The Covid pandemic has inspired record numbers of people to become nurses, with more than 56,000 signing up to nursing courses or apprenticeships in England since the outbreak in early 2020, according to a report. Figures from the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas) show that more 18-year-old school leavers are applying for and accepting places to study nursing than before the pandemic, with applications up by 38% since 2019, while applications from those over the age of 21 have also risen by more than a third. The report by Ucas and Health Education England found that 69% of recent applicants said the Covid pandemic had inspired them to apply to become a nurse, with around one in 10 saying the pandemic was the most important factor in their decision. One in four applicants said the current high profile of healthcare workers was a significant influence on their decision. Ruth May, the chief nursing officer for NHS England, said she was thrilled by the record number of applications. “The last couple of years, difficult as they have been, have shone a spotlight on the value of our nursing profession and the rewarding careers on offer in every corner of the NHS,” she said. Clare Marchant, the chief executive of Ucas, said she expected that the increased demand for places on nursing courses would continue before next week’s deadline for applications to courses starting in autumn. “It is heartening to see that one of the positive legacies of the work of our incredible healthcare workers during the pandemic is that more of our young people have been inspired to enter the nursing profession, particularly when they are arguably the ones who have been most affected, both in terms of their education and way of life,” Marchant said. Nursing is now the fifth most popular subject studied at higher education in England, having recovered from a fall in applications that followed the government’s removal of bursary funding in 2017. In 2021, 25,000 students were accepted on to nursing programmes. The report also identified nursing careers as boosting social mobility in the UK, with nursing alongside education and health and social care courses as the only subjects where more young people from the most disadvantaged areas choose to study nursing than their most advantaged counterparts. But the report also showed a continuing gender gap in the profession, with women nine times more likely to choose and be placed on nursing courses than men.Researchers have claimed that more than two-thirds of male football fans harbour hostile, sexist or misogynistic attitudes towards women’s sport. A study led by Durham University, based on a survey of almost 2,000 male football supporters, detected what it terms “openly misogynistic masculinities”, irrespective of age. Although progressive opinions among men were strongly represented they were not as common as hostility and sexism and the researchers suggest this indicates a backlash in advances in gender equality. The study was set in the context of increased visibility of women’s sport in recent years, most notably since the 2012 London Olympics and the 2015 Women’s World Cup in Canada, where England secured a bronze medal. Dr Stacey Pope, an associate professor from Durham University’s department of sport and exercise sciences, was the lead author, with her team assisted by researchers from the Universities of Leicester and South Australia. Their analysis was based on the responses of 1,950 male football supporters who regularly use UK-based fan message boards. “This is the first study to examine UK men football fans’ attitudes to women’s sport in an era in which women’s sport has experienced a significantly increased media profile,” said Pope. “Our research showed that attitudes towards women in sport are, to some extent, changing, with more progressive attitudes. However, the findings are also reflective of a patriarchal society in which misogyny is rife. There were numerous examples of men from across all generations exhibiting highly sexist and misogynistic attitudes.” A sub-group of 507 respondents who answered particular questions were divided into three categories: those displaying progressive views, others harbouring overtly misogynistic attitudes and covert misogynists. The first band of 24% expressed strong support for equal media coverage of women’s sport, with many saying the 2015 Women’s World Cup had represented a watershed. Yet some of the overt group – 68% of those polled – suggested women should not participate in sport at all, or, if they did, would be better suited to more “feminine” pursuits such as athletics, rather than football. Media reporting of women’s sports – a sphere regarded as intrinsically inferior – was seen as “positive discrimination” or “PC nonsense”. The 8% of fans branded covertly hostile comprised the smallest group. They typically expressed progressive attitudes in public before revealing more reactionary private opinions. The co-author John Williams, from Leicester University, said: “The increase in media coverage of women’s sport was openly supported by some men. But it also clearly represents, for others, a visible threat. “This is at a time when there are more widespread anxieties circulating among men about how to establish and perform satisfying masculine identities. For men like these, there was a pronounced anti-feminist backlash.”Antimicrobial resistance poses a significant threat to humanity, health leaders have warned, as a study reveals it has become a leading cause of death worldwide and is killing about 3,500 people every day. More than 1.2 million – and potentially millions more – died in 2019 as a direct result of antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections, according to the most comprehensive estimate to date of the global impact of antimicrobial resistance (AMR). The stark analysis covering more than 200 countries and territories was published in the Lancet. It says AMR is killing more people than HIV/Aids or malaria. Many hundreds of thousands of deaths are occurring due to common, previously treatable infections, the study says, because bacteria that cause them have become resistant to treatment. “These new data reveal the true scale of antimicrobial resistance worldwide, and are a clear signal that we must act now to combat the threat,” said the report’s co-author Prof Chris Murray, of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington. “We need to leverage this data to course-correct action and drive innovation if we want to stay ahead in the race against antimicrobial resistance.” Previous estimates of the health impact of AMR have been published for several countries and regions, and for a small number of pathogen-drug combinations in a wider range of locations. However, until now no estimates have covered all locations or a broad range of pathogens and drug combinations. The new Global Research on Antimicrobial Resistance (Gram) report estimates deaths linked to 23 pathogens and 88 pathogen-drug combinations across 204 countries and territories in 2019. Statistical modelling was used to produce estimates of the impact of AMR in all locations – including those with no data – using more than 470m individual records obtained from systematic literature reviews, hospital systems, surveillance systems, and other data sources. The analysis shows AMR was directly responsible for an estimated 1.27million deaths worldwide, and associated with an estimated 4.95 million deaths, in 2019. HIV/Aids and malaria have been estimated to have caused 860,000 and 640,000 deaths, respectively, in 2019. While AMR poses a threat to people of all ages, young children were found to be at particularly high risk, with one in five deaths attributable to AMR occurring in children under the age of five. The report highlights an urgent need to scale up action to combat AMR, and outlines immediate actions for policymakers that would help save lives and protect health systems. These include optimising the use of existing antibiotics, taking greater action to monitor and control infections, and providing more funding to develop new antibiotics and treatments. The UK’s special envoy on antimicrobial resistance, Dame Sally Davies, said AMR was “one of the greatest challenges facing humanity”. She added: “Behind these new numbers are families and communities who are tragically bearing the brunt of the silent AMR pandemic. We must use this data as a warning signal to spur on action at every level.” Regionally, deaths caused directly by AMR were estimated to be highest in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia, at 24 deaths per 100,000 population and 22 deaths per 100,000 population respectively. In high-income countries, AMR led directly to 13 deaths per 100,000 and was associated with 56 deaths per 100,000. In the western Europe region, which includes the UK, more than 51,000 people died as a direct result of AMR. Other experts said Covid-19 had demonstrated the importance of global commitments to infection and control measures, such as hand-washing and surveillance, and rapid investments in treatments. Tim Jinks, the head of the drug-resistant infections programme at Wellcome Trust, said: “The Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of global collaboration: political leaders, the healthcare community, the private sector and the public working together to tackle a global health threat. “Like Covid-19, we know what needs to be done to address AMR, but we must now come together with a sense of urgency and global solidarity if we are to be successful.”Joe Biden has said he thinks Russia will attack Ukraine, warning that Moscow would face a “stiff price”, but he admitted Nato was divided on how to respond if there is only a “minor incursion”. The White House was forced to issue a hasty clarification to that last point, saying that any movement of Russian forces over the border would be treated as invasion. But Biden, in his most extensive remarks on the Ukraine crisis to date, given at an extended press conference on Wednesday, alarmed the government in Kyiv and strayed from the show of determined unity that Nato has sought to project. Asked about Vladimir Putin’s intentions, the US president said: “I’m not so sure he is certain what he’s going to do. My guess is he will move in. He has to do something.” Biden said a full-scale invasion would be “the most consequential thing that’s happened in the world in terms of war and peace since World War Two”, with the risk of spilling outside Ukraine’s borders, and “could get out of hand”. He said that Russia would prevail militarily in an invasion but would suffer heavy casualties. “This is not all just a cakewalk for Russia militarily,” he said, noting the military aid the US has provided recently. “They’ll pay a stiff price, immediately, short-term, medium-term and long-term if they do it.” Nato has said it would move troops to its eastern flank in the event of an attack, and the US has been discussing a range of sanctions with its European allies. However, the president, in reflecting on the possible scenarios, revealed behind-the-scenes divisions among the Nato allies on how severe the response would be. “What you’re going to see is that Russia will be held accountable if it invades and it depends on what it does,” he said. “It’s one thing if it’s a minor incursion, and then we end up having to fight about what to do and not do etc.” Asked to clarify what qualified as a minor incursion, he pointed to cyberattacks and the presence of Russian intelligence officers, who Washington has said are already in Ukraine. He suggested a major movement of troops into Ukrainian territory would be a red line. “There are differences in Nato as to what countries are willing to do, depending on what happens,” Biden said. “If there’s Russian forces crossing the border … I think that changes everything.” There was an immediate dismayed reaction from Kyiv on Biden’s choice of words, and his suggestion that a “minor incursion” would divide Nato and draw an uncertain response. One Ukrainian official told CNN it “gives the green light to Putin to enter Ukraine at his pleasure”. A few minutes after Biden finished speaking, his spokeswoman, Jen Psaki, issued a clarification. “President Biden has been clear with the Russian president: If any Russian military forces move across the Ukrainian border, that’s a renewed invasion, and it will be met with a swift, severe, and united response from the United States and our allies,” Psaki said in a written statement. “President Biden also knows from long experience that the Russians have an extensive playbook of aggression short of military action, including cyberattacks and paramilitary tactics. And he affirmed today that those acts of Russian aggression will be met with a decisive, reciprocal and united response.” Earlier in the day the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said Russia could take “further aggressive action” against Ukraine “at any moment”, adding that Putin’s military intentions were still unclear as he prepared for talks with his Russian counterpart at the end of the week. Speaking after meeting Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, in Kyiv, Blinken said Russia had amassed “very significant forces” on Ukraine’s borders, including in Belarus where major exercises are due to begin next month. It could double them in “relatively short order”, he said. Before talks on Friday in Geneva with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, Blinken said he was relentlessly pursuing a peaceful solution to the crisis. But there seem few signs that Moscow and Washington can reach diplomatic agreement in Switzerland. The Kremlin wants Nato forces to withdraw from eastern Europe and to return to 1997 levels of deployment. Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Rybakov, said on Wednesday that Moscow would be satisfied with a unilateral US commitment to vote against Nato membership for Ukraine. Blinken said he did not have a “piece of paper” by way of answer to Russia’s latest security demands, but he appeared to rule out a veto promise over Ukraine’s future, saying closing Nato’s doors to new members was an “absolute non-starter”. Asked what Russia might do next, Blinken said: “I can’t read Vladimir Putin’s mind.” But he pointed out that Russia’s president had a long history of aggressive behaviour. This included attacking Georgia in 2008 and annexing Crimea in 2014, and “training, arming and leading” a separatist rebellion in eastern Ukraine. Blinken added: “We have to base our actions on the facts.” After Kyiv, Blinken is due to travel to Berlin for talks with German and European allies. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said relations with the US were advancing at “Formula One speed”. He acknowledged Russia was refusing to negotiate with his government directly, saying: “Mr Lavrov is avoiding me.” Russia has brushed off calls to withdraw its troops from the Ukrainian border by saying it has a right to deploy its forces wherever it likes on its own territory. It also has rejected US allegations that it is preparing a pretext to invade Ukraine. Lavrov dismissed the US claim of a Russian “false-flag operation” as “total disinformation”. Speaking at a meeting of the Valdai discussion club, Ryabkov repeated Moscow’s denials it had plans to attack Ukraine. “I am confident that there is no risk of a large-scale war that could break out in Europe or somewhere else. We do not intend to take any aggressive steps,” he said. “We have no intention of attacking, staging an offensive on or invading Ukraine.” Ryabkov said Moscow would not consider an informal moratorium on Ukraine’s entrance into Nato sufficient. “If the US assumes a unilateral legally binding commitment that it will never vote in favour of admitting Ukraine and other countries to Nato, we will be ready to consider this option. It would be an easier path for the US,” he added. Meanwhile, Russia continued its deployment of military assets from its far east to the borders of Ukraine. Open source researchers said on Wednesday they had identified elements of a BM-27 Uragan rocket artillery launcher in Belarus about 200km (125 miles) from Kyiv. The deployment of heavy rocket artillery so close to the Ukrainian capital could further increase fears that the plans for joint exercises could provide cover for a Russian-led advance that could quickly engulf Kyiv and its government. On Wednesday Russia’s defence ministry released fresh details of the joint exercises, which are set to begin next month and continue until 20 February. Russia was planning to deploy 12 Sukhoi Su-35 air defence fighters to Belarus for the exercises, along with S-400 and Pantsir anti-air defence systems, the ministry said in a statement. The Biden administration has promised to boost military assistance to Ukraine in the event of a Russian operation, but has ruled out sending troops. On Wednesday Blinken said military support was continuing, with deliveries last year at their highest level since 2014. The US has also been supplying Ukraine with classified intelligence. The CIA director, William Burns, visited Kyiv last week and shared its risk assessment with Zelenskiy’s cabinet, a US official said.Hundreds of heavily armed police have stormed one of Rio’s largest favelas at the start of what authorities claimed was a “transformational” attempt to wrest back control from the drug gangs and paramilitary mafias which dominate huge swaths of the Brazilian city. The operation began at daybreak on Wednesday as security forces in camouflage gear and armoured personnel carriers swept into Jacarezinho, a bustling redbrick community that has been a stronghold of the Red Command drug faction since the 1980s. One burly special forces soldier sported a Latin adage on a tactical vest stuffed with high-caliber ammunition. “Si vis pacem, para bellum,” it said. “If you want peace, prepare for war.” Hours later police said 30 arrests were made as troops targeted Muzema, a much smaller favela controlled by the “milícia” mafia groups that many now consider a far greater threat than Rio’s drug factions. “Today’s operations are merely the start of changes that go far beyond public security,” tweeted Rio’s conservative governor, Cláudio Castro, an ally of the Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, who once publicly called for the milícias to be legalized. Civil police chief Allan Turnowski said a permanent police occupation would follow Wednesday’s raid on Jacarezinho, which last year was the scene of the worst police massacre in Rio history. “This will work out. Good always defeats evil,” Turnowski wrote on Instagram. Other communities will reportedly be occupied in the coming days. Critics and specialists doubt the new wave of occupations will do anything to resolve the decades-long drug conflict that continues to claim hundreds of mostly young, black lives each year. A high-profile “pacification” project, launched before Brazil’s 2014 World Cup and Rio’s 2016 Olympics, was initially hailed as a success but failed to permanently evict traffickers from the favelas, while milícias have massively expanded their footprint over the last decade and now control more than 50% of the city. Pablo Nunes, a public security expert from Rio’s Centre for Studies on Public Security and Citizenship, voiced skepticism over the claim from Rio’s governor that this week’s operations – which caught specialists by surprise – represented the start of “a major process of transformation” in the favelas. “The favelas and outskirts of Rio have never been transformed by the barrel of a gun,” said Nunes, who suspected the initiative was simply a political ploy to help a politically weak governor secure a second term in office later this year. “This is a very well-known script,” Nunes said of the political use of public security policy in Rio, with little if any thought given to the people and communities affected or the long-term impact on crime. Ivan Blaz, the spokesperson for Rio’s military police, pushed back against such doubts, claiming authorities were determined to combat drug traffickers and the “rule of terror” imposed by milícias, who he admitted enjoyed the support of serving or former members of the security forces. “I understand [some people] feel they have seen this film before … but it’s my duty to not accept this,” Blaz said as a helicopter swooped over streets long controlled by rifle-toting gang members. “Optimism is part of my uniform.” Leandro Souza, a community leader in Jacarezinho, said he hoped the military occupation would be accompanied by job-creation and training schemes and social projects that could lift a profoundly deprived community flanked by abandoned factories. “If they manage this … it will be a huge step forwards like never seen before,” he said. “I hope this is not simply another botched attempt at ‘pacification’ that leads to bloodshed and claims the lives of residents, police officers and even those involved in drug trafficking.”Former Facebook employee Frances Haugen and other prominent whistleblowers have renewed calls for Facebook to release a long-awaited report on its impact in India, alleging the company is purposely obscuring human rights concerns. More than 20 organizations on Wednesday joined whistleblowers Frances Haugen and Sophie Zhang, as well as former Facebook vice-president Brian Boland, to demand the company, now called Meta, release its findings. “As a result of the consistent and continuous barrage of hate on social media, particularly on Facebook, Indian Muslims have been practically dehumanized and rendered helpless and voiceless,” said Zafarul-Islam Khan, a former chairman of Delhi Minorities Commission, speaking at a press briefing organized by Facebook critics known as the Real Facebook Oversight Board. Meta had commissioned law firm Foley Hoag in 2020 to carry out an independent review of its impact in India – the company’s largest market at 340 million users – but its release has repeatedly been delayed, activists allege. In November, rights groups told the Wall Street Journal that the social media company had narrowed the draft report’s scope and was delaying the process of releasing it. Calls for more information on how hate speech plays out on Meta platforms in India intensified when Haugen leaked internal documents in 2021 showing how the the company struggles to monitor problematic content in countries with large user bases. The papers revealed in particular how users in India were inundated with fake news, hate speech including anti-Muslim posts and bots interfering with elections. These papers underscored an ongoing critique that the company does not allocate proportional resources to its larger, non-English markets. Haugen revealed in her papers and testimony to Congress that Facebook has earmarked only 13% of its global misinformation budget to non-US countries, though Americans make up just 10% of its active daily user base. Such funding issues are particularly stark in countries like India, which has 22 official languages, said Teesta Setalvad, an Indian civil rights activist and journalist, in a press conference on Wednesday. “Facebook allows unchecked inciting content that has become an instrument for targeting minorities, Dalits and women in India,” she said. Facebook’s director of human rights policy, Miranda Sissons, said in a statement : “Given the complexity of this work, we want these assessments to be thorough. We will report annually on how we’re addressing human rights impacts, in line with our Human Rights Policy.” In their letter to Facebook, activists cited the UN guiding principles on business and human rights, which urge that companies should “be prepared to communicate this externally, particularly when concerns are raised by or on behalf of affected stakeholders”. “Facebook knows its operations happen behind a veil,” Haugen said. “But when we speak to each other, we begin to see a larger, more comprehensive view. We must push for mandatory transparency.” “Unless Facebook is required to publish, India will not get the safety it deserves,” she added. Reuters contributed to this reportThat’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s Covid blog. Please join me on our latest live feed here where I’ll be focusing a little more on the coronavirus crisis across Asia, Australia and the Pacific. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said restrictions will be tightened if there is a community transmission of Omicron. Ardern made the remarks during a press conference on Thursday in which she provided an update on the country’s traffic light system. When Omicron enters the community behind the border, the whole country will move into red within 24 to 48 hours, stuff.co reports. The prime minister previously told her MPs that Omicron is a “different foe” and will result in case numbers not seen in New Zealand before. However, she added that the variant “is not insurmountable” and long lockdowns should not be needed. Two new Omicron cases have been reported in Auckland. Testing in New Zealand for Covid will be free, and rapid antigen tests will be used more widely, Ardern added. Moving across to Europe, Austria has also recorded a record daily rise in Covid infections with 27,641 cases reported in the past 24 hours, according to data from the Austrian Agency for Health (AGES). It marks an incident rate of 1,439 per 100,000 of the population. Mexico is also reporting a record daily increase of more than 60,000 new confirmed Covid-19 cases, health ministry data showed on Wednesday, as the country steps up testing for the virus. In the past 24 hours, more than 150,000 test results were logged, the ministry’s data showed, far more than Mexico was registering at the start of the month. With 60,552 new infections, the number of overall cases since the pandemic began increased to 4,495,310 while 323 more deaths brought the overall death toll to 302,112. Brazil has reported 204,854 new confirmed cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, breaking the country’s previous record for the second day in a row, the health ministry said on Wednesday. The ministry also reported 338 new Covid-19 deaths. The previous record of 137,103 cases of the coronavirus was reported on Tuesday. The South American country has now registered 23,416,748 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 621,855. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as we unpack all the latest Covid developments from across the world. I’ll be reporting to you from Sydney and my colleagues from London will take over a little later in the day. Here’s a snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The NSW Covid numbers are in and sadly another 25 Covid positive people in the state have died, with 30,825 new infections recorded. NSW has also recorded a slight reduction in the number of people hospitalised, with 2,781 patients now in Covid wards, compared with 2,850 yesterday. Victoria’s number are also in and sadly 15 more people with Covid-19 have died with 21,966 new infections recorded. There are now 1,206 hospitalisations, an increase from yesterday’s 1,152. The Therapeutic Goods Administration has just granted provisional approval to two oral Covid-19 treatments, Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir + ritonavir) and Lagevrio (molnupiravir). The interval for a booster shot will be reduced to three months in Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia and the ACT amid unprecedented strain on hospitals as Omicron cases surge. Meanwhile, Alexander Zverev believes some more players at the Australian Open may have Covid-19 but they may have gone undetected because they weren’t tested, AAP reports. Here’s a round-up of Wednesday’s top international Covid news. Denmark reported a record 38,759 infections, a 37% jump on two weeks ago. Algeria announced it’s closing schools for ten days over rising cases. Germany reported a record 112,323 cases as Omicron continues to batter Europe. Bulgaria reported its highest Covid tally of the whole pandemic, with 11,181 new infections, a 65% jump on the 6,766 cases recorded on Wednesday two weeks ago. France detected over 400,000 new cases for the second day in a row. Japan is is set to widen Covid restrictions to cover half its population as the Omicron variant drives record infections. Northern Ireland will cut self-isolation from seven to five days from Friday, following suit from new isolation rules in England. England will soon scrap virtually all Covid measures, the health secretary confirmed. St Petersburg in Russia detected record cases, as the country clocked over 33,000 infections. Hana Horka, a Czech folk singer, died on Sunday after deliberately exposing herself to Covid. Her son said she was a victim of the antivax movement. The US government will make 400m non-surgical N95 masks free to the public from next week, the White House said. Children aged 5-11 in Malaysia will be jabbed starting February with the Pfizer vaccine. Tennis ace Novak Djokovic is the controlling shareholder in a Danish biotech firm aiming to develop a Covid treatment that doesn’t involve vaccination. In the US, Starbucks has suspended the requirement for its 220,000 employees to be vaccinated or regularly tested after a Supreme Court ruling. US actor John Malkovich was turned away from a luxury hotel in Venice, Italy last week after failing to present a valid Covid vaccination pass. Portuguese voters with Covid or isolating will be allowed to vote in person on 30 January. Authorities in Beijing, China announced another piece of infected international mail, local media reported, amid doubts from experts, who say such events are extremely rare. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew, in London for today. Now over to my colleague Samantha Lock in Australia. Bye for now. The US government will make 400m non-surgical N95 masks from its strategic national stockpile available for free to the public starting next week, the White House said. The masks will be available in high street pharmacies such as CVS and Walgreens. It’s part of an effort to stamp out the rise of the Omicron variant across the nation. Health experts recommend an N95, rather than a cloth mask, to stop the spread of the highly-mutated Omicron variant. Denmark reported a record high of 38,759 new Covid infections, a 37% jump on the 28,283 cases detected on Wednesday two weeks ago. The Copenhagen Post reports this alarming stat based on per capita data: “Were Denmark as populated as the UK, its count would be 420,000.” A further 16 people died from virus-related reasons. It comes after Denmark on Monday ended restrictions on cinemas, museums and cultural institutions after in measures a month intended to clamp down on Omicron, with public venues reopening on a day Denmark also broke its record-case tally. Children aged 5-11 in Malaysia will be vaccinated starting February, authorities said. The dosage for children in this age bracket is lower, around one-third the dosage given to over-12s, and only the Pfizer-BioNTech will be used following evidence it’s safe and effective. Clinical trials found that the risk of symptomatic infection in vaccinated children is reduced by 90%, the country’s vaccine committee said in a statement. (The decision to vaccinate this age bracket was already taken on 6 January.) Meanwhile, Malaysia reported 3,245 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, the New Straits Times reports, largely flat on the 3,270 cases on Wednesday two weeks ago. A further 9 new Covid-related deaths were announced, halving the 18 reported two weeks ago today and climbing the national death toll to 31,818, the 29th highest worldwide. Algeria announced it will close schools for ten days over rising Covid cases. Elementary and high scools will shut from Thursday, president Abdelmadjid Tebboune said on Wednesday, but universities will decide for themselves whether to close. Reuters reports the details: Algeria is battling infections from both the delta variant infections and the fast-spreading omicron variant. On Wednesday, heath officials reported a daily record of 1,359 omicron cases and 12 deaths. Tebboune urged officials to set a “robust testing structure” in public heath facilities and in private laboratories. In December, Algeria started requiring a vaccine passport to enter many public venues, seeking to boost the country’s low inoculation rate and overcome vaccine hesitancy that has left millions of vaccines unused. Less than a quarter of Algeria’s population has had even one vaccine dose. More on the fallout from UK health secretary Sajid Javid’s confirmation earlier today that England will scrap virtually all Covid restrictions, which drew scorn from experts. Health professionals questioned the move: Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS trusts, pointed to the high number of Covid-19 patients in hospital “at a time when the NHS is already at full stretch and contending with the toughest winter on record”, and some regions were still seeing increased infection numbers. Pat Cullen, the general secretary of the Royal College of Nursing, said ministers would “regret sending the wrong signal to the public for political expediency”. Likewise, unions expressed concern: Unison, the UK’s largest health union, warned that ditching plan B “in one fell swoop” risked jeopardising progress made. Christina McAnea, the union’s general secretary, said: “Rather than allowing a free-for-all, ministers should be urging caution and encouraging continued mask-wearing on transport, in public places and in schools, where it can still make a real difference.” Mary Bousted, the joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: “While the trend amongst secondary aged children is down, it is however uncertain, due to the short time schools have been back since the Christmas holidays, that this trend will continue. Such uncertainty could lead to a pronounced risk of increased disruption with children and staff having to isolate.” Read The Guardian’s full story here. The British Medical Association has warned that lifting all Covid restrictions in England risks a resurgence in infections, more people ending up in hospital and more cases of long Covid. “Today’s announcement from the prime minister risks creating a false sense of security when the levels of infection and illness remain high, and the NHS is still under crippling pressure”, said Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the BMA’s chair of council , in a highly critical response to Boris Johnson’s statement. “This decision clearly is not guided by the data. When Plan B was introduced in December, there were 7,373 patients in hospital in the UK . The latest data this week shows there are 18,979. Case rates too are nearly twice as many. “The pressures on the NHS are clear for everyone to see. We have a record backlog of 6m patients [in England] at a time when hospitals are cancelling operations, Trusts are declaring critical incidents and ambulance delays are jeopardising public safety. Removing all restrictions risks a rebound in the number of infections across society, would inevitably increase hospitalisation rates, further destabilise patient care and drive up the rate of staff absences and the number of people with long Covid,” he added. Nagpaul said that ending mask-wearing and the duty to isolate after displaying symptoms of Covid were particularly reckless. “It is vital that the government acts according to the data and takes a measured approach. Removing effective infection control measures like mask-wearing on public transport and indoor crowded spaces will inevitably increase transmission and place the public at greater risk, especially for those who are vulnerable. We recognise the implications of restrictions on our society, but equally we have seen the impact of the failure to control the virus on the economy, business and education. “The announcement by the prime minister that he will seek to end self-isolation rules is premature, especially given the statement by the World Health Organisation earlier today that the pandemic is far from over amidst high global case rates and the risk of new variants emerging.” Hana Horka, a Czech folk singer, died on Sunday after deliberately exposing herself to Covid, her family said. Horka, 57, wanted to prove recovery from Covid so she could obtain a health pass to visit venues. Horka, vocalist for the band Asonance, voluntarily exposed herself to the virus when her vaccinated husband and son caught it before Christmas, her son Jan Rek told public radio iRozhlas.cz. “She decided to continue to live normally with us and preferred to catch the disease than to get vaccinated,” Rek said. Rek blamed the death on a local anti-vaccine movement, saying its leaders had “blood on their hands”. Read the full story here. France detected 436,167 new Covid cases on Wednesday, a dramatic 117% jump from the already-high 202,293 new cases recorded on Wednesday three weeks ago. It comes after France on Tuesday reported its record daily tally for the pandemic, at 464,76 infections, edging close to half a million. It keeps French Covid infections above 400,000 for the second day in a row. A further 231 people died from Covid-related causes in French hospitals, Reuters reports. Earlier this month French President Emmanuel Macron’s plans for a vaccine passports were approved by parliament, part of a strategy he characterised as intended to suppress Omicron’s spread and “piss off” unvaccinated people. Northern Ireland, UK will cut the self-isolation period from seven to five days from Friday, first minister Paul Givan said on Twitter. The move follows guidance announced earlier this week in England, UK for five full days’ isolation – provided people test negative by lateral flow on quarantine days five and six. The change reflects latest medical evidence, policymakers said, and is expected to combat staff shortages. The US charted the path on 5-day isolation periods – cut from 10 days – last month but the decision drew scorn from experts for not baking in a test-to-release component. Northern Ireland reported a further six people had died from Covid-related reasons on Wednesday, plus another 4,451 new infections. Russia reported 33,899 fresh Covid infections over the past 24 hours, the Moscow Times reports, a 117% surge on the 15,632 new cases on Wednesday two weeks ago. Russia’s last wave peaked in early November, with cases gradually dropping week on week, but infections began jumping again in early January driven by Omicron. St Petersburg, Russia’s second-biggest city behind Moscow by population, set a new record high on Wednesday – with 4,382 new cases. (Tuesday saw the city report 3,958 cases.) Russia reported a further 698 deaths on Wednesday. Russia has the world’s second-highest death toll from the virus, behind only the US, with Reuters estimating deaths of over 670,000 people. It comes after Moscow’s mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, said on Tuesday he was extending work-from-home rules and guidance to protect elderly people until April 1 amid the Omicron climb. “Given the rapid and wide spread of Omicron, it is clear that the workload of outpatient clinics will increase sharply,” Sobyanin said. Serbian tennis player Novak Djokovic is the controlling shareholder in a Danish biotech firm aiming to develop a Covid treatment that doesn’t involve vaccination. The tennis world No 1, who was deported from Australia this week after the government canceled his visa over his unvaccinated status, bought an 80% stake in QuantBioRes in June 2020. My colleague Mark Sweney has further details (full story here): QuantBioRes has about 11 researchers working in Denmark, Australia and Slovenia, according to Loncarevic, who stressed the company is working on a treatment, not a vaccine. The company’s website says that it started developing a “deactivation mechanism” for Covid-19 in July 2020. Djokovic, who may also be barred from defending his French Open title in Roland Garros in May after the French government ruled on Monday that all athletes will have to be vaccinated in order to attend and compete in sporting events, acquired his stake in the company in June 2020. The company is developing a peptide, which inhibits the coronavirus from infecting the human cell, expects to launch clinical trials in Britain this summer, added Loncarevic. In the US, Starbucks has suspended the requirement for its 220,000 employees to be vaccinated or regularly tested after a Supreme Court ruling. Reuters reports the details: The coffee giant had said earlier this month it would require its around 220,000 US employees to be fully vaccinated against Covid-19 or undergo weekly testing. The US Supreme Court last week struck down Joe Biden administration’s vaccination-or-testing mandate for large businesses, ruling that the policy overstepped executive authority. “We respect the court’s ruling and will comply,” Starbucks chief operating officer John Culver wrote in a memo to workers. The vast majority of Starbucks employees are vaccinated, Culver added. UK health secretary Sajid Javid confirmed previous reports (see earlier post) that England will revert back to Plan A measures, departing from Omicron-prompted Plan B restrictions. The changes include an end to mandatory face masks and Covid passports from next Thursday, and the immediate suspension of ‘work from home’ guidance. For the full story follow our UK live blog here. Bulgaria reported its highest Covid tally of the whole pandemic on Wednesday, with 11,181 new infections, a 65% jump on the 6,766 cases recorded on Wednesday two weeks ago. The country’s former record tally came yesterday at 9,996 cases, and was previously 7,560 on 7 April 2021. Bulgaria’s positive rate was 24% on Wednesday, state broadcaster BNT News reports. A further 91 people died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, BNT reports, a 38% climb on the 66 deaths on Wednesday two weeks ago. Bulgaria, with has seen over 32,000 people die from the virus, has the lowest vaccination rate in the EU, with only about 29% of the country’s population double-jabbed according to a Reuters estimate. Bulgaria has among the highest per capita death rates in the world. Ukraine detected 12,815 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, a 172% jump on the 4,711 new cases on Wednesday two weeks ago. The country’s most recent wave peaked in late-October and early-November. But Omicron is driving a new uptick in cases. A further 163 people died from Covid-related causes, local media Ukrinform reports, 45% down on the 297 people who died on the same day two weeks ago. It comes after Ukraine received almost 1m doses of the Pfizer Covid vaccine from the US and expects 200,000 Sinovac vaccine doses from China. Ahead of the imminent UK Covid press conference (which you can follow live here), let’s take a look at today’s Covid figures in context. New daily cases, although remaining high at 108,069, appear to have spiked after the dramatic rise in recent weeks. Hospitalisations, which lag cases, have also jumped, but significantly less than last year. It’s the same story with deaths, climbing recently but not as significantly as this time last year. The UK reported that a further 359 people died from Covid-related reasons in the past 24 hours. This is Jem Bartholomew taking charge of the blog from here on out. Do get in touch with tips and stories from around the world. Drop me an email or message me on Twitter, it’s always great to from readers. The staffing crisis in social care is getting worse and worse, data from the Care Quality Commission regulator has shown. Vacancy rates have almost doubled since April and now stand at 11% in England. That figure does not include the tens of thousands of care workers off with Covid. The south of the country is worse affected than the north and the crisis is raising concerns about standards of care and widespread rationing of services. A typical care home in London with 100 staff now has at least 12 vacancies. The National Care Forum, which gathers data from its own survey, estimates the problem is worse with an 18% vacancy rate. The UK has recorded a further 108,069 Covid cases and 359 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That is compared to 94,432 infections and 438 fatalities reported in the 24 hours prior. It comes as Boris Johnson announced the end of all Covid measures introduced to combat the Omicron variant – including compulsory mask-wearing on public transport and in shops, guidance to work from home and vaccine certificates – from next week. The prime minister told the Commons that the legal requirement on people with coronavirus to self-isolate would be allowed to lapse when the regulations expired on 24 March, and that date could be brought forward. You can read more about that here: All plan B Covid restrictions, including mask wearing, to end in England The US actor John Malkovich was turned away from a luxury hotel in Venice last week after failing to present a valid Covid vaccination pass, Italian news media reported Wednesday. Local newspaper Il Gazzettino reported that the theatre and film actor, star of “Dangerous Liaisons” and “Being John Malkovich”, was in Venice for two days of filming for US television series “Ripley”. Because his mandatory vaccination card had expired, Malkovich was denied entry to his luxury suite at the Hotel Danieli overlooking the Grand Canal, the paper wrote. He was instead housed in private lodgings, it said. Contacted by phone, the hotel would not confirm reports due to privacy concerns. Italian news agency ANSA confirmed the report, citing sources within the production. Under Italian law, only those who show proof of full vaccination or recovery from Covid can access public spaces like hotels, restaurants, bars and other venues, as well as public transport. What does England moving to Plan A mean? My colleague Rachel Hall has this explainer: Portuguese voters with Covid-19 or those in isolation due to exposure to the virus will be allowed to leave home to cast their ballots in a snap election on 30 January, the government said on Wednesday. The announcement came a day after Portugal, which has almost 90% of its 10 million population fully inoculated, reported a daily record of 43,729 Covid infections, stoked by the fast spreading Omicron variant. Hospital admissions and mortality remain well below levels seen in the previous peaks. The interior minister Francisca Van Dunem told a news conference that quarantined voters should only head to polling stations from 6pm to 7pm, urging those not infected to go before that period. The recommendation is not mandatory. They must wear a face mask, keep a social distance and can only leave home to vote. Staff working at polling stations will be given protective equipment. “We need a social pact that allows everyone to vote in safety,” said Van Dunem, asking those in isolation not to take public transport to the polling station but walk or use their own vehicle instead. The head of health authority DGS, Graça Freitas, said there would be no designated areas for those with Covid-19 to vote in and they would not be required to show proof of their health status at the polls. “This solution of having a dedicated time period for these people to vote... will prevent, not totally, but will minimise the risk of contagion,” Freitas said. The election was called after parliament rejected the minority Socialist government’s budget bill for 2022. The prime minister António Costa’s party has a comfortable lead in opinion polls but is likely to fall short of a full parliamentary majority. The election campaign is in full swing after Sunday’s kick-off and street rallies draw large crowds, where mask-wearing is optional. A woman acting as a “guerrilla journalist” when she filmed inside a hospital in an attempt to prove her belief that lockdown measures were disproportionate has been convicted of a public order offence. Debbie Hicks, 47, a former teacher and psychologist, filmed twice at the Gloucestershire Royal hospital in Gloucester in December 2020 and told staff who challenged her she could do what she wanted as she paid her taxes. Hicks, from Stroud, argued that she was exercising her right to freedom of expression and trying to expose what she believed was a false government narrative that hospitals were full of patients with Covid. But finding her guilty of using threatening words or behaviour likely to cause harassment, the district judge Nicholas Wattam said staff had the right to work without being molested. Read the full story here: Covid denier fined for filming in Gloucester hospital The Czech government has scrapped a decree making Covid-19 vaccinations mandatory for key professionals and over-60s to avoid “deepening fissures” in society, while the daily tally of new cases hit a record high. The prime minister Petr Fiala said his new centre-right government did not see reasons for compulsory inoculation as the previous administration had planned in some sectors. “This does not change our stance on vaccination. It is still undoubtedly the best way to fight Covid-19 ... however, we do not want to deepen fissures in society,” Fiala told a news conference on Wednesday. In December, the previous government ordered Covid-19 vaccinations from March 2022 for hospital and nursing home staff, police, soldiers and some other professions, as well as those aged over 60. That decision brought protests against the measures. The policy turn comes as a wave of the Omicron variant hits the country of 10.7 million people. The health ministry said 28,469 new cases were reported for Tuesday, a record daily number since the start of the pandemic and more than double the 12,371 reported the same day last week. Like other central European nations, the government expects about 50,000 daily cases by the end of the month. In preparation, asymptomatic essential healthcare workers and social service personnel who test positive may be allowed to continue working. Businesses want the list extended. Fiala’s government has also shortened quarantine and isolation times, while launching mandatory testing of employees at companies from this week. Hospitalisations, which peaked in the latest Delta wave at more than 7,000 in early December, dropped to 1,635 on Tuesday from 1,761 reported for Monday. The country has reported 36,937 coronavirus deaths since the start of the pandemic, one of the world’s worst rates per capita. German police have said they are currently investigating more than 12,000 cases of suspected forged vaccine passes. Since December, when tighter restrictions were introduced in an effort to slow the spread of the Omicron variant, the number of reported forgeries has soared, police said. In most public places in Germany the public now have to prove a 2G status - that they are double vaccinated or recovered - and more recently 2G +, which represents either an official lateral flow test result or a booster shot. The measures do not apply to essential services such as medical practices, supermarkets and other grocery stores, whilst on public transport, 3G rules apply (according to which people have to prove they have been double vaccinated, have recovered or have a negative test result). The demand for forged vaccine passes has increased as rules have tightened, the federal police department told the news agency DPA. Forgeries have been particularly high in the southern state of Bavaria, where 4000 cases are active, and the western state of North Rhine-Westphalia, where police are investigating more than 3500 cases. The government in Munich has said it believes the real number is likely to be considerably higher. Fake vaccines are also an issue in Germany, as highlighted following raids last week carried out at 100 addresses across four states, after it was discovered that a doctor in Bavaria had administered placebo vaccines - consisting of a saline solution - to his patients. Vaccine sceptics from across the country reportedly travelled to his practice to receive the jabs and the accompanying vaccine certificate. Among the jabbed were also people who had thought they had received a genuine vaccine, discovering only through an antibody test offered by the local health authorities that that was not the case. The doctor has been temporarily suspended by medical authorities, pending a criminal investigation. One of the people who unwittingly received the placebo vaccine, a 50-year-old woman who lives with her 85-year old mother, told the tabloid newspaper Bild: “I was flabbergasted when I found out. I wanted BioNTech, but I got saline solution instead.” She said the doctor had inoculated her in her right buttock, stating at the same time: “Be careful - winter’s coming”. NHS and health leaders reacted with caution to the announcement that Plan B measures are to be scrapped in England, highlighting that with about 20,000 patients still in hospital with Covid, the current Omicron wave “isn’t over”, and warning that there could be “a second Omicron surge”. Some accused ministers of “sending the wrong signal to the public” for political expediency, and said it was “very premature” to conclude the threat from Omicron had subsided. Hospitals in some areas have also not yet hit predicted peak Covid admission levels, NHS leaders said. Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS hospital, mental health, community and ambulance services, said: Trust leaders have been encouraged that the number of people catching Covid-19 is now falling nationally, and the number of Covid-19 patients in hospital is stabilising. However, there are still nearly 20,000 Covid-19 patients in hospital, at a time when the NHS is already at full stretch and contending with the toughest winter on record. There are also regional variations in the number of Covid-19 hospitalisations, with the numbers increasing in the North East and Yorkshire, while decreasing in London. This means that some trusts tell us they are expecting their peak later this week, or possibly early next. Cordery said it was “important” to recognise “that this surge isn’t over” and that “the health service is still operating under extremely challenging circumstances”. She added: The government must continue to examine the evidence closely and make calculations based on the future level of risk, including of a second Omicron surge. Pat Cullen, the Royal College of Nursing’s general secretary and chief executive, said: The prime minister’s decision to loosen the restrictions may have relieved the pressure from his backbenchers but will do nothing to relieve the pressure on the NHS. Cullen said the country could not rely on vaccines alone when the situation is “still so precariously balanced”. She added: Time will tell whether dropping other measures when the pressure on health and social care services remains unrelenting was wise – particularly when thousands of unvaccinated nursing staff are facing the sack. Ministers should adopt a cautious approach. The government will regret sending the wrong signal to the public for political expediency. With so many Covid-19 patients still in hospital, it would be very premature to conclude this wave is over. That is not what our members are telling us. Catherine Noakes, professor of environmental engineering for buildings at the University of Leeds, and a member of Sage appears to be furious with the relaxation of Covid restrictions in England. In a couple of tweets following Boris Johnnson’s announcement, she said: Right, okay…erm not sure we’re following the science… it’s still around, still at 1 in 20 people, still seriously infectious, still pretty unpleasant to catch. I’d keep ventilating and wearing masks folks I see we’re also back to “face coverings for people you don’t normally meet” FFS, YOU CAN CATCH IT FROM A PERSON YOU KNOW Teaching unions expressed concern about the sudden lifting of Covid restrictions, in particular the requirement to wear face masks in classrooms, warning that many head teachers in England are still seeing widespread disruption to education due to Covid. Dr Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: Schools and colleges are still feeling the impact of Covid. The latest ONS infection survey update shows 1 in 10 primary age pupils have Covid. While the trend amongst secondary aged children is down it is however uncertain, due to the short time schools have been back since the Christmas holidays, that this trend will continue. Such uncertainty could lead to a pronounced risk of increased disruption with children and staff having to isolate. The government is due to publish figures for Covid-related absence in schools next week. “The danger is we lift restrictions too quickly before the effects of returning to school are clear,” said Bousted. This will result in more education disruption which is extremely worrying particularly for pupils taking national exams this year whose education has been so badly disrupted already. There was also scepticism that the Covid announcements may have been politically motivated to distract from the prime minister’s predicament. “Rather than announcements aimed at saving Boris Johnson’s job, government should be exercising a duty of care to the nation’s pupils and the staff who educate them,” said Bousted. This disruption is at the door of the government who should have got ventilation and filtration solutions in place before Omicron as advised by Sage and they should be getting these solutions in place urgently now to ensure interruption of education remains at the minimum. Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said the prime minister’s decision to lift Plan B measures is at odds with the situation school leaders are facing on the ground. Whiteman warned: Mass disruption is ongoing, with high numbers of staff and pupils absent. School leaders are telling us they still feel very much in the eye of the Covid storm. The reality for many children and young people is that Covid continues to seriously disrupt the normal rhythm of schools. Parents and teachers alike will be hopeful that we have passed the peak of infections from Omicron, but it is imperative that schools continue to be supported by government to keep the gates open, as we emerge from the depths of winter disruption. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, gave a conditional welcome to the announcement on masks, as long as it is supported by public health and scientific advice. He said the situation in schools and colleges remains extremely challenging with significant levels of pupil and staff absence due to Covid as well as difficulties in obtaining supply cover because of high demand. There is a danger that we are heading once again for a situation in which the government gives the impression that the crisis is over when in actual fact there is huge disruption continuing to take place in education and it is very far from being a case of business as normal. The Department for Education later clarified that masks will no longer need to be worn in classrooms from Thursday, but will continue to be worn in communal areas in schools in England until Thursday next week when masks will go altogether. Linked to the announcement that Plan B measures will be dropped in England from next week is falling infection levels across most of the country, writes our science editor Ian Sample. Covid infections are falling across most parts of the UK, according to the latest official data which suggest that the winter wave driven by the Omicron variant has passed its peak. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimates that infections in the community fell in England, Wales and Scotland in the week ending 15 January, with the trend in Northern Ireland still uncertain. The figures mark a turning point in the latest phase of the epidemic which has seen weeks of record-breaking infections in the UK fuelled by Omicron. While infection levels are still high, the ONS estimates that they fell in England from 3,735,000 in the first week of January, with 1 in 15 people testing positive, to 2,984,200 or 1 in 20 testing positive last week. Similar declines were seen in Wales and Scotland where the ONS estimates that 1 in 25 and 1 in 20 people, respectively, had the virus in the week ending 15 January. Infections may be approaching a peak in Northern Ireland too, where a further 1 in 20 were estimated to have the virus last week. The interim data from the ONS, which will be followed by a full report on Friday, show Covid infections declined in all regions of England in the most recent week, except the North East and the South West where it was unclear whether cases had peaked for now. While infections decreased in most age groups in England in the latest week of the survey, they rose in young children aged two years old to year six of primary school. Sarah Crofts, head of analytical outputs for the ONS Covid-19 infection survey said the latest figures showed “a welcome decrease in infections across most parts of the UK and among all age groups apart from younger children.” Plan B measures aimed at tackling the spread of Covid are to be dropped across England, the prime minister has announced. Boris Johnson told MPs more than 90% of over-60s across the UK had now had booster jabs to protect them, and scientists believed the Omicron wave had peaked nationally. He said the government had taken a “different path” to much of Europe and the “data are showing that, time and again, this government got the toughest decisions right”. The restrictions, which include working from home advice, mandatory face masks in some settings and Covid passports, will be allowed to expire on 26 January. The news comes as Covid infection levels are falling in most parts of the UK for the first time since early December. From 27 January, the following changes will take effect in England: End of mandatory Covid passes, but businesses can continue to use them if they choose to It will no longer be a legal requirement to wear a face mask, including in classrooms for secondary students and on public transport, but they will still be recommended in some places, such as in enclosed or crowded spaces, particularly when you come into contact with people you don’t normally meet End to work from home guidance Restrictions on care homes will be eased - further detail to be released However, there will still be a legal requirement to self-isolate if you test positive for Covid. But Johnson said there will “soon be a time” when self-isolation guidance can be removed entirely. The regulations expire on 24 March, he said, adding he does not expect to renew them. A cross-party committee of councillors is to decide the future of the Sheffield city council chief executive, Kate Josephs, a week after she apologised for having leaving drinks in Whitehall during lockdown. Josephs led the government’s Covid-19 taskforce from July to December 2020. After details of the gathering emerged in the media she released a statement admitting it took place and saying she was “truly sorry”. Sheffield city council, her current employer, said a committee of councillors would be set up “to consider what steps, if any, should be taken next”. Josephs’ leaving drinks gathering was attended by dozens of officials from the Cabinet Office’s Covid-19 taskforce. On the day it was held the government’s official Twitter feed replied to a query asking if employers could hold Christmas parties at the end of the working day. The feed said: “Hi Mick, although there are exemptions for work purposes, you must not have a work Christmas lunch or party, where that is a primarily social activity and is not otherwise permitted by the rules in your tier.” The full story is here: Sheffield council to decide fate of chief Kate Josephs following lockdown drinks Austria’s new daily coronavirus infections have shattered the previous record as the Omicron variant continues to spread, the chancellor Karl Nehammer said. Nehammer told a news conference on Wednesday: We have close to 30,000 infections. That is a frighteningly high figure. The previous record for new daily cases published by the interior and health ministries was 17,006, set a week ago. Museums and concert halls in the Netherlands opened briefly on Wednesday to protest at their continued closure under a Covid lockdown, offering yoga sessions in front of paintings by Dutch masters and haircuts to the swell of a live symphony orchestra. The Netherlands eased a month-long lockdown last weekend, allowing gyms, hair dressers and shops to reopen. But cultural venues were ordered to remained closed to the public until at least 25 January. “I simply don’t understand why the measures are still so strict, preventing cultural events from happening,” Alexandra Gerny, a life coach who could not resist an invitation to have her hair done on stage while the 130-year-old Concertgebouw Orchestra played, told Reuters. “If you look at the rest of Europe, I find myself asking: why so cautious? I simply don’t get it. The damage caused by staying closed is so much greater. It just makes me so angry and that’s not so easy to do!” She was among 50 visitors welcomed to the “Kapsalon Concertgebouw” haircut performance, held in violation of rules banning concerts for an audience. Guests wore face masks and socially distanced, while attendants at the entrance checked passes showing proof of vaccination against Covid, recovery from the illness, or a negative test. Famous museums across the Netherlands, from the Van Gogh in Amsterdam to the Frans Hals in Haarlem, opened their doors at risk of being fined. Also on offer to visitors were Tai Chi sessions and nail studios. Amsterdam’s mayor, Femke Halsema, said she would “enforce” the current lockdown measures but there were no signs of officials doing so. In a Twitter post, the junior culture minister Gunay Uslu voiced understanding for the protest but urged caution. She wrote: The cultural sector is drawing attention to their situation in a creative way. I understand the cry for help and that artists want to show all the beautiful things they have to offer us. But the opening of society must go step by step. Culture is high on the agenda. The prime minister Mark Rutte last week announced the reopening of shops and resumption of group sports despite record numbers of new Covid infections. New cases have been hitting near daily records above 30,000. The country has recorded more than 3.5 million infections and 21,000 deaths since the start of the pandemic. But hospital numbers have been steadily declining. “It’s a protest of the cultural sector in the Netherlands,” said Dominik Winterling, the new managing director of the Concertgebouw. “We want to make sure that the politicians in The Hague understand that we want to open again.” After nearly two years of uncertainty, performers and musicians need perspective, he said. “We simply don’t know what’s going on. We cannot open from one day to the next, so we need some time to prepare. What we really want is to play for an audience because that’s what we’re there for. We want to inspire people. That’s what it’s about.” Winterling said he could not guarantee everyone would get a haircut, but they would all experience a show to remember. Good morning from London! If you’re joining us, here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Polish state employees will move to remote working and private sector companies should follow suit as the country faces another surge in daily Covid cases, the health minister said. Poland reported more than 30,000 daily cases today for the first time since April, intensifying debate over whether stricter restrictions on public life are needed. The Czech government will today consider making Covid vaccinations mandatory for workers in key professions and people over the age of 60, as the daily tally of new coronavirus cases hit a record high in the country. The UK’s minister for armed forces, James Heappey, said there needs to be “some reflection” about the amount of alcohol consumed in No 10 and how regularly. Asked about whether there is a “drinking culture” at the heart of government, in the light of the Downing Street lockdown parties, Heappey said: “I think that there does need to be some reflection about the amount of alcohol that appears to be consumed and how regularly, not just at No 10 but in a number of departments of state, and I know that all secretaries of state and the prime minister and the senior civil service are quite seized at whether or not this reflects on a culture that needs to change.” [For his full answer, see 8.45am.]. There have been record daily Covid cases in Germany, which have gone over 100,000 for the first time. The health minister Karl Lauterbach said he expected the wave to peak in a few weeks, telling the RTL broadcaster: “I think we will reach the peak of the wave in mid-February, and then the number of cases could fall again, but we haven’t reached the peak yet.” I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Polish state employees will move to remote working and private sector companies should follow suit as the country faces another surge in daily Covid-19 cases, the health minister said. Poland reported more than 30,000 daily cases today for the first time since April, intensifying debate over whether stricter restrictions on public life are needed. “If these trends continue, next week the number of infections could exceed the level of 50,000 per day,” Adam Niedzielski told a news conference. Reuters report he urged private employers to follow the state sector in requiring people to work from home whenever possible. A quick snap from Reuters here that the Hungarian opposition’s candidate for prime minister, Péter Márki-Zay, said he has tested positive for coronavirus and has moved into quarantine. Márki-Zay said on his official Facebook page that he had mild symptoms resembling a cold, and had received three Covid-19 shots so was hoping to get back on the campaign road in five days if he has a negative test then. Hungary holds elections on 3 April. Almost two years after working in a temporary Covid intensive care unit at the hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Kim Bishop, a critical care nurse, can still remember which patients were in which rooms. “When you walk back on these units, you know which patient survived in which room and which ones didn’t,” said Bishop, who still works at the Philadelphia hospital and moves among different units. “I thought we closed that chapter once we closed that unit, but now walking back into it, it’s almost like a slap in the face.” Bishop’s feelings are not unique among providers who treat Covid patients in the US. Many are leaving the field. Recent research indicates that healthcare workers and first responders are displaying post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms like veterans who served in combat. Read more of Eric Berger’s report here: ‘It’s a war zone’ – healthcare workers show signs of stress similar to combat veterans Nicola Slawson is live now with our combined UK politics and Covid live blog – it is going to be a busy day for her with plots against Boris Johnson and PMQs due for noon. You can follow that here. I’ll be continuing here with the latest international Covid developments. The Czech government will today consider making Covid vaccinations mandatory for workers in key professions and people over the age of 60, as the daily tally of new coronavirus cases hit a record high in the country. Reuters report authorities said 28,469 new cases were reported on Tuesday, more than double the 12,371 reported for Tuesday of last week. Neha Arora reports from New Delhi for Reuters that India reported new coronavirus infections at an eight-month high on Wednesday. However, the federal authorities have said Omicron was causing fewer hospitalisations and deaths than the Delta variant, which killed hundreds of thousands last year. But Tarun Bhatnagar from the ICMR-National Institute of Epidemiology in Chennai said the impact of the current run-up in infections will only show up with a lag: “We have to worry about hospitalisation and deaths and that will come later. There will always be a lag of two-three weeks.” Scotland’s national clinical director has said Omicron is definitely on a “downward slope”, but urged caution over thinking the pandemic is in its final stages. Asked if we are in the “endgame”, PA Media quotes Prof Jason Leitch telling BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: I think we’re in the endgame of Omicron. Nobody knows if we’re in the endgame of the whole pandemic. And anybody who does, I’m afraid it’s hope rather than reality. I hope we’re in the endgame, and the WHO are telling us still to be cautious – don’t drop your guard for surveillance of other variants that might come into your country or you might generate yourself. But we’re definitely in a downward slope of Omicron, which is terrific news. David Aaronovitch of the Times sums up quite neatly here that UK government ministers on the airwaves appear very happy to pre-judge the outcome of Sue Gray’s investigation when it comes to staff and civil servants, less so when it comes to fellow Conservative politicians. The minister for armed forces in the UK, James Heappey, has been asked about whether there is a “drinking culture” at the heart of government, in the light of the Downing Street lockdown parties that have emerged. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Breakfast: I think it’s quite hard to answer that in a straight way because what I reflect on having worked both in Downing Street and in the Ministry of Defence, both departments where an awful lot of people have to work extraordinarily long hours, because they are dealing with real-time operational issues, and I don’t know that colleagues who get to the end of a very, very long day, and maybe have a glass of wine at their desk before they go home, is that a drinking culture different to those who finished work earlier in the evening and go for a drink with friends outside work? I think that there does need to be some reflection about the amount of alcohol that appears to be consumed and how regularly, not just at No 10 but in a number of departments of state, and I know that all secretaries of state and the prime minister and the senior civil service are quite seized at whether or not this reflects on a culture that needs to change. A quick snap from Reuters here that Hungary’s daily tally of new Covid-19 infections has jumped to a record 14,890. The government said the Omicron variant “was spreading strongly”, but the number of patients treated in hospital has remained at a relatively low level. In the UK, Jonathan Reynolds is Labour’s shadow secretary for business and industry and he has been on the airwaves this morning. He told Sky News: That interview yesterday the prime minister gave, where there was a new excuse. This time no one had told him about the rules that he himself had introduced. He has lost all authority. And whether it is when the report comes out, or whether it is earlier than that, given how quickly things seem to be moving last night, we all know what’s going to happen. There is going to be a no-confidence vote. And what I resent most of all about all of this is, if you look at the situation people are facing right now … this cost of living crisis, the squeeze on households demands a responsible government. Are they responding? No, because the prime minister is trying to get himself out of a scandal of his own making. With speculation mounting in the UK that enough Conservative MPs may be unhappy with Boris Johnson’s performance as prime minister to trigger a vote of no confidence, environment secretary George Eustice has said he would not be one of them. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Good Morning Scotland: I’ve got confidence in the prime minister. Clearly the revelations that have been coming out are damaging and it’s unsettled parts of the Conservative parliamentary party, there’s no denying that. I think the prime minister was right to apologise but I support him because I do think the important agenda that he’s got around levelling up our country, bringing our union together after a number of difficult years, arguing over things like Brexit, I think he is the right one to do that, and he has my support to carry out that important agenda that he was elected to. Here is another quote from armed forces minister James Heappey on his media round this morning in the UK, with what looks like an attempt to paint a picture of the prime minister as a hapless victim of circumstance. PA Media quotes him telling Times Radio: If you are going through a day in which you are having calls with world leaders, meetings on national security, meetings on ten different policy areas, all of those meetings come and go in the blink of an eye, you rely utterly on the team around you to make sure that you are properly briefed and to have your back around what it is that they put in your diary. As unedifying as I think it is to point to those who perhaps don’t have a platform with which to respond, the reality is that those who work around the prime minister need to have his back. By the prime minister’s own admission in parliament, he spent 25 minutes in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020. Theresa May’s former chief of staff Gavin Barwell has said Boris Johnson should have apologised immediately over the Downing Street lockdown party scandal. PA Media quotes him telling LBC: It’s been clear for months that someone has been leaking things drip by drip by drip. So, after the first story, you have to establish all the facts, get it all out there on your own terms and apologise, genuinely apologise contritely and hope that you can get through that. Now that might not have worked, it might be that people were so angry that that would have been it, but I’m sure that would have been a better strategy than trying to deny it for months on end. Just a little bit more from Reuters here on those record daily Covid cases in Germany, which have gone over 100,000 for the first time. They report that health minister Karl Lauterbach said he expected the wave to peak in a few weeks, telling the RTL broadcaster: “I think we will reach the peak of the wave in mid-February, and then the number of cases could fall again, but we haven’t reached the peak yet.” James Heappey is the UK government minister for the armed forces, and he is on the media round in the UK this morning. Here’s what he has had to say on Sky News about intrigue against Boris Johnson over Downing Street’s lockdown parties: I only know what I’ve read in the papers overnight that some colleagues appear to have met to discuss things. I don’t think that’s surprising. I suspect there’s lots of colleagues who are reflecting on what they’ve heard in their constituencies and a feeling under a lot of pressure right now, because the British public are absolutely furious with what they’ve heard. The prime minister has apologised. I can tell colleagues that in the meetings I see the prime minister, in which we discuss the most sensitive matters that the state has to deal with, at a time when the world is incredibly unstable the prime minister is taking really big decisions and he’s making the right calls. And this doesn’t feel like the time to be changing our prime minister. I just think that the prime minister has given his account of things he did at the dispatch box, which all ministers take very seriously. They have a responsibility to be absolutely accurate in what they say. Others have contested that version and said that they’re willing to do so on oath. We will wait to see what Sue Gray has heard and the conclusions that she makes. Hello, and a good morning from me, Martin Belam, in London. Another busy day of political intrigue that revolves around Covid ahead of us in the UK, I suspect. Here are three things it might be worth bearing in mind over the next couple of days. Here is exactly what Boris Johnson said in parliament on 8 December: I apologise for the impression that has been given that staff in Downing Street take this less than seriously. I am sickened myself and furious about that, but I repeat what I have said to him: I have been repeatedly assured that the rules were not broken. I repeat that I have been repeatedly assured since these allegations emerged that there was no party and that no Covid rules were broken. And here is what he said in parliament on 12 January: When I went into that garden just after six on 20 May 2020, to thank groups of staff before going back into my office 25 minutes later to continue working, I believed implicitly that this was a work event. With hindsight I should have sent everyone back inside. I should have found some other way to thank them. I should have recognised that even if it could be said technically to fall within the guidance, there are millions and millions of people who simply would not see it that way, people who have suffered terribly, people who were forbidden from meeting loved ones at all inside or outside, and to them and to this house I offer my heartfelt apologies. And here’s a reminder from Alain Tolhurst at PoliticsHome of exactly what the rules were at the time: Around an hour before the gathering took place the Cabinet minister Oliver Dowden told a televised Covid briefing: “You can meet one person outside of your household in an outdoor, public place provided that you stay 2 metres apart. The law at the time said gatherings between more than two people were not permitted in public places, but that an exception would be made for “essential for work purposes”. The number of letters of no confidence in UK prime minster Boris Johnson could hit threshold of 54, though numbers may be short, the BBC is reporting. As many as 20 Conservative lawmakers who won their seats at the last general election in 2019 plan to submit letters of no confidence in Johnson, according to reports. “Group of 2019 MPs to submit letters to try to hit threshold of 54 to trigger a contest,” BBC political editor Laura Kuenssberg said. “They might hit 54.” An analysis by the Times showed that 58 Conservative lawmakers had criticised the prime minister. The letters are confidential, so the chairman is the only person who knows how many lawmakers have actually written them. Johnson will address parliament on Wednesday after his Cabinet is expected to approve plans to end the recent restrictions imposed to tackle the spread of Covid-19 in England. We will have more on this story as it develops. Before I hand over to my esteemed colleague Martin Belam and before Boris Johnson announces a potential end to plan B Covid measures across England, here is a recap of how Covid has unfolded across the globe. Europe British PM Boris Johnson is to meet with his cabinet on Wednesday morning where he is expected to end of plan B Covid measures across England. A review of Covid restrictions will likely see ministers approve the end of current advice for people to work from home where possible and the use of vaccine certificates to enter venues like nightclubs and sports stadiums. Germany is recorded 112,323 new coronavirus cases and 239 deaths on Tuesday, according to recently updated figures from the Robert Koch Institute. It is the highest recorded daily figure since the pandemic began. Omicron accounts for more than 70% of new infections. The Czech Republic has reported a daily Covid record of 28,469 new cases on Wednesday. Fatalities significantly decreased however with 6 deaths recorded for Tuesday, a drop from Monday’s 23 fatalities, according to ministry of health data. Americas Brazil has recorded a record 137,103 new cases of the novel coronavirus in the past 24 hours, the health ministry reported on Tuesday. The number of deaths also rose by 351, the highest number since mid-November. Asia Authorities in Beijing have announced another piece of infected international mail, the Beijing news has reported. Japan is poised to widen Covid-19 controls to cover half its population as the Omicron variant drives new infections to record levels, Reuters reports. Prime minister Fumio Kishida is expected to officially approve the plan after it was cleared by an expert panel on Wednesday. Vietnam recorded its first cases of the Omicron variant in the community. The three positive cases were detected over the weekend in Ho Chi Minh City and confirmed as Omicron late on Tuesday. China reported its lowest daily count of local Covid infections in two weeks after cities clamped down on high-risk areas, quarantined infections and conducted mass testing on residents. Mainland China reported a total of 55 domestically transmitted infections for Tuesday, lower than the 127 recorded a day earlier and marking the fewest since 1 January. A Chinese couple who were trapped on a never-ending date thanks to a Covid lockdown have tied the knot. The rate at which Covid is spreading in the Philippines’ capital Manila is on a “clear downward trend”, analysis suggests, though infections have continued to rise rapidly elsewhere in the country. Taiwan has expanded its airport testing for new arrivals, after dozens of positive cases were detected despite a requirement that all travellers obtain a negative PCR result no more than two days before getting on their flight. A mass hamster cull in Hong Kong has sparked fears among animal welfare groups that people will abandon their pets after 11 of the rodents from one petshop in the city tested positive for Covid-19. Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific Australia has announced financial incentives in a bid to lure international workers, backpackers and students to the country to fill some of the critical workforce shortages being faced as a result of the Omicron surge. The small island nation of Papua New Guinea has just announced its first case of the Omicron variant as local authorities call for calm. Australia and New Zealand have started to dispatch aid to Tonga to help provide temporary shelter and clean drinking water after volcanic eruption. However, there are fears that relief workers could bring a “tsunami of Covid” cases to the Pacific Island nation that has so far recorded just one case of the virus. The World Health Organization has cautioned that the Covid pandemic is far from over as the agency’s chief described the narrative that Omicron is a mild disease as “misleading”. The WHO also says the worst of the coronavirus pandemic – deaths, hospitalisations and lockdowns – could be over this year if huge inequities in vaccinations and medicines are addressed quickly. The Czech Republic has reported a daily Covid record of 28,469 new cases on Wednesday. Fatalities significantly decreased, however, with six deaths recorded for Tuesday, a drop from Monday’s 23 fatalities, according to ministry of health data. The daily death toll for the month of January has averaged 38 fatalities per day with a high of 61 deaths recorded on 3 January. A mass hamster cull in Hong Kong has sparked fears among animal welfare groups that people will abandon their pets after 11 of the rodents from one pet shop in the city tested positive for Covid-19. The local Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA), which runs veterinary clinics, told Reuters “numerous” worried pet owners have been contacting them for advice. “We urge the pet owners not to panic or abandon their pets,” SPCA said in a statement. Scientists around the world and Hong Kong health and veterinary authorities have said there was no evidence that animals play a major role in human contagion with the coronavirus. However, Hong Kong government officials took no chances after a series of recent infections with the Delta variant were traced back to a worker at a pet shop. Hundreds of samples were collected from animals, including rabbits and chinchillas, but only the hamsters tested positive for Covid-19, resulting in officials giving orders for some 2,000 hamsters from 34 pet shops to be put down “humanely”. Vanessa Barrs, professor of companion animal health at City University of Hong Kong, said: Millions of people around the world have pets, and there have been no cases proven of pets transmitting infection to other humans. The theoretical risk is there, but it just doesn’t happen.” Health workers in hazmat suits were seen walking out of pet shops around the city carrying red plastic bags into their vans. Dozens of pet shops were asked to close, while imports and sales of small mammals were suspended. Buyers of hamsters after 22 December, 2021 were asked to hand them to authorities for culling and not leave them on streets. It was unclear how many had been handed in. A hotline for inquiries was set up, while 150 of the pet shop’s customers were sent into quarantine, officials said. Authorities in Beijing have announced another piece of infected international mail, the Beijing news has reported. It brings the total number of international parcels which authorities say they have detected traces of Covid-19 on to seven, days after attributing one to Beijing’s first case of the Omicron variant. The CDC in Shunyi district said on Tuesday it had conducted an epidemiological investigation, further testing, and environmental disinfection, finding three close contacts and four secondary contacts of the most recent parcel. It has also tested more than 1,000 people and taken 50 environmental samples. The news follows an announcement on Monday linking an otherwise untraced case of the Omicron variant to an international parcel sent from Toronto, Canada via the US and Hong Kong. Health officials said 22 traces of the virus were found on that piece of mail, including two on the outer surface of the package, two on the inner surface and eight on the paper inside the document. Nucleic acid testing confirmed the variant was Omicron. 54 environmental samples of international mail also from Toronto were collected, and five were found to be positive, authorities said. Australia has announced financial incentives in a bid to lure international workers, backpackers and students to the country to fill some of the critical workforce shortages being faced as a result of the Omicron surge. Prime minister Scott Morrison unveiled the $55m package that will refund the cost of visa application fees for up to 175,000 backpackers and international students on Wednesday. Under the details of the visa rebate program, the $630 fee for international students will be covered for the next eight weeks, and for backpackers for 12 weeks. Morrison said his message to 150,000 international students and 23,500 backpackers with visas was to “come on down”. We want you to come to Australia and enjoy a holiday here … [and] move all the way around the country. At the same time, join our workforce and help us in our agricultural sector, in our hospitality sector, and so many of the other parts of the economy that rely on that labour.” He said international students “particularly those who are working and being trained in healthcare, aged care, those types of sectors” would be “incredibly helpful”. The prime minister also said states that still had in place quarantine requirements for international arrivals should consider lifting them to take advantage of the additional staff arriving into the country. “I’d be encouraging them to look at those rules to make sure they can get those critical workers in,” Morrison said. Read the full story here. Australia and New Zealand have started to dispatch aid to Tonga to help provide temporary shelter and clean drinking water after volcanic eruption. However, there are fears that relief workers could bring a “tsunami of Covid” cases to the Pacific Island nation that has so far recorded just one case of the virus. New Zealand has dispatched two naval vessels with relief supplies onboard. Defence minister Peeni Henare said they were expected to arrive in four days, though could arrive as soon as Friday if the weather holds. Sophie Ford, international response coordinator for the Australian Red Cross, said aid groups were aware of Covid-19 restrictions that require people coming into the country to isolate for up to three weeks, and goods to be quarantined for days. “We’re really mindful that our response doesn’t bring any more problems,” Ford said. A senior Tongan diplomat in Canberra, Curtis Tuihalangingie, told the ABC that there were concerns of “a tsunami of Covid hitting Tonga” as humanitarian relief came to the country. Read the full story here. Taiwan has expanded its airport testing for new arrivals, after dozens of positive cases were detected despite a requirement that all travellers obtain a negative PCR result no more than two days before getting on their flight. The new measure comes as Taiwan battles small clusters of local infections including the Omicron variant. Last week Taiwan’s CDC ordered that all passengers on long-haul flights from the Americas, Europe, the Middle East, Australia and New Zealand would be given a rapid PCR test at the airport immediately on arrival. On Tuesday the CDC said this process would be expanded to people from other regions, after the process detected a surprisingly high number of apparently positive cases on arrival, including 58 on the first day. Those who test positive are taken directly to hospital or quarantine facility with their luggage. Those who test negative are allowed to continue through the arrival process, which includes a being sprayed with disinfectant, and put in designated transport to a quarantine hotel or facility. During the two weeks in quarantine (and a subsequent week of mandatory semi-isolation), individuals are tested another five times - including two PCRs and three at-home rapid tests. Taiwan is maintaining extraordinary measures as part of an apparent Covid Zero strategy, one that has kept life for those inside its borders relatively normal for most of the pandemic. However the Omicron wave sweeping the planet has also coincided with Lunar New Year, the most important holiday of the year for much of East Asia, when hundreds of millions travel across the region. Tens of thousands of overseas Taiwanese have reportedly arrived in Taiwan this month, beginning quarantine early to be out in time for the Spring Festival. There are now clusters of community cases linked to Taoyuan international airport and a steakhouse in the city. Of the 17 community cases in Taiwan reported on Tuesday, five are still untraced. Also on Tuesday, the health minister Chen Chih-shung gave a frank indication that people will at some point have to accept the presence of the virus in Taiwan. Asked about Taiwan’s future strategy, Chen said it was a combination of mask wearing, strong hygiene, vaccinations and quarantine for inbound travellers, but people also needed to prepare for co-existence. The rate at which Covid is spreading in the Philippines’ capital Manila is on a “clear downward trend”, analysis suggests, though infections have continued to rise rapidly elsewhere in the country, placing pressure on health services. The Philippines has experienced a recent surge in infections, which health experts have blamed on the more transmissible Omicron variant. There is hope that the wave of infections in Manila, previously a hotspot for cases, is slowing. Dr Guido David, of the research group OCTA, which has provided analysis of the Covid outbreak in the Philippines, said the seven day average of new cases in Manila had fallen over the past week by 23% from 2,152 to 1,658. “The region is still at critical risk, so we need to continue to follow health protocols,” David added. Various restrictions have been in place to curb infections in Manila, including a “no vaccination, no ride” policy limiting access to public transport. Businesses such as restaurants and beauty salons are also operating at a lower capacity, as are churches and parks. Elsewhere across the Philippines, infections have continued to rise. This includes Davao City, on the southern island on Mindanao, where a major Covid hospital has suspended admissions for non-emergency cases, according to a report by Rappler. Scheduled surgeries have also been postponed at the Southern Philippines Medical Center (SPMC). Davao region is under similar restrictions to Manila. A Chinese couple who were trapped on a never-ending date thanks to a Covid lockdown have tied the knot, Agence France-Press reports. Zhao Xiaoqing, a 28-year-old woman from northern China’s Shaanxi province, thought her date in mid-December with a young man living in a different city would be a one-day affair where she would also get to know his family. “I never thought about staying the night, because it’s pretty awkward,” Zhao Xiaoqing, who was meeting the man for only the second time, told local media Jimu News on Monday. But authorities in her date’s city of Xianyang suddenly ordered a lockdown due to a spike in virus cases, leaving the woman unable to return home. The man’s parents urged the pair to get engaged after just one week together - but Zhao said she felt it was “too rushed.” Zhao said she was “not too interested” when she first saw a photograph of the man - named Zhao Fei - but later thought he looked better in real life. Despite the awkward start, the pair began to develop feelings for each other, and have now decided to get engaged. Zhao Xiaoqing, who is an online apple trader, told Jimu News: We get along very well. I have to sell apples on livestream at his house, but no matter how late it is he’s always by my side. I’m very touched by this. Our souls are compatible, we get along very well, and both our parents are happy.” China has reported its lowest daily count of local Covid infections in two weeks after cities clamped down on high-risk areas, quarantined infections and conducted mass testing on residents. Mainland China reported a total of 55 domestically transmitted infections for Tuesday, according to data from the national health commission, lower than the 127 recorded a day earlier and marking the fewest since 1 January. China reported a total of 171 new confirmed Covid-19 cases for Monday, 17 January, down from 223 a day earlier, according to government data. The 127 local transmissions was down again from 163 a day earlier. The drop was mainly driven by fewer infections in the central city of Anyang, which reported 29 new local symptomatic cases for 18 January, compared with 94 the prior day. Moving across to Europe where the Omicron variant continues to spread, Germany is reporting a daily rise of more than 100,000 new coronavirus cases. The European country recorded 112,323 new coronavirus cases and 239 deaths on Tuesday, according to recently updated figures from the Robert Koch Institute. The weekly incidence rate reached 584.4 new infections per 100,000 people over seven days, the agency added. The number is a significant jump on yesterday’s daily rise of 74,405 and 193 deaths and on case numbers recorded at the end of the last week. It is the highest recorded daily figure since the pandemic began. Germany now joins other European countries like the UK, France and Italy in recording more than 100,000 new Covid-19 infections on one day. Omicron now accounts for more than 70% of new infections. The country recently tightened restrictions on access to restaurants, bars and cafes to people who have received their booster jabs or who are tested on top of being fully vaccinated or recovered. Germany has also pledged to accelerate vaccinations while the parliament prepares to discuss introducing mandatory vaccinations - a measure supported by new chancellor Olaf Scholz. Vietnam has also just recorded its first cases of the Omicron variant in the community. The three positive cases were detected over the weekend in Ho Chi Minh City and confirmed as Omicron late on Tuesday, the Tien Phong Newspaper reported, citing health authorities. Up to now, Vietnam has recorded 70 Omicron cases, all of which were imported cases and isolated immediately after entry. The Southeast Asian country reported a recent daily increase of 16,838 Covid cases, according to ministry of health figures. As many countries report rapid rises in cases fuelled by Omicron, some have managed to escape the destruction caused by the new variant altogether. The small island nation of Papua New Guinea has just announced its first case of the Omicron variant as local authorities call for calm. Authorities announced on Tuesday the case was a man who came to Papua New Guinea in December from South Africa, after travelling through London and Hong Kong. He initially tested negative with no symptoms upon arrival in the country. “Given the period for the man’s travel, it is unclear when or where he contracted the Omicron strain, however given its incubation period of three days– it is likely he acquired it after departing South Africa,” said David Manning, national pandemic response controller. Read the full story by Guardian reporter Lyanne Togiba in Port Moresby here. Japan is poised to widen Covid-19 controls to cover half its population as the Omicron variant drives new infections to record levels, Reuters reports. Prime minister Fumio Kishida is expected to officially approve the plan after it was cleared by an expert panel on Wednesday. The so-called quasi-emergency measures permit governors to impose curbs on mobility and business, including shorter opening hours for bars and restaurants, as well as prohibitions on alcohol sales. The measures, already in place in three regions, will widen to cover Tokyo and 12 other prefectures, lasting from Friday until 13 February. Japan recorded 20,835 new Covid-19 cases on Monday, according to ministry of health data. The figure jumped more than 32,000 on Tuesday, according to a tally by national broadcaster NHK, exceeding the previous high seen in August shortly after Tokyo hosted the Summer Olympics. The western prefecture of Osaka posted a record 5,396 new cases, while Tokyo had 5,185, the highest since 21 August. Public health experts are concerned that a wave of Omicron cases could overwhelm the healthcare system. Tokyo’s occupancy rate of hospital beds for Covid patients rose to 23.4% on Tuesday. An increase to 50% would warrant declaration of a full state of emergency, officials have said. Japan has vaccinated about 80% of its population, but its booster shot program has barely begun. Brazil has recorded a record 137,103 new cases of the novel coronavirus in the past 24 hours, the health ministry reported on Tuesday. The number of deaths also rose by 351, the highest number since mid-November. The Omicron variant has spread rapidly across the South American country, becoming the dominant strain. New cases have soared above the previous daily record of 115,228 on 23 June last year. Brazil has now registered 23,211,894 cases since the pandemic began while the official death toll has risen to 621,517, according to ministry data. Brazil has the world’s third highest death toll from Covid-19 after the United States and Russia. Almost 70% of Brazilians are fully vaccinated, and Brazil this week started vaccinating children aged 5-11 years. The Covid pandemic is far from over, the World Health Organization chief has said, cautioning against a narrative that the Omicron variant is risk-free. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters in a press conference from the WHO’s headquarters in Geneva on Tuesday: This pandemic is nowhere near over. Omicron may be less severe, on average, but the narrative that it is a mild disease is misleading,” he said. Make no mistake: Omicron is causing hospitalisations and deaths, and even the less severe cases are inundating health facilities.” The UN health agency chief warned against dismissing Omicron as mild in light of evidence it seems to cause less serious disease. Debate continues as to whether the virus is on the verge of passing from the pandemic phase to becoming an endemic disease that humanity can live with - with the implication that the danger will have passed. But the WHO has warned that the sheer numbers of people infected will mean many people are still falling seriously ill and dying. “An exponential rise in cases, regardless of the severity of the individual variants, leads to inevitable increase in hospitalisations and deaths,” WHO emergencies director Michael Ryan told Tuesday’s press conference. As England prepares to see an easing of Plan B Covid measures later this month, here is a quick visual representation of how many people remain in hospital with coronavirus each day in the UK. A No 10 statement setting out the plan for Wednesday’s decision noted that case numbers are still high, with 17,000 Covid patients in hospital in England. A government spokesperson said: “Decisions on the next steps remain finely balanced. Plan B was implemented in December to slow the rapid spread of the extremely transmissible Omicron variant, and get more jabs in arms. “The Omicron variant continues to pose a significant threat and the pandemic is not over. Infections remain high but the latest data is encouraging, with cases beginning to fall. British prime minister Boris Johnson is expected to instruct millions to return to workplaces across England as he tries to placate furious MPs with a review of Covid restrictions that could end all rules introduced to combat Omicron. The cabinet will meet on Wednesday morning to examine Covid data and review plan B restrictions imposed in December amid the rapid spread of the variant, with Johnson set to update the Commons later in the day. While an official statement said decisions remained “finely balanced”, ministers are widely expected to approve the end of current advice for people to work from home where possible and the use of vaccine certificates to enter venues like nightclubs and sports stadiums. This would happen from Monday 26 January, the pre-set review point for the plan B measures. It is also possible, if considered less likely, that the cabinet could drop the final plan B restriction which mandates masks on public transport and in shops. This move in particular would please many Conservative backbenchers, especially those in the influential Covid Recovery Group. Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog today as we unpack all the latest Covid developments from across the world. I’ll be reporting to you from Sydney and my colleagues from London will take over a little later in the day. Boris Johnson’s fight to salvage his premiership and the Downing Street parties scandal continues to somewhat overshadow the Covid crisis unfolding in the UK. Johnson will attempt to change the national conversation by meeting with his cabinet on Wednesday morning where he is expected to end of Plan B Covid measures across England. A review of Covid restrictions will likely see ministers approve the end of current advice for people to work from home where possible and the use of vaccine certificates to enter venues like nightclubs and sports stadiums. This would happen from Monday 26 January, the pre-set review point for the plan B measures. Meanwhile, the World Health Organization has cautioned that the Covid pandemic is far from over as the agency’s chief described the narrative that Omicron is a mild disease as “misleading”. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus addressed reporters during a press conference on Tuesday, saying: “Make no mistake: Omicron is causing hospitalisations and deaths, and even the less severe cases are inundating health facilities.” Here’s a quick run-down of all the global developments: The United Nations is preparing for distanced relief operations in Tonga to avoid a Covid outbreak in the Pacific island nation that is reeling under the impact of a volcanic eruption and tsunami. Covid deaths in the US are climbing and modellers forecast 50,000 to 300,000 more Americans could die by the time the wave subsides in mid-March. The World Health Organization says the worst of the coronavirus pandemic — deaths, hospitalisations and lockdowns — could be over this year if huge inequities in vaccinations and medicines are addressed quickly. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has advised against travel to 22 nations and territories because of a rising number of Covid cases. In France, 464,769 new cases have been registered in the past 24 hours – a global record increase. Italy’s cases have jumped to 228,179 from 83,403 a day earlier. Omicron measures in Scotland will be lifted on Monday, Nicola Sturgeon has announced. This includes restrictions on indoor live events, table services in hospitality and distancing in indoor public places. The UK has reported 94,432 new Covid cases and 438 deaths. There were more than 900 Covid deaths in England and Wales in the first week of January. The ONS records a 58% rise on the previous week but figures are artificially high due to Christmas bank holidays. Lateral flow tests will no longer be free for people in the UK by the end of June, according to a document seen by Reuters news agency. France’s education minister is facing calls to resign after it emerged he had announced Covid protocol for schools while he was on holiday in Ibiza. Please feel free to get in touch with me if you have a story or tips to share. Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: samantha.lock@theguardian.com Twitter: @Samantha__LockGetting ready for the start of the Women’s Ashes, it feels strange that the last time I played for Australia was April 2021. It’s by far the longest break I’ve had. It went quickly, but now that I’m back it feels like forever. In the meantime I had other things to think about. Last August, my partner Jess had our daughter Rylee by C-section 11 weeks premature. We were told at 24 weeks that she could come any day. It was frightening. We had an obstetrician and a paediatrician who were amazing, who kept reassuring us that with today’s technology, 28 weeks was going to be alright. For the first five days Jess was in hospital too, and I would stay there until they kicked me out. Once she was home we settled into a routine of Rylee’s care. They were long days. It was a strange perk to get from cricket, but the Women’s and Children’s Hospital is across from Adelaide Oval, so it helped that we got free parking. I feel for the nurses – they don’t get looked after, so in their breaks they have to go outside and move their cars. I would do gym and go back to the hospital, do some running and go back, then we would go home and sleep and repeat the whole thing again. Spending nights without knowing, calling up as soon as we woke up to see how she was. It’s the strangest feeling knowing that you’ve got a child that you can’t take home with you. She was in hospital for 53 days, then 10 days on the early discharge program. But we’ve been lucky. She’s been a healthy bub from the start, she just needed to put on a lot of weight and grow. As for Jess, there is nothing worse than seeing the person you love in pain. That was harder than I thought. I could see how much she wanted to be lifting Rylee. They’re so overworked in the hospital that you don’t want to bother a nurse to get you into a wheelchair. Then comes figuring out how to raise a child. It’s the unknown, the uncertainty. Going from a really controlled hospital environment to taking her home and we’re in charge of a baby. I was crapping myself, thinking that I don’t know the first thing about parenting. But in the end it’s someone who you love and want to take care of. It’s far from Instagram-worthy. People feel that pressure, but you have to take expectations out of it. You have ideas about the sort of parent you’re going to be, and how you’ll react in certain situations, but you don’t know until you get into it. Jess and I are different – I’m clearly going be the fun but tough parent and she’s the sooky one, so we’re going to balance out nicely. We’re part of some groups online of premature parents, so we can exchange how we’re feeling and get advice. It’s been a journey, and it’s really solidified our relationship. It feels like we’ve got this, terrifying as it has been. We know that together we can do anything. In September, India played a Test match against Australia in Queensland. It was a bummer not be playing, but it was so cool to watch because it was such a good contest. India were incredible in the whole series, and the fact that we had a Test that was outside the Ashes showed some intention of getting us more Tests. At least we hope so. In the end I only had one week completely off training. During a life-changing experience I managed to keep the same basics. Getting back into full state training in longer blocks was harder, then practice games with a full day away from Rylee. I got lucky with a lot of Big Bash being played in Adelaide: I only missed three games and never spent more than three days away from home. I’ve played cricket for a long time, and knew I wasn’t going to lose my skillset. I backed myself to come in and play. Doing that in a fun environment, where the Adelaide Strikers have a bloody great set-up with a lot of good people who were performing well, it ticked all my boxes. Now the Women’s Ashes T20s have come to Adelaide – which is great for South Australians, we were frothing over it. Changing the schedule is hard on others, but none of the players have had their best preparation. I’m just excited to get out there, and getting to play on Adelaide Oval in my first game? What a welcome mat that is. I’m banking on muscle memory and a bit of fun. It will be so good to be back.Joe Biden spent decades in Washington, striving to reach the White House. When he achieved the goal a year ago on Thursday, at the age of 78, he spoke of a “winter of peril and possibility”, of cascading crises as an opportunity to think big and aim high. It turns out the Washington he knows so well has proved more foe than friend, offering more peril than possibility. The 46th US president discovered that not being Donald Trump isn’t enough to get things done or make people love him. Biden held only his second solo White House press conference on Wednesday – a testy and at times rambling near two hours – with his social and environmental spending agenda and push for voting rights laws foundering on Republican rocks. Biden arrived with sepia-tinted nostalgia for the Senate of his youth, promising that he could still work across the aisle for the greater good. The Republican Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, a grandmaster of obstruction, had other ideas. “One thing I haven’t been able to do so far is get my Republican friends to get in the game at making things better in this country,” Biden told reporters in the East Room, flags and shiny gold curtains behind him. (Note that he still refers to them as “friends”.) Biden went on: “I did not anticipate that there’d be such a stalwart effort to make sure that the most important thing was that President Biden didn’t get anything done.” The president insisted: “I actually like Mitch McConnell. We like one another. But he has one straightforward objective: make sure that there’s nothing I do that makes me look good, in his mind, with the public at large. And that’s OK. I’m a big boy. I’ve been here before … I think that the fundamental question is, ‘What’s Mitch for?’” The man who in his inaugural address declared, “We must end this uncivil war that pits red versus blue,” suggested that his biggest mistake had been underestimating the radicalisation of a party still tethered to Trump. “Did you ever think that one man out of office could intimidate an entire party where they’re unwilling to take any vote contrary to what he thinks should be taken for fear of being defeated in primary?” the president asked. Biden told the story of five Republican senators who privately told him they agreed with him but admitted: “Joe, if I do it, I’ll get defeated in a primary.” He turned the tables on reporters, asking if they thought we’d ever get to a point where not a single Republican would diverge on a major issue. Biden will be praised for speaking plainly about one of America’s two major parties having gone off the rails. He was asked if he should have expected this after eight years as Barack Obama’s vice-president, in which he witnessed the Republican party organising around the principle of “no”. “They weren’t nearly as obstructionist as they are now,” he insisted. This attempt to reframe the narrative by shining a light on Republicans instead of self-inflicted wounds was somewhat undercut because, at that very moment, a member of his own party was holding court in the Senate. Joe Manchin of West Virginia was busy explaining his opposition to reform of the filibuster, a procedural rule that is standing in the way of the voting rights bills in an evenly divided Senate. As a symbol of presidential impotence, the split screen was hard to beat. Manchin and his fellow holdout Democrat, Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, seem determined to upstage the Biden presidency at every turn. Biden promised to unite the nation but has not even united his own party. Biden has restored civility to the White House – even at its weirdest moments or even when he snapped at reporters, this event had nothing on insult-hurling Trump – but has conducted the fewest press conferences in his first year as president since Ronald Reagan. Wearing a dark blue suit with handkerchief in top left pocket, white shirt and yellow and blue striped tie, Biden naturally began with some chest-thumping about his record. “I didn’t over-promise but I have, probably, outperformed what anybody thought would happen,” he claimed. He fired off a barrage of statistics – more than 210 million Americans vaccinated, more than 6 million jobs created – that show him in a favourable light. “It will get better,” he insisted from a lectern on a rug spread out on the shiny wood floor. “We’re moving toward a time when Covid-19 won’t disrupt our daily lives, where Covid-19 won’t be a crisis but something to protect against and a threat. Look, we’re not there yet, but we will get there.” It was hardly “Morning in America” but it would have to do. The president took question after question in a press conference that ran longer than any given by Obama or Trump. Biden admitted that more coronavirus testing should have been done earlier. He insisted that his Build Back Better agenda was the best antidote to inflation but conceded it would have to be broken into “chunks” to get through Congress. He caused a diplomatic kerfuffle by seeming to imply that a Russian “minor incursion” into Ukraine would not be such a big deal, forcing the White House to clean up and clarify. Towards the end, he appeared to meander, drifting into talk about the cable news industry “heading south”. One question, harking back to that inaugural address on a chilly day at the US Capitol, asked if the nation was less divided now than it was a year ago. “Based on some of the stuff we’ve got done, I’d say yes,” Biden said, “but it’s not nearly as unified as it should be.” As for the year-two relaunch that many feel is now required, Biden promised to get out and talk to the public more often, bring in more academics, editorial writers and thinktanks for expert advice, and get “deeply involved” in the midterm elections. He did not say he would expending his energies on wooing McConnell or other Republicans. “My buddy John McCain’s gone,” Biden admitted. Washington is a difference place now. The year of living naively is over.The Pentagon has declassified and publicly released video footage of a US drone strike in Kabul that killed 10 civilians in the final hours of the chaotic American withdrawal that ended its 20-year war in Afghanistan. The New York Times obtained the footage through a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit against US Central Command, which then posted the imagery to its website. It marks the first public release of video footage of the 29 August strike, which the Pentagon initially defended but later called a tragic mistake. The videos include about 25 minutes of footage from what the Times reported were two MQ-9 Reaper drones, showing the scene of the strike prior to, during and after a missile struck a civilian car in a courtyard on a residential street. Indistinct images show individuals moving in or near the attack zone. A Pentagon investigation last year found the strike in Kabul was an “honest mistake” and recommended no legal or disciplinary action, a conclusion that was met with widespread outrage from Congress and human rights groups. Critics said the report contributed to a culture of impunity and failed to address systemic problems in the US conduct of drone warfare, making future civilian casualties inevitable. The victims of the 29 August strike included Zemari Ahmadi, who worked for a US-based aid organisation, and nine members of his family, including seven children. Even though the investigation by the US air force inspector general, Lt Gen Sami Said, found that the drone operators had confused a white Toyota Corolla at the scene with a car linked to a terrorist group and also failed to spot a child visible in surveillance footage two minutes before the strike, it found no evidence of wrongdoing. “The investigation found no violation of law, including the law of war. Execution errors combined with confirmation bias and communication breakdowns led to regrettable civilian casualties,” the report said. “It was an honest mistake,” Said told reporters at the Pentagon. “But it’s not criminal conduct, random conduct, negligence.” Three days earlier a suicide bombing at the airport had killed 13 US troops and more than 160 Afghans. When it later acknowledged its error in the 29 August drone strike, Central Command said it determined that the man driving the car had nothing to do with the IS group. Additional reporting from Julian BorgerA proposal by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, to allow children to drive forklifts appears to have caught the states by surprise, with the Queensland, Victorian and New South Wales governments saying they have no plans to lower the current age of 18. Unions have also criticised the proposal, saying forklifts are dangerous machines that require skilled operation. Speaking on Wednesday ahead of a meeting of national cabinet on Thursday, Morrison said he wanted to further reduce regulation in the transport and other sectors in order to ease a staffing crisis that has crippled supply chains and stripped supermarket shelves of staples including pork and some fresh vegetables. “There are other changes that need to be made and they’re at a state level, and I’m continuing to pursue those with the states,” Morrison said. “There are changes that we need to make around the age of forklift drivers, to get quite specific.” But speaking after Thursday’s meeting, the prime minister admitted the short-lived idea had been scrapped due to a lack of support. The ACT government issued a statement noting: “Sensible and safe measures to alleviate workforce shortages have been supported but allowing 16-year old’s to drive a forklift was unanimously rejected by all states and territories.” Forklift drivers in Queensland, NSW and Victoria require a special “high risk work” licence, which involves doing a short course and sitting a test, and is only available to people who are 18 and over. Morrison did not say on Wednesday what age minimum he wanted instead of 18 and a spokesperson for the prime minister did not provide an age when asked. A spokesperson for Queensland’s industrial relations minister, Grace Grace, said there had been “no contact” from the prime minister on the idea with either the minister’s office or at the departmental level with the Office of Industrial Relations. “It’s certainly not something Queensland is considering independently,” the spokesperson said. Under the Palaszczuk government, Queensland has taken a hard line on safety at work. In 2017 it became the second state or territory, after the ACT, to introduce industrial manslaughter laws. The first industrial manslaughter conviction under the new law, in 2020, involved a man crushed between a forklift operated by an unlicensed driver and a stationary truck. Tim Lyons, who conducted the review that resulted in the industrial manslaughter laws, said that “letting kids whizz around on forklifts is insane”. “They are not dodgem cars,” he said in a Twitter post. “The kids are very likely to kill or injure themselves or someone else.” A spokesperson for NSW’s minister for customer service and digital government, Victor Dominello, said: “At this stage, NSW has no plan to change the current law.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said he was not aware that the proposal to lower the age for forklift licences would be up for discussion at national cabinet. “With no disrespect to the PM or anybody else, I’m always up for new ideas and being creative, but I’ve had two meetings these last two Mondays with supermarket CEOs and they haven’t suggested that,” Andrews said. Godfrey Moase, an executive director at the United Workers Union, said he had seen “a couple of fatalities” involving forklifts during his time as a union official. “It’s as dangerous or can be as dangerous as a motor vehicle,” he said. “You’re driving … a piece of heavy equipment that can cause severe trauma injuries to people on impact.” He said the age should not be reduced. “It’s a piece of heavy machinery that needs to be treated with due care and respect,” he said.Australia’s jobless rate dropped to the lowest in more than 13 years as the economy burst out of the post-lockdown gates in late 2021, generating momentum that has prompted one of the nation’s big four banks to bring forward its prediction of the first hike in official interest rates. The economy added 64,800 jobs in December, lowering the unemployment rate to 4.2% from a previously reported 4.6% in November when a record number of extra positions were taken up, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said. The survey, though, carried a qualification that it only captured the 28 November-11 December period. That preceded the worst of the disruptions of soaring numbers of Omicron Covid cases. Even so, “this is the lowest unemployment rate since August 2008, just before the start of the global financial crisis and Lehman Brothers collapse, when it was 4%”, the ABS labour economist Bjorn Jarvis said. “[F]or a rate below 4% we need to look back to the 1970s when the survey was quarterly. “Recovery in New South Wales and Victoria continued to have a large influence on the national figures, with employment in these two states increasing by 32,000 and 25,000 people between November and December,” Jarvis said. “Their employment was around where it had been in May, having fallen 250,000 and 145,000 during the lockdowns [respectively].” The latest figures underscore the strength of the economy at the end of 2021. The huge fiscal stimulus by states and the federal government, household savings topping $200bn and record-low official interests all combined to stoke economic activity before Omicron disrupted supply chains and prevented many thousands from working because of infections or being in close contact with Covid-positive people. However, Westpac signalled it’s seen enough strength in the economy to advance the timing of when it expects the first move by the central bank to lift its official annual cash rate from 0.1%. The sinking jobless rate was part of its calculus, and if the bank is right, mortgage holders will have to fork out more on their burgeoning loans sooner than they may have expected. Financial markets have been tipping a June 2022 move by the Reserve Bank of Australia. Since June 2021, Westpac had pencilled in the first RBA rate rise to come in February 2023. It has now shifted its expectation to this August. Then the central bank will raise the official rate by 15 basis points, or 0.15 percentage points, to 0.25%, and will follow up with a full quarter-point rate rise to 0.5% by October, Westpac predicted. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “We are more optimistic about the unemployment rate than the [RBA’s] latest forecasts,” Westpac said in a briefing note this morning. “Currently the [RBA] expects the unemployment rate to reach 4.25% by end 2022 and 4.5% by the month of June 2022 – our same forecasts are 3.8% and 4.1%, respectively.” Westpac said. “The [RBA] Board would probably view around 4% as full employment – an objective the Bank does not expect to achieve until end 2023 but which we expect by June 2022.” Economists have been monitoring how much consumer sentiment has been dimmed by Omicron-triggered distortions at work and as supermarkets and others struggle to supply meat, cheese and various other products. The Commonwealth Bank’s latest Household Spending Intentions index, also released on Thursday, ended 2021 at its highest level since the series began in July 2017. The gauge tracks actual spending on 12 consumer categories but also Google search data to identify planned purchases. It registered strong gains for retail, travel and transport prior to the Omicron impacts showing up. Notably, the home buying sub-index extended its recent falls, dropping 17.3% in December compared with the previous month. “It is a generally weak month seasonally for home-loan applications and was compounded by falls in Google searches for real-estate listings,” the report said. Employers, meanwhile, were struggling to fill a historically high number of job vacancies at least as of 11 December, the ABS said, noting the number of people in the employment market had steadied after a jump during the previous month. “[T]he participation rate remained steady in December, at 66.1%,” Jarvis said. “This was in contrast to what we saw in November, when a large number of people who were attached to a job re-entered the labour force, which drove the participation rate up by 1.4 percentage points.” The participation rate remained 0.2 percentage points higher than just prior to the start of the pandemic and only 0.2 percentage points below the historical high in May and June 2021, he said. Andrew McKellar, the chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, said today’s labour data offered “a rear-view observation of employment”. “With labour and skills shortages across many sectors, already strong labour force figures make clear that further emphasis is needed from government to boost workforce participation, invest in skills and [vocational training], and establish an ambitious skilled migration program,” McKellar said. “Whilst we can expect Omicron to disrupt these strong gains in early 2022, these pressures are likely to quickly re-emerge as case numbers begin to fall.” Among the states, South Australia – which goes to the polls in March state elections – saw its jobless drop to a seasonally adjusted 3.9%, or the lowest since the series began in 1978. Western Australia was even lower at 3.4%, while NSW sat at 4%, Victoria 4.2%, Queensland 4.7%, Tasmania 3.9%, the ACT 4.5% and the Northern Territory at 4.2%.It was a career honor Jeff Daniels probably didn’t think he was going to be bestowed with. The famed actor, musician and producer on Wednesday etched his way into history by inspiring the name of a very special newly discovered species of worm. The parasite – now dubbed Tarantobelus jeffdanielsi – kills tarantulas, just like Daniels did in the 1990 cult classic Arachnophobia. (Note: for all those concerned – unlike his newly discovered namesake – Daniels did not actually kill any spiders. Allegedly no arachnids were harmed on set.) Being named after a self-fertilizing hermaphroditic worm that lives for about 11 days in a lab is a “distinction no other entertainer can claim”, a news release out of University of California, Riverside trumpeting the achievement said. Tarantobelus jeffdanielsi is just one of more than 25,000 species of nematodes – also known as a roundworm – that have been discovered and named. The plentiful parasites, considered to be “among the most abundant animals on Earth”, according to the Encyclopedia Britannica, can be found on plants, in beer malts and even deep within the Earth’s crust. The Tarantobelus jeffdanielsi is the only one that takes down tarantulas. The worms inhabit the spiders’ mouths and impact their behavior in strange ways, including causing them to walk on their tiptoes. They also impact and inhibit the spider’s use of its fangs. “His character in the film is a spider killer, which is exactly what these nematodes are,” said UC Riverside parasitologist Adler Dillman of Daniels. Dillman, who led the team that discovered the Jeffdanielsi, was initially tipped off when he received a call from a wholesale tarantula breeder losing his spiders to a strange illness in 2019. Daniels has expressed appreciation for the honor. “When I first heard a new species of nematode had been named after me, I thought, ‘Why? Is there a resemblance?’ he said in response to UCR. He added that the name made him smile, “And of course, in Hollywood, you haven’t really made it until you’ve been recognized by those in the field of parasitology.”Australia’s drugs regulator has for the first time approved oral treatments for Covid-19 which should help address supply shortages of other treatments. The approval applies to two drugs – Paxlovid and Lagevrio. They have been “provisionally” approved, which means they can be administered by health professionals in limited circumstances but the manufacturers must submit further data as the drugs are used more widely. The director of infectious diseases at Mater Health Services, associate professor Paul Griffin, said on Thursday: “We’ve got great safe and effective vaccines. We’ve got intravenously administered antivirals and monoclonal antibodies, which have certainly helped us. But what we’ve been missing right now is an oral therapy that changes the course of the Covid illness.” How do the drugs work? They both stop the virus from reproducing readily in cells of the body – and they do that in slightly different ways. Lagevrio causes errors during the viral replication process “to the point where the virus is no longer viable and doesn’t survive that process,” Griffin said. Paxlovid blocks a critical enzyme – a protease – that the virus needs to replicate itself. Either medicine should ideally be administered as soon as possible after diagnosis and within five days of the onset of symptoms. The medicines are taken twice a day for five days. In clinical trials, both drugs were very effective in reducing rates of death. Who will benefit? The treatments can only be given to adults with Covid-19 who do not yet require oxygen but who are at increased risk of progression to hospitalisation or death – for example, the elderly or immunocompromised. This is also the case for other treatments available. But until now, those treatments had to be delivered through intravenous infusion in a hospital or other medical setting, or through consecutive intramuscular injections. There have also been supply shortages of some of these treatments. “The oral therapies are going to be easier to use,” Griffin said. “They’re going to be easier to get to people earlier, which is really important with all these kinds of interventions. How quickly we give them can in many ways determine how well they work. “This also reduces the burden on the healthcare system as these oral therapies can be very much community focused, rather than requiring a hospital bed and resources to administer.” It will have a clear benefit for people in aged care, who won’t have to be transferred to hospital for intravenous treatment. Resistance to virus mutations A research fellow in clinical pharmacology at Flinders University, associate professor Andrew Rowland, said most existing Covid-19 treatments and vaccines targeted the virus’s spike protein. “Paxlovid is an important new treatment for Covid patients as it targets a unique process in Covid replication that is not related to the spike protein,” he said. “This means that Paxlovid is less likely to lose efficacy due to mutations in the spike protein, which to date have been associated with the major variants including Delta and Omicron”. When will they be used? The Australian government has secured 500,000 treatment courses of Paxlovid and 300,000 courses of Lagevrio for supply during 2022, with the first deliveries due in the coming weeks. Are they a vaccine alternative? No Covid treatments are an alternative to vaccination. Not only are treatments reserved for the most at-risk cases but there may also continue to be supply shortages of treatments throughout the pandemic. Importantly, treatments only work for a short period of time, whereas vaccines provide longer-lasting protection. “Vaccines work so tremendously well at stopping people progressing to severe disease but also preventing people from getting the infection and passing it on,” Griffin said. “These drug therapies certainly won’t do all those things. They’re an added tool to vaccination that will make a huge difference to the most vulnerable.” Rowland added that the drugs were also expensive. “Currently a disproportionate number of patients being treated for Covid with monoclonal antibodies in the community, being admitted to hospital, and requiring ICU beds are unvaccinated,” he said. “The expense of supplying Paxlovid to these Australians will place a further burden on an already overstretched healthcare system. We can afford to vaccinate 32 children for the cost of treating one person with Paxlovid.”Joe Biden held a marathon press conference on the eve of the one-year anniversary of his inauguration. “It’s been a year of challenges, but it’s also been a year of enormous progress,” the president said. He responded at times contentiously to questions from reporters about his failures to get his Build Back Better platform passed, and his plummeting poll numbers. Joe Manchin – the West Virginia Democrat who has so far blocked much of Biden’s key agenda – spoke on the Senate floor in defense of the filibuster. He made it clear he would not vote to change the procedure to support voting rights reform. Getting rid of the rule, Manchin said, would be “perilous” for the Senate and the US. Bernie Sanders warned he may support primary challengers against Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the two holdouts in Senate Democrats’ debate over changing the filibuster to pass a voting rights bill. Sanders told reporters yesterday that he believes “there is a very good chance” the two senators will face primary challenges because of their stance on the filibuster. After hours of lively debate, Republicans, as expected, blocked Democrats’ voting rights legislation from advancing. The Senate now debating a rules change put forth by Democrats to allow the legislation to advance to a final vote regardless, but that effort is also expected to fail. We’re closing out this blog, but we’ll be updating our coverage of tonight’s voting rights debates. In the meantime, give my colleague Sam Levine’s analysis piece a read: Susan Collins, a Republican of Maine, has entered into a heated, passive-aggressive exchange over voting rights with Jon Ossoff, a Democrat of Georgia. Collins claimed that the Democrats’ voting rights legislation was too long and that she would have voted once more for the 1965 Voting Rights Act that she voted to reauthorize in 2006. In fact, she said, she voted “enthusiastically” for extending Voting Rights Act, and bristled at Ossoff for calling her and other Republicans out for voting down voting rights. “I’m not sure the senator from Georgia was even born in 1965,” she said. “Surely he is not confusing” the current bill with the reauthorization. Ossoff, who was born in 1987, responded that he was referring to Collins’ refusal to replace provisions of the VRA that were gutted by the Supreme Court with the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act would do. The court specifically asked Congress to update Sections 4 and 5 of the VRA. With “great respect” for Collins, Osoff said, “what I was respectfully noting ... was what I believe to be an inconsistency between voting consistently to reauthorize [the VRA] ... but then not voting to even allow debate in this body” on the latest voting bills. Republicans have now blocked the Democrats’ voting rights legislation for the fifth time in 6 months. The Senate now debating a rules change to exempt the bill from 60-vote threshold to advance. Speaking in favor of amending the rules, Angus King of Maine asserted: “If we had the rules that we have today we wouldn’t have the Voting Rights Act and the Civil Rights Act, because it was too easy to stop anything.” King questioned why Republicans who oppose Democratic legislation wouldn’t at least want bills to advance to a vote. Democrats are not now moving to end the filibuster, but to return to a “talking filibuster” – a system wherein the chamber’s voting rights debate could be brought to a close and the bill advanced, once Republicans seeking to block a vote have run out of turns to speak. The motion end debate and move to a final vote failed 49-51. It needed 60 votes to pass. Senate leader Chuck Schumer switched his vote to a no in the end, for a procedural reason - so he can attempt to change Senate rules to allow a simple majority to advance the legislation to a final vote. Of course, holdouts Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema likely won’t join their Democratic colleagues’ effort to change the rules. The Senate vote to end debate on the bill and move to a final vote has failed, as expected. Sixty votes were needed to bypass a Republican filibuster. Democrats are now expected to try to change rules so that they can move onto a final vote with just a simple majority, Senator Roy Blunt claimed that GOP restrictions on voting access weren’t as severe as they appear, arguing states were rolling back unusual expansions they made in 2020 to accommodate voters during the Covid-19 pandemic. But that’s not true. Several of the measures do away with longstanding laws. Georgia Republicans imposed new identification requirements on mail-in ballots, which had been in place since 2005. Arizona Republicans made it harder to stay on a list of voters who permanently receive a mail-in ballot. The list has long been widely used in the state. Montana Republicans got rid of same day registration, which had been in place since 2006. Democrats closed out their pleas to pass voting rights legislation with a fiery speech from Georgia senator Raphael Warnock. He emphasized the importance of passing voting rights protections at all costs. “History is watching us. Our children are counting on us,” he said. For his colleagues who refused to act, he had a cutting message: “You cannot remember MLK and dismember his legacy at the same time,” Warnock said. “I will not sit quietly while some make Dr. King a victim of identity theft.” The state legislature in Georgia, dominated by Republicans, passed sweeping new restrictions on voting access following the election of Democrats Warnock and Jon Ossoff to the Senate in 2020, and Joe Biden’s victory in the state. Bernie Sanders of Vermont said today is a “sad day” for the US, singling out Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema for their obstruction. “I regard it as a very sad day for our country, and I mean this very sincerely, that not one Republican in this body is prepared to vote for this bill,” he said. “Now, I understand why that is the case,” he continued. “I do not understand why two Democrats who presumably understand the importance of the Freedom to Vote Act, and as I understand it, will vote for the Freedom to Vote Act are not prepared to change the rules so that that bill could actually become law.” The progressive Vermont senator told reporters on Tuesday that he would support primary challengers to Manchin, a Democrat of West Virginia, and Sinema, A Democrat of Arizona. The Supreme Court rejected a bid by Donald Trump to withhold documents from the congressional committee investigating the 6 January insurrection. Documents that the committee is seeking include diaries, visitor logs, drafts of speeches and handwritten notes, held by the National Archives and Records Administration. The court has yet to decide whether to hear a broader appeal of lower court rulings that the former president could not assert executive privilege to shield materials from being handed over. Read more: Senator Mike Crapo, a Republican of Idaho, just delivered a speech full of misinformation, defending voting restrictions. With the help of my colleague, the voting rights reporter Sam Levine, I’ve sorted through his speech: Crapo cited 2020 election turnout as a reason not to pass voting rights protections, disregarding the changes in voting rules to make it easier for citizens to vote amid the pandemic. He claimed that it was a “myth” that “Republican state legislatures are enacting laws that will roll back early voting.” He cited Iowa’s 20-day early voting as an example, failing to mention that Iowa Republicans shortened the early voting period from 29 days to 20 last year. He claimed that Georgia’s voting restrictions preventing the distribution of water and food to voters waiting in line to cast ballots applies only to “political organizations”. The Georgia law prevents any “person” – not just political groups – from providing food and water to people in line. “This law of anti-electioneering or anti-vote-buying is standard practice in many states,” Crapo claimed. While it is common for states to have anti-electioneering statutes at the polls, the Georgia law went further to explicitly ban food and water, which is not common. “Georgia already had a ban on electioneering around the polls and if that’s what this was really about they could have written something narrower, such as something that prevents the mention of candidates on any food or water being handed to voters,” Rick Hasen, an election law professor at the University of California, Irvine, told the Washington Post in March. On the Senate floor, New Mexico senator Ben Ray Luján is detailing how voting restrictions block many Latino and Native Americans from casting their ballots. “These are American citizens whose rights were taken away for partisan advantage,” he said. “History will not look kindly on inaction at this critical moment, and we must show the American people that we will not flinch when faced with a choice to protect our democracy or let it crumble before our eyes,” he said. Meanwhile, the Senate has been debating the Democrats’ voting rights bill, which the chamber is expected to vote down at about 19:45 local time. Democrats have snuck the bill onto the Senate floor, and circumvented an initial filibuster attempt by tacking it on as an amendment to an unrelated Nasa bill – not unlike the way some parents sneak vegetables into their children’s mac and cheese. But Democrats still need 60 votes to bypass a Republican filibuster to end debate and start voting on the measure - which they don’t have. So, they’ll move to try to change the filibuster rules. That’ll fail as well, as Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema remain adamant against changes to the filibuster. Joe Biden has wrapped up his marathon, nearly 2-hour press conference, which ran longer than the lengthiest conferences held by Donald Trump or Barack Obama. This news conference follows criticisms that the president has been avoiding press conferences and making himself directly available to reporters. He called on 24 journalists, taking more than one question from several reporters. In response to Peter Doocy of Fox News, who asked Biden why he was trying “to pull the country so far to the left?” the president responded: “You guys have been trying to convince me that I am Bernie Sanders. I’m not. I like him. But I’m not Bernie Sanders. I’m not a socialist. I’m a mainstream Democrat and I have been.” The president conceded that the child tax credit and free community college provisions were unlikely to make it through the strategy of getting his Build Back Better plan passed in “chunks”. “They are massive things I’ve run on and care a great deal about,” he noted, but said he wasn’t sure he could get them passed soon. The child tax credit, which was issued initially as temporary relief amid the pandemic, kept 3.7m kids out of poverty in December. But families have been left in limbo after the payments expired, and Joe Manchin killed hopes of making them a permanent resource for struggling parents. “I don’t believe the polls,” Biden said at the press conference, echoing an infamous refrain from his predecessor. Asked by a reporter how to win over moderates and independents who backed him in 2020, but have wavered in their support in recent polls. Biden’s approval rating has plunged in recent months. A Gallup poll found released today 40% of US. adults approve of the job he is doing. His average approval rating has sat at about 42% in recent months. A Quinnipiac poll released last week found his approval rating was as low as 33%, though the White House dismissed it as an outlier. A defensive Biden today told reporters he’s faced some of the biggest challenges any US president has faced. “I’m not complaining,” he said. At his press conference to mark one year in office, Joe Biden outlined some of the changes he plans to make for his second year. The president said he would leave the White House more to communicate his message to the American people, which has been difficult because of coronavirus-related restrictions. He also said he would consult more with outside experts and be “deeply involved” in the midterm elections, as Democrats seek to defend their narrow majorities in the House and Senate. Making his case in defense of the filibuster, Joe Manchin said the Senate should stay on voting rights and have an extended debate on the topic until it could reach some kind of bipartisan consensus. “We don’t have to change the rules to make the case to the American people about voting rights,” Manchin said in his Senate floor speech moments ago. “We could have kept voting rights as pending business for the Senate. Today, a week, a month from now. This is important. Let’s work it out. Let’s stay here and go at it.” Such a proposal ignores the reality that nearly all of the Republican caucus has expressed no interest in negotiating over the specific policies in the Democratic bills. Manchin reportedly spent weeks trying to find GOP support for the measures and was unable to find any. Just one Republican, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, voted in support of the proposal to restore a key provision of the Voting Rights Act. Republicans have railed against the voting rights bill in broad terms, saying that it is federal overreach. The US constitution explicitly authorizes Congress to set rules for federal elections. Over at Joe Biden’s press conference, a reporter asked the president whether he is pleased with the performance of Kamala Harris, who is leading the administration’s work on voting rights. The reporter also asked Biden whether he still expects Harris to be his running mate if he seeks reelection in 2024, as he has said he plans to do. “Yes and yes,” Biden replied. “She’s going to be my running mate, number one. And number two, I did put her in charge, and I think she’s doing a good job.” So far, Democrats have failed to pass a voting rights bill, as Senate Republicans have repeatedly used the filibuster to block their proposals. As Joe Biden took questions from reporters at his press conference, Joe Manchin delivered a Senate floor speech on voting rights and filibuster reform. Manchin dug in on his support for the filibuster, making it clear he would not vote to change the procedure to support voting rights reform. Getting rid of the rule, Manchin said, would be “perilous” for the Senate and the US. “I will not vote to eliminate or weaken the filibuster. The filibuster plays an important role in protecting our democracy from the transitory passions of the majority and respecting the input of the minority in the Senate,” Manchin said. “For those who believe bipartisanship is impossible, we have proven them wrong. Ending the filibuster would be the easy way out. I cannot support such a perilous course for this nation when elected leaders are sent to Washington to unite our country by putting politics and party aside.” Manchin’s speech came hours before Democrats were set to vote on sweeping voting rights legislation that is doomed to fail because Republicans are unified in their opposition to the measure, denying it the 60 votes needed to move forward. Manchin and fellow Democrat Kyrsten Sinema have been stalwart in their refusal to make changes to the filibuster, which Democrats say Republicans have weaponized as a tool of obstruction in recent years. A reporter asked Joe Biden about Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell’s comment today that the midterm elections will be a referendum on Democrats’ performance since taking control of the White House and Congress. “I actually like Mitch McConnell. We like one another. But he has one straightforward objective: make sure that there’s nothing I do that makes me look good, in his mind, with the public at large,” Biden said. “And that’s okay. I’m a big boy. I’ve been here before.” Joe Biden confirmed the Build Back Better Act will likely have to be separated into multiple bills in order to get some of its components passed. “It’s clear to me that we’re going to have to probably break it up,” the president said. Biden noted that Joe Manchin, who announced his opposition to the spending package last month, supports some of the bill’s key provisions, such as establishing universal access to free prekindergarten. “I think we can break the package up, get as much as we can now and come back and fight for the rest later,” Biden said. Joe Biden was asked whether he believes the threatened sanctions against Russia will be enough to prevent Vladimir Putin from approving an invasion of Ukraine, when such economic measures have not proven effective with the Russian president in the past. “He’s never seen sanctions like the ones I’ve promised will be imposed if he moves,” the president replied. Biden noted he has had “frank discussions” with Putin in recent weeks, as fears have intensified over a potential invasion of Ukraine. The US president said that, if Putin moves forward with a full-scale invasion, it will be a “disaster” for the Russian economy. “Russia will be held accountable if it invades,” Biden said. A reporter asked Joe Biden whether he needed to be more realistic in his legislative goals and and scale down his priorities in order to get something passed. The president said he did not believe he needed to scale down his goals, arguing his agenda is largely popular with the American people. “We just have to make the case of what we’re for and what the other team’s not for,” Biden said, underscoring the need for Democrats to contrast their priorities with those of Republicans. However, in response to a follow-up question, Biden seemed to acknowledge that the Build Back Better Act may need to be broken up into several pieces to get passed. “I’m confident we can get pieces, big chunks of the Build Back Better law signed into law,” Biden said. Joe Manchin announced last month that he would not support the $1.75tn spending package, which represents the centerpiece of Biden’s economic agenda. But the president and Democratic congressional leaders have indicated they are not giving up on the proposal. Joe Biden is now taking questions from reporters, after delivering some prepared remarks about the coronavirus pandemic and the US economy. A journalist asked the president whether he believes he promised too much to voters, considering Democrats’ failure to pass a voting rights bill or the Build Back Better Act since he took office. “I didn’t overpromise. I have probably outperformed what anybody thought would happen,” Biden replied. The president insisted his administration had made “enormous progress” over the past year, but he acknowledged that the year had not seen much bipartisanship. Condemning the obstructionist tactics of the opposing party, Biden said he had not succeeded in convincing “my Republican friends to get in the game”. Joe Biden said coronavirus will not disappear anytime soon, but he expressed confidence that the situation in the US will continue to improve in the months ahead. “I’m not going to give up and accept things as they are now. Some people may call what’s happening now the ‘new normal.’ I call it a job not yet finished,” Biden said. “It will get better. We’re moving toward a time when Covid-19 won’t disrupt our daily lives, where Covid-19 won’t be a crisis but something to protect against and a threat. Look, we’re not there yet, but we will get there.” Biden’s remarks come as the Omicron variant causes a surge in cases of coronavirus in the US, putting more pressure on hospitals and resulting in high demand for tests. While touting the successes of his first year in office, Joe Biden acknowledged that many Americans remain unhappy with the state of the nation. “For all this progress, I know there’s a lot of frustration and fatigue in this country. And we know why: Covid-19,” Biden said. The president said he understood Americans are tired nearly two years into the pandemic, but he emphasized the US now has the tools to save lives and keep the economy open -- vaccines, tests and masks. Nodding to criticism that the White House should have made coronavirus tests more widely available sooner, Biden said, “Should we have done more testing earlier? Yes. But we’re doing more now.” Joe Biden has now appeared at the podium to kick off his press conference, which comes on the eve of the one-year anniversary of his inauguration. “It’s been a year of challenges, but it’s also been a year of enormous progress,” the president said. Biden touted his administration’s success in boosting coronavirus vaccination rates and lowering the US unemployment rate, despite widespread criticism of Democrats’ failure to pass a voting rights bill or their Build Back Better Act. Biden is expected to deliver prepared remarks for about 10 minutes before taking questions from reporters. Stay tuned. Joe Manchin will deliver his Senate floor speech on voting rights and filibuster reform at 4.30pm ET, his office just confirmed in a statement. Given that timing, it is quite likely that Manchin will be speaking as Joe Biden holds his press conference, which is scheduled to begin at 4pm ET. So while Biden is trying to tout the successes of his first year in office, Manchin will simultaneously be taking the podium on the Senate floor and likely eliminating any hope of passing voting rights legislation in the near future. It should be an eventful afternoon, to say the least. Stay tuned. Tim Scott, a Republican of South Carolina, criticized Joe Biden for comparing the voting restrictions enacted in the past year to the racist policies of the Jim Crow era. Scott, the only Black Republican member of the Senate, said the issue of voting rights is “really important to all Americans but specifically important to Americans from the Deep South who happen to look like me”. “As I listened to the president talk about the importance of stopping what he characterized as ‘Jim Crow 2.0’, I felt frustration and irritation rising in my soul,” Scott said. “I am so thankful, thankful that we are not living in those days.” After Scott spoke, Cory Booker, another one of the three Black members of the Senate, stepped up to the podium to denounce the voting restrictions and their disproportionate impact on minority voters. “Don’t lecture me about Jim Crow. I know this is not 1965. That’s what makes me so outraged. It’s 2022,” said Booker, a Democrat of New Jersey. “And they’re blatantly removing more polling places from the counties where Blacks and Latinos are overrepresented. I’m not making that up. That is a fact.” The Senate debate over voting rights and filibuster reform has been going on for hours now, and the chamber may not wrap up its work today until 9pm or 10pm ET, per PBS NewsHour. The Senate debate over Democrats’ voting rights bill and their suggested changes to the filibuster continues, with Republicans denouncing their colleagues’ proposals. Thom Tillis, a Republican of North Carolina, pledged that he would leave the Senate if his party ever amended the filibuster -- or rather the legislative filibuster, as Republicans already eliminated the filibuster for supreme court nominees. “The day that Republicans change the rues for the filibuster is the day I resign from the Senate,” Tillis said. “And I believe that I have a number of members on my side of the aisle that would never do it. So you don’t have to worry about the argument, ‘If you don’t change it now, they’ll just change it when they hit the trifecta.’ It’s not going to happen.” It will be interesting to see if those comments ever come back to haunt Tillis. Joe Biden held a virtual meeting today with some of the senators who traveled to Ukraine over the weekend to meet with the country’s president and discuss concerns over a potential Russian invasion. “President Biden and the senators exchanged views on the best ways the United States can continue to work closely with our allies and partners in support of Ukraine, including both ongoing diplomacy to try to resolve the current crisis and deterrence measures,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said in a statement. “President Biden commended the strong history of support for Ukraine from both sides of the aisle, and agreed to keep working closely with Congress as the Administration prepares to impose significant consequences in response to further Russian aggression against Ukraine.” Secretary of state Antony Blinken is also in Ukraine today, meeting with President Volodymyr Zelenskiy before traveling to Geneva for talks with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, on Friday. Blinken has warned that Russia could take “further aggressive action” against Ukraine “at any moment,” the Guardian’s Luke Harding and Andrew Roth report: The US Supreme Court has issued a very unusual statement. Not about any of the high-stakes cases the bench is considering, however, but about coronavirus, masks - the wearing of - and a report of a disagreement between liberal-leaning Sonia Sotomayor and conservative-leaning Neil Gorsuch over what can be a life-or-death issue. The Associated Press elucidates: Two Supreme Court justices say a media report that they were at odds over the wearing of masks in court during the recent surge in coronavirus cases is false. The court on Wednesday issued an unusual three-sentence statement from Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Neil Gorsuch. It read: “Reporting that Justice Sotomayor asked Justice Gorsuch to wear a mask surprised us. It is false. While we may sometimes disagree about the law, we are warm colleagues and friends.” The statement came after NPR’s longtime Supreme Court correspondent Nina Totenberg reported Tuesday on an alleged conflict between the two, who normally sit next to each other during arguments at the high court. Sotomayor, who has diabetes, has been attending arguments remotely from her chambers this month during the surge of the coronavirus’ omicron variant. Her colleagues, with the exception of Gorsuch, have been wearing masks this month while hearing arguments in the courtroom., Totenberg reported that unidentified court sources said “Sotomayor did not feel safe in close proximity to people who were unmasked” and that “Chief Justice John Roberts, understanding that, in some form asked the other justices to mask up.” She did not elaborate. Gorsuch’s decision not to wear a mask “has also meant that Sotomayor has not attended the justices’ weekly conference in person, joining instead by telephone,” Totenberg reported. The court had no comment beyond the statement. Sotomayor is an appointee of former President Barack Obama while Gorsuch was appointed by former President Donald Trump. Totenberg did not immediately respond to an emailed request for comment from The Associated Press. Following NPR’s story, CNN also reported that “a source familiar with the situation” said Sotomayor didn’t “feel comfortable sitting on the bench near colleagues who are not masked.” Neither NPR’s story nor CNN’s story said Sotomayor had directly asked Gorsuch to wear a mask. The justices’ statement did not say what reporting it was referencing. A long-contested statue of Theodore Roosevelt was dismantled earlier today as part of the process to remove it from its position outside the American Museum of Natural History in New York, where it has stood since 1940. The large equestrian statue of the former US president was blighted by its being accompanied by sculptures of a Native American man and an African man, flanking Roosevelt, on foot and slightly behind him, in contrast to his sitting high on his horse. Removal of the statue was suggested by the museum and backed by the city authorities in the summer of 2020, at the time of the biggest nationwide uprising for racial justice and equity since the civil rights movement, following the murder of George Floyd by a white police officer in Minneapolis. The statue has been protested for decades with critics saying it, in the words of the New York Times, “symbolized the painful legacy of museums upholding images of colonialism and racism in their exhibitions..... “Designed by the American sculptor James Earle Fraser in 1939, [the statue] was one of four memorials that a city commission had reconsidered in 2017, ultimately deciding in a split decision to leave it in place and add context. Its 2019 exhibition, “Addressing the Statue,” discussed the figures walking beside Roosevelt and Roosevelt’s complex legacy, which included overt racism in his later years.” Reuters adds: The museum on its website said it was proud of its long association with the Roosevelt family, adding: “At the same time, the statue itself communicates a racial hierarchy the Museum and members of the public have long found disturbing.” Roosevelt, who was president from 1901 to 1909, was known for his exuberant and daring manner. He implemented antitrust and conservationist reforms, though critics said he took an interventionist approach to foreign policy, including projecting U.S. naval power around the world. Here’s where the day stands so far: Bernie Sanders warned he may support primary challengers against Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the two holdouts in Senate Democrats’ debate over changing the filibuster to pass a voting rights bill. Sanders told reporters yesterday that he believes “there is a very good chance” the two senators will face primary challenges because of their stance on the filibuster. Manchin is set to deliver a Senate floor speech this afternoon outlining his position on voting rights and filibuster reform. The Senate will hold a procedural vote later today on Democrats’ voting rights bill, and the vote is expected to fail because of a Republican filibuster. Joe Biden will hold a press conference today as he marks one year in office. The president will likely face tough questions about his party’s failure to pass a voting rights bill or the Build Back Better Act. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Lisa Murkowski, the only Senate Republican who voted to advance the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act last year, signaled opposition to Democrats’ latest proposal. The Senate is holding a debate as the chamber prepares for a procedural vote on Democrats’ newest voting rights bill, which combines elements of the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. In her floor speech moments ago, Murkowski reiterated her commitment to protecting voting rights but said she did not believe this bill sufficiently covered states’ rights to set their own election laws. Over on Capitol Hill, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell lamented the “sad spectacle” of Democrats trying to change the filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. McConnell accused majority leader Chuck Schumer of launching a “direct assault on the core identity of the Senate” by attempting to amend the filibuster, which Republicans have repeatedly used to block Democrats’ voting rights bills. “Our colleague from New York will try to kill the character of the institution he is supposed to protect and to serve,” McConnell said. “The legislative filibuster is a central Senate tradition. It is the indispensable feature of our institution. It makes the Senate serve its founding purpose: forging compromise, cooling passions and ensuring new laws earn broad support from a cross-section of our country.” Of course, bipartisan compromise has become increasingly rare in Washington, and using the filibuster to block the opposing party’s bills is now considered standard practice in the Senate. Later today, Joe Biden will hold the 10th press conference of his presidency, far fewer than any of his recent predecessors during their first year in office. In a sharp shift from Donald Trump, Biden has said journalists are “indispensable to the functioning of democracy”, which the president has repeatedly warned is under threat at home and abroad. Yet press access to the president has been limited. Biden has held just nine formal news conferences during his first year, according to research compiled by Martha Joynt Kumar, director of the White House Transition Project. Trump had held 22 and Barack Obama 27 at the same point in their presidencies. Only Ronald Reagan, whose public appearances were scaled back following an assassination attempt in March 1981, held fewer press conferences during his first year. But Reagan did 59 interviews that year, compared with Biden, who has only done 22. Trump, who labeled the media the “enemy of the American people” and once praised a congressman who assaulted a reporter, did 92 interviews during his first year. Biden does field questions more frequently than his predecessors, but takes fewer of them, according to Kumar’s tally. These impromptu exchanges with reporters often follow scheduled remarks or public appearances. “For the president, it is a question of how do you use your time?” Kumar said. “And for Biden, he has wanted to use his time negotiating privately on his policies.” Read the Guardian’s full report: Joe Biden will hold a press conference this afternoon, as the president marks one year since he took the oath of office. The president is expected to field tough questions about Democrats’ failure to pass their voting rights bill and the Build Back Better Act, as well as his unimpressive approval rating. Speaking at her daily briefing yesterday, White House press secretary Jen Psaki instead stressed the accomplishments of Biden’s first year in office, including boosting coronavirus vaccination rates and getting the bipartisan infrastructure bill signed into law. “We need to build on that. The work is not done. The job is not done. And we are certainly not conveying it is,” Psaki said. “So, our objective -- and I think what you’ll hear the president talk about tomorrow -- is how to build on the foundation we laid in the first year.” The press conference is scheduled to begin at 4pm ET, and the blog will have updates and analysis once it starts. Stay tuned. Worth noting: most Senate Democrats are actually sitting in the chamber to listen to the debate over their voting rights bill, per CNN. The Senate is expected to hold a procedural vote on the bill later today, and it will almost certainly fail. Because of a Republican filibuster, the bill will need 60 votes to advance, which will not happen in the 50-50 Senate. In his own Senate floor speech today, majority leader Chuck Schumer reiterated his argument that members have a duty to pass voting rights legislation and strengthen America’s election systems. Schumer sharply criticized Republicans for downplaying the impact of the voting restrictions enacted by 19 states in the past year. “Our Republican colleagues don’t even acknowledge that we have a crisis,” Schumer said, noting that minority leader Mitch McConnell claimed states were not engaged in voter suppression. Schumer outlined some of the restrictions that states have enacted, including limiting early voting and hours at polling places and making it harder to register to vote. “Just as Donald Trump has his ‘big lie,’ Leader McConnell now has his: ‘States are not engaging in trying to suppress voters whatsoever,’” Schumer said. Senator Joe Manchin will deliver a floor speech this afternoon outlining his position on changing chamber rules to allow voting rights legislation to move forward. “It is such an important issue that all of us have grave concerns about, and it’s worthy of the time we spend,” Manchin told CNN. “I would like to see us stay on the bill. There’s no use to try to bring this to finality by having a vote that’s going to fail tonight. Let’s just stay on it.” As of now, the Senate is expected to hold a procedural vote on whether to advance Democrats’ voting rights bill, which passed the House last week. That vote, which will need the support of 60 members because of the filibuster, is expected to fail. And as long as Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema continue to oppose rule changes, the bill has no path to passage in the Senate. Mark Kelly, one of the last Senate Democrats who had not yet clarified his position on filibuster reform, has now said he supports rule changes to allow voting rights legislation to advance. The Arizona Republic reports that Kelly, who is up for reelection this year, supports a “talking filibuster” rule only for Democrats voting rights bill. “If campaign finance and voting rights reforms are blocked again this week, I will support the proposed changes to pass them with a majority vote,” Kelly said in a statement. “Protecting the vote-by-mail system used by a majority of Arizonans and getting dark money out of our elections is too important to let fall victim to Washington dysfunction.” A talking filibuster would still require 60 Senate votes to cut off debate on a proposal, but that debate would eventually come to an end anyway as the filibusters gave up the floor. Once they did so, the debated bill could be passed by a simple majority of 51 votes. Democrats have been discussing a talking filibuster rule as a potential compromise for those who do not support eliminating the filibuster all together. However, as of now, the talking filibuster proposal does not have the necessary support for approval because Joe Manchin has said he wants all rule changes to attract bipartisan support, and Republicans remain staunchly opposed to weakening the filibuster. Republicans are severely distorting district lines to their advantage and weakening the influence of minority voters as they draw new district lines across the country, according to a new report by the Brennan Center for Justice. The report, which examines the state of play of the ongoing decennial redistricting cycle, notes that Republicans are shielding their efforts to dismantle minority districts by arguing that the new lines are based on partisanship. While racial discrimination in redistricting is illegal, the US supreme court said in 2019 that discrimination based on partisanship was acceptable. “This cycle is seeing unprecedented efforts to undermine the political power of Black, Latino, Asian, and Native communities through redistricting, especially in southern states that, for the first time in more than half a century, are no longer covered by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act,” the report says. “Some of the most aggressive attacks on minority power are coming in the suburbs of southern states like Texas and Georgia. There, Republicans have surgically dismantled rapidly diversifying districts where communities of color have enjoyed increasing electoral success in recent years,” it adds. The report also notes that Republicans, who have complete control over the drawing of 187 of the US House’s 435 districts, are making districts much less competitive. Donald Trump won 54 districts by 15 or more points in states where the GOP controls redistricting under old maps. Under the new plan, that number increases to 70. The redistricting cycle is still ongoing. New York, Tennessee, and Missouri are still among the states where lawmakers are drawing new maps. Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema are also experiencing some external pressure as they resist efforts to change the filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. EMILY’s List, the progressive group that backs women candidates who support abortion rights, said it would withhold its endorsement from Sinema because of her stance on filibuster reform. “Our mission can only be realized when everyone has the freedom to have their voice heard safely and freely at the ballot box,” EMILY’s List president Laphonza Butler said in a statement released yesterday. Butler noted that her group has not contributed to or endorsed Sinema’s campaign since she first won her Senate seat in Arizona’s 2018 elections. “Electing Democratic pro-choice women is not possible without free and fair elections. Protecting the right to choose is not possible without access to the ballot box,” Butler said. “So, we want to make it clear: if Sen. Sinema can not support a path forward for the passage of this legislation, we believe she undermines the foundations of our democracy, her own path to victory and also the mission of EMILY’s List, and we will be unable to endorse her moving forward.” Greetings, live blog readers. Progressive senator Bernie Sanders has said he may consider supporting primary challengers to Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the two holdouts in Democrats’ debate over whether to amend the filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. Sanders told reporters yesterday that he believes “there is a very good chance” the two senators will face primary challenges because of their stance on the filibuster. When asked if he would consider backing such primary challengers, Sanders replied, “Well, yeah.” Manchin brushed off the warning, saying, “I’ve been primaried my entire life. That would not be anything new for me.” But Sanders’ comments underscore the growing rift in the Democratic party over the filibuster and, more broadly, the best response to Republican obstructionism. While progressives support using every tool at their disposal to circumvent Republican tactics, centrists like Manchin and Sinema still underscore the importance of bipartisanship, which has become increasingly rare in Washington. Joe Biden will hold a press conference later today, and he will almost certainly be asked what that divide says about his party and whether he can get anything else done in Congress with members of his own party at odds. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.If 2018’s award season belonged to Guillermo del Toro’s magical, cold war thriller, The Shape of Water, then 2022 is shaping up to be an award-collecting encore for the film director and the all-star cast of his latest movie. De Toro’s Nightmare Alley peers into a circus tent in New York in the 1930s; a place where garish contortionists meet sleazy carnies looking to swindle the wealthy. When down-on-his-luck midwesterner, Stanton (played with many, many layers by Oscar-nominated actor Bradley Cooper) joins the carnival, he meets a clairvoyant named Zeena (Toni Collette is magnificent in this role) who teaches him a coded language system that makes it appear she can read minds. Enthralled by his newfound skill, Stanton convinces his lover and fellow carny Molly (played by Rooney Mara) to leave the circus and join him as an assistant in a two-person psychic act called The Great Stanton in New York’s nightclubs. Two years on, they are making serious bank. But one evening, their mentalist performance is interrupted by psychiatrist Dr Lilith Ritter (played by Academy Award-winning actress Cate Blanchett) who attempts to expose the duo’s secret language. Stanton fires back by humiliating her before the city’s influential social set. Intrigued by his conman ways, Lilith invites Stanton to her fancy office the next day, a sepia-drenched room with marble floors and wooden walls. “You see the office representing the character of Lilith: it’s beautiful but it conceals a lot of things,” del Toro says. “The office is full of secret doors. Behind them, there are recorders, a safe, a secret entrance. “It’s in perfect order. But you feel [like it’s] a little bit menacing … there’s a superiority to it. What I do is create environments that allow the characters to thrive. You can see Lilith moving about the office in an elegant, and yet extremely calculated way.” And thrive Blanchett does. This scene is the first of a series of captivating on-screen moments between Blanchett and Cooper, the type that will hold your attention in the same way Cooper and Lady Gaga’s steamy Oscars performance did in 2019. “Have you not heard? We’re at war,” Lilith, in her svelte, belted black suit tells Stanton, as she slinks about the office and slams a newspaper on the coffee table before him. “I’m aware,” he answers nervously, clearly wanting to feel superior to Lilith, but knowing that he is inferior in this moment. Lilith’s line has two meanings, del Toro says. “The line is meant to signify that America is at war now,” he says. “But it’s also to signify that ‘we’ – Stan and Lilith – are at war, because he humiliated her horribly in front of everyone. [With these two characters], there’s a constant change of who is dominant … it’s a dance of coming closer and then further apart. “[Stanton] is almost like this young child in awe of this woman.” Stanton and Lilith begin an affair and conspire to manipulate a dangerous tycoon named Kimball (played by Peter MacNeill). Lilith also begins psychiatry sessions with Stanton, which open up his character, in scenes that allow Cooper to, as the New York Times expertly put it, “let you see his character’s internal whirring”. Nightmare Alley is based on William Lindsay Gresham’s novel, published in 1946, a time when psychoanalysis was deemed a little too kooky for Americans. “I play the traditional femme fatale – I draw men to their doom,” Blanchett tells W Magazine. “But I saw my character, Lilith, as a beacon of truth in a perverted way. Someone who was able to excavate the truth from a person who did not want the truth revealed.” The all-star cast also includes Willem Dafoe, Richard Jenkins and David Strathairn. Mara has recently been announced as the titular character in the new Audrey Hepburn eight-episode biopic, which will be directed by Oscar-nominated filmmaker Luca Guadagnino. According to Blanchett (whom you may have just seen in climate change allegory movie Don’t Look Up as Leonardo DiCaprio’s news anchor mistress), Nightmare Alley has a larger message, one that is communicated best by her character. “The more one tries to conceal one’s true nature, the more those tendencies will have an impact on your life,” she says. “It’s one thing to lie – it’s another thing to believe your lies (and my character reveals the truth).” Yes, del Toro might take home a golden statue or two this year, but make no mistake, this is Blanchett’s award season, and everybody will be talking about this performance. Nightmare Alley is in Australian cinemas on 20 January 2022.For early childhood educator Alice Clarke, it’s not a question of if she acquires Covid-19, it’s when. “Honestly, in the next three weeks I’ll have Covid,” she said. “It’s just an anticipation now of how bad it’s going to be.” Clarke lives with a compromised immune system – she has type 1 diabetes – so she is relieved to have had her booster shot. But it seems inevitable she will come into contact with Covid, having regular contact with more than 60 children at her Horsham preschool, all of whom are unvaccinated. She fears the spread of the virus and the associated teacher shortages will be “extremely difficult” for childcare centres, with regional areas particularly vulnerable. “It’s going to be a shitshow,” Clarke said. “We don’t have many relief teachers available, and we’re going to have staff in and out and children not regularly attending. Particularly in regional areas, there just aren’t enough quality educators.” She said it will be “extremely difficult” to deliver a high quality program for children this year. “We’ll just be trying to get by. I’m anticipating a worse year this year than the last two.” Childcare centres have warned they are on the verge of closing if they don’t receive additional support, as absence rates surge amid the Omicron outbreak. In a letter sent to the acting education and youth minister Stuart Robert last week, , the sector’s peak bodies called for more financial support and rapid antigen tests for staff. As of 18 January, 420 childcare centres were closed across Australia because of Covid, including 209 in New South Wales. “The current wave … is causing major disruption to the provision of education and care services due to a combination of reduced attendance and significant staff shortages due to illness and isolation requirements,” the letter, provided to Guardian Australia, warned. “Without measures … to safeguard education and care services, the risk of systemic adverse service viability outcomes and service closures will be catastrophically increased.” More than 3,000 members of the Early Learning Association Australia, the Community Child Care Association and Community Early Learning Australia said more than one-in-four staff were absent because of Covid with some centres reporting a majority of staff unable to work. Child attendance numbers were also down, with absence rates as high as 43% across large providers compared to about 10% in November and December. The letter said a lack of access to RATs was compromising safety. “Without access to RATs staff who have been exposed but are asymptomatic are attending work with vulnerable children who cannot be immunised, which further increases the risk of Covid spreading within services,” the letter said. As a result, parents are choosing to keep their children at home, rather than risk exposure. Parents concerned about safety Darwin-based university lecturer Keller Kopf was notified last week that his son’s childcare centre had closed due to positive Covid cases among carers. When it reopened this week, Kopf decided against returning his four-year-old boy to the centre. Kopf’s child lives with severe asthma that resulted in him being frequently hospitalised in 2021. As his son is unvaccinated, Kopf said he wasn’t willing to take the risk. Melbourne GP Kate’s four-year-old contracted the virus from childcare in October, while herself, her husband and two-year-old were struck down on NYE. “I always thought the risk would be my work but the first episode was daycare,” Kate, who did not want to use her last name, said. “We haven’t had much in the way of a choice. I can’t work with them – they’re two and four.” Kate hopes her children’s immunity since contracting the virus will protect them now that Covid has again begun to spread at the daycare centre, which has closed three times in the past year. “In the short term it should be safe, but that will change next month,” she said. Financial pain for centres Services can waive gap fees for a child who doesn’t attend childcare because they, or a member of their household, have been directed to isolate due to Covid-19, or where a centre is closed on government advice. But they can’t if a centre doesn’t have enough staff, or if families are worried about safety. The sector is calling for an absence payment covering at least 15% of the gap fee for an absent child to be offered for an expanded list of Covid related reasons, guaranteed income funding and priority to be given to early educators for booster appointments. They are also calling for all staff and children to be tested twice weekly or every day for close contacts. It follows the federal government’s decision to exempt close contacts from isolation rules for a range of workers, including in education. Labor’s shadow minister for early childhood education, Amanda Rishworth, has also written to Robert calling for urgent action, including access to free RATs for early learning services, prioritised booster appointments, and improved ventilation. “As early educators and children become infected, or directed to isolate at home, early learning services are being left in a precarious position,” Rishworth said. “Families that are keeping their children at home because they are close contacts are being forced to pay for childcare they cannot use, and as a result some are choosing to withdraw their children from care, dealing another financial blow to services. “The issues arising from Omicron were foreseen and it is the role of the commonwealth government to plan for such eventualities and provide national leadership so that children, families and educators can attend services safely.” David Worland, the chief executive at ELAA, said staff shortages had worsened since last year as infections rise. He said additional funding to implement Covid-safe work practices was needed. “We need a commitment from the federal government to some financial support that gives service providers a guaranteed income flow compared to pre-Covid,” he said. Community Child Care’s executive director Julie Price said childcare workers were highly stressed. “There’s a lot of anxiety amongst educators and teachers about their exposure to coronavirus. Service leaders are worried about children and families, their staff. Price said requiring service leaders to be responsible for their own contact tracing was only compounding stress. “People are worn out. I’ve heard of people who’ve just said I’ve had enough, I’m going,” she said. A spokesperson from the Department of Education, Skills and Employment said the federal government had invested about $3.2bn in the early childhood sector since the pandemic began, including an extra 10 allowable absence days per child. They said detailed operational plans for teachers and educators, including mask wearing and rapid antigen testing would be set during national cabinet this week. “National Cabinet … agreed that child care is a critical sector and will be included in close contact arrangements for essential workers in each state and territory,” the spokesperson said. “Close contact isolation rules are enabling more services to stay open during the Omicron wave.”A fiery demand by former minister David Davis for Boris Johnson to resign fills many front pages, while others hone in on the prime minister’s defiance in the face of a Conservative rebellion. The Guardian splashes with “‘In the name of God, go’: Tory anger builds as Boris Johnson clings on”. Davis’s outrage came on the heels of Christian Wakeford, the MP for Bury South, quitting the Conservatives to join Labour. The prime minister vowed to battle on in No 10 and his supporters insisted he now had the breathing space for a fightback, with many MPs awaiting the outcome of the Sue Gray inquiry into the parties at No 10. The Independent also leads with “In the name of God, go” writing that the prime minister faced an angry Commons as a Tory defected to Labour. The Mirror too goes with the Davis quote. Johnson “hanging by a thread”, it writes, above the headline “In the name of God, go”. And the Metro’s take is “In the name of God GO!” squeezed between pictures of Davis and Johnson. The embattled PM finds support in other papers, notably the Mail. It splashes with “Boris and Carrie’s baby hit by Covid”, reporting that six-week old Romy was badly ill but is now on the mend, alongside a picture of smiling Carrie Johnson. Above that story the paper hits out at the “narcissistic rabble of Tory MPs” trying to topple the PM “who’s leading us out of Covid”. Pointing to a comment piece inside the paper, the Mail offers its twist on the Davis demand: “In the name of God, grow up!” The Express follows a similar sentiment with its lead: “In the name of party unity, go … and back the PM!”. The paper says allies of Johnson rallied to his defence after suffering devastating blows from his own MPs. The Times has “PM fights on as plotters pull back from the brink” as Johnson survives a defection and the Davis attack. The paper says the prime minister has been granted a reprieve by MPs plotting to oust him as concern builds that the Gray inquiry will be more critical of the prime minister than expected. The Telegraph leads with Johnson’s defiance, “Johnson: I won’t quit if rebels force vote”. Davis is pictured as it reports the senior Tory says the PM will have to be dragged “kicking and screaming from office”. The Sun plays with the theme of the so-called pork pie plotters, a group of the 2019 intake of Conservative MPs mobilising against him. “As our Bojo pork pie chart shows ...” it writes, underneath the headline “Battling PM crust ahead” and a shot of a pie sliced up according to the pressing issues of the day. The paper says Johnson battled a day of extraordinary drama, coming out just ahead of the plotters. The FT splashes with “Johnson buys time after defection to Labour rallies restive Tory MPs” and reports the PM secured a “fragile” truce. The i paper has a similar feel with “Johnson clings on to power … for now”. Conservative backbenchers do not expect an immediate vote of no confidence in Johnson, it writes, waiting until the Gray report on his conduct next week.Fresh pictures of the devastation in Tonga have emerged five days after an enormous volcano eruption and subsequent tsunami cut off contact with the outside world, as the first plane carrying international aid landed. A series of photos tweeted by the Tongan consulate late on Wednesday show trees and buildings flattened and covered in ash. Others show debris piled up outside homes and damaged vehicles. “Nuku’alofa, the ‘city’ of The Kingdom of #Tonga, covered in volcanic ash,” the consulate wrote. A state of emergency has been declared in the country until 13 February, the Tongan government announced. The release of the new photos came hours before a New Zealand Defence Force plane landed following what Rear Admiral Jim Gilmour, commander of Joint Forces New Zealand, said was a “mammoth effort” to clear ash from the runway of Tonga’s international airport by hand. He said strict no-contact protocols would be adhered to as aid supplies were unloaded because “we’re very respectful that the last thing Tonga would need now is a Covid outbreak”. The island nation has so far recorded just one case of the virus. A further flight could be sent as soon as Saturday. The HMNZS Wellington was also expected to arrive on Thursday and survey the harbour to ensure its safety ahead of the arrival of the larger HMNZS Aotearoa on Friday, which is carrying supplies including 250,000 litres of water and a desalination plant. Australia sent an air force plane that arrived on Thursday loaded with essential supplies including protective equipment and shelter materials, and the government said it expected to send a naval vessel loaded with equipment including helicopters either later Thursday or on Friday. China’s president Xi Jinping said Beijing was ready to provide as much support as its capacity allowed, according to news outlet Xinhua. Telephone links between Tonga and the rest of the world were also partially restored on Thursday, though restoring full internet connectivity is likely to take a month or more according to the owner of the archipelago’s sole subsea communications cable. Speaking from the capital, Nuku’alofa, local journalist Marian Kupu told Reuters Tongans were in the process of cleaning up all the dust but feared they may run out of drinking water. “Each home has their own tanks of water supply but most of them are filled with dust so it’s not safe for drinking,” Kupu said. Kupu said a few villages on the western side of Tonga were very badly hit. “I won’t say we are expecting more deaths but as we are speaking the government is trying to fly to the other islands to check over them,” she said. When asked if there was enough food supplies, she said: “I can say maybe we can survive for the next few weeks but I’m not sure about water.” The United Nations said that about 84,000 people, more than 80% of the population, had been badly affected by the disaster. “They have been affected through loss of houses, loss of communication, what we understand is the issue with the water,” UN spokesperson Stephane Dujarric told reporters. “Water is really the biggest life-saving issue. Water sources have been polluted, water systems are down.” The Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano erupted about 40 miles (65 km) from the Tongan capital with a blast heard 2,300 km (1,400 miles) away in New Zealand, and sent tsunamis across the Pacific Ocean. Waves reaching up to 15 metres (49 feet) hit the outer Ha’apia island group, destroying all the houses on the island of Mango, as well as the west coast of Tonga’s main island, Tongatapu, where 56 houses were destroyed or seriously damaged, the prime minister’s office said. The UN said the evacuation of people from these islands was under way. Three people were confirmed to have died in the disaster.The Australian Open farewell tour continued longer than expected. Now, having played her encore, Samantha Stosur will leave the stage on a high. This second-round appearance was Stosur’s 797th tour-level singles match, of which she has won more than 450. On Wednesday, Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova ensured there would not be a 798th, the Russian dispatching the Australian veteran 6-2, 6-2. On a day of upsets in the women’s draw, this was not one of them. The defeat at Kia Arena was emphatic. There was no hint of a comeback similar to that gritty first-round performance against American wildcard Robin Anderson. But even after Pavlyuchenkova broke her serve to take a 5-2 second-set lead and successfully served out the match, Stosur’s smile was unmoving. The occasion, for once, meant more than the tennis. Stosur played her first professional match at the age of 14. At 17, she contested her first Australian Open. Since then she has climbed all the way to the top, to world No 4 and the 2011 US Open trophy. Now, 20 years later and ranked 487th, she has earned the right to hop off at the bottom. “I have done more than I ever thought was possible,” she said to a standing ovation, which preceded a dedicated video tribute and presentation from Tennis Australia. “I dreamed of winning a grand slam and doing close to the things I did. To do what I have done dreaming as a little kid is phenomenal. I couldn’t have asked for more. I’ve had many great moments here in Australia and around the world. Yeah, it’s been amazing.” Pavlyuchenkova too was taken by the moment. “It was actually very emotional for me,” she said. “I had goosebumps when everybody was clapping for Sam. She is such a wonderful human being and also amazing tennis player, so thank you Sam.” Pressure has forever plagued Stosur at her home slam and positivity has rarely been afforded to the Queenslander, who has never make it past the fourth round and failed to win a single match in five consecutive attempts between 2016 and 2020. Overall, in her previous 19 campaigns, she was knocked out in the first round eight times. The very fact she made the second round at her 20th – she now equals Lleyton Hewitt’s record for most Australian Open appearances – is testament to the palpable, almost unrecognisable sense of freedom with which she overcame Anderson. It was the first time Stosur had successfully staged an Australian Open comeback after dropping the first set since 2003, when she did so against Spanish star Conchita Martínez. And so she will walk away from singles as one of the greats of Australian tennis, who beat Serena Williams in the 2011 US Open final, who spent 441 consecutive weeks between 2008 and 2017 as the top-ranked Australian singles player of either gender, and who was a fixture in the world’s top 25 for nine consecutive years. “Thank you to everyone who has been along with me the 20 years,” she said. “The coaches, they know who they are, they have all helped me in some way on and off the court, shaped me into the person I am. The family – they are all down there now – mum and dad, my brothers for giving up everything early on driving me to tournaments on the weekend, getting dragged along for Sam’s tennis. But I think it was all worth it, so thanks for giving everything you’ve got as well. “Obviously my partner, thanks Liz, standing by me and getting me through the hard times and also the good times. Little Evie at home, I hope you’re awake, I say hello to you. Everyone on the sideline, I’ve had a great time, thanks for all being here. If I missed anyone I’m sorry, but I love you all.”Armadas of alien-like sea creatures have been washing up on Australian beaches thanks to the warm weather but experts warn people should look but not touch. Jellyfish expert Dr Lisa-ann Gershwin said bluebottles had been washing up on beaches across New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania in “gobsmacking numbers” over the last few months thanks to the warmer weather. “They’re having a really fun time this year and they’re definitely terrorising us this year,” Gershwin said. “They’re really strange alien creatures. There’s no two ways about it. “It doesn’t have any equal to people, or animals, or corals, or things we understand intuitively. It’s just their own brand of weirdness in such a cool way.” A population of bluebottles on the move is known as an “armada” and the species is evolutionarily descended from jellyfish in the same way humans are related to monkeys or apes. They are also the closest known relative of the Portuguese man o’ war and distantly to Porpita porpita, a marine organism with a circular float but no sail. Every bluebottle population floats freely on the surface of the ocean, made up of “an unbelievable number” of individual “colonies”. These colonies are what are commonly referred to as “bluebottles” but are actually a collection of semi-autonomous parts fused together. Each colony is also either left-handed or right-handed, with the sail on top of the animal angled one way or the other. When a breeze picks up at just the right angle, it will carry off only a small number of colonies at any given time, ensuring the whole population isn’t lost in one gust. Even more weirdly, every individual bluebottle colony is a hermaphrodite with both male and female reproductive organs, and each of the autonomous components is responsible for its own function such as feeding, stinging or reproduction. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Gershwin said that for humans it would be as if each arm and leg operated entirely independently, with each limb having its own critical job required to keep the whole alive. Bluebottles themselves are preyed upon by Glaucus, otherwise known as the “sea lizard” or “Pokémon slug”. Glaucus are often washed up on shore with the bluebottle, and looks like a lizard but is actually a sea slug that feeds on the colony and “steals” its stingers for its own defence. Gershwin said there was a still much to learn about the biology of this “amazing feat of nature” as it was difficult to track down where they originate and then to study them before they complete their lifecycle. However, what is known is the complex changes brought by climate change are likely to create ideal breeding environments for bluebottles and other jellyfish species which already reproduce “faster than rabbits”. While they may flourish, fish, crustaceans and other marine life will struggle with warmer waters, lower oxygen levels and acidifying oceans. If someone finds a bluebottle washed up on the beach, Gershwin encouraged people to look but warned they should not touch, poke or stomp on the animals as even in death they can sting. “These things bloody hurt,” she said. Bluebottles excrete a microscopic mucus on their tentacles that is invisible and cannot be felt when touched but which contains thousands of stinging cells that are “armed and dangerous” as they inject venom into the skin on contact. Even where a person uses a stick to poke at the creature, it will collect the microscopic film which can then be found by a dog or other animal when left behind. There have also been cases where young children stomped on the animals and the venom has splashed into the eyes of someone watching. Gershwin, who once allowed herself to be stung 80 times to test various methods at treating the stings, said the pain was “excruciating” with the closest comparable feeling akin to being splashed with scalding hot cooking oil. “I let my curiosity overwhelm my common sense,” she said. “It was, hands down, the stupidest thing I’ve ever done. Let me go on record: I paid a big price for it. I was in a lot of pain and I was very swollen. I do not recommend anyone do the same.” If someone is stung, Gershwin says the advice from the Australian Resuscitation Council is to first wash the sting in ocean water to clean off any stinging cells, before cleansing with either very hot water – as hot as a person can stand it before pulling away – or very cold water “for the pain”. Even if nothing is done, however, the pain will resolve in 30 minutes on its own. Gershwin said people shouldn’t “run screaming” but take a moment to appreciate the “fascinating creatures”. “This is nature standing up on her haunches and showing off with a brightly coloured, frilly dress,” she said. “But also: don’t touch.”Ghislaine Maxwell’s legal team on Wednesday filed documents requesting a new trial following revelations that a juror may not have disclosed childhood sexual abuse during jury selection. In a letter to the court, Maxwell’s lawyers wrote that they filed her “motion for a New Trial … and accompanying exhibits under seal.” The documents were filed under seal, and their contents were not known. “For the reasons set forth in the Motion, we request that all submissions pertaining to Juror No. 50 remain under seal until the Court rules on the Motion,” they wrote. Maxwell’s lawyers filed this letter shortly before the midnight deadline to submit paperwork formally requesting a new trial. Maxwell, the daughter of the late British publishing baron Robert Maxwell, was convicted on 29 December of five counts for facilitating the late financier Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of girls, some as young as 14. After last year’s trial, one panelist, juror No 50, said in an interview that he was a victim of childhood sexual abuse. This juror, Scotty David, reportedly said he told fellow jurors about his experience – and that this helped other panelists understand things from a victim’s point of view. David’s statements about prior abuse spurred questions, given that potential jurors completed questionnaires during the selection process which included: “Have you or a friend or family member ever been the victim of sexual harassment, sexual abuse, or sexual assault?” The questionnaire also asked: “Witnesses in this case may testify claiming sexual abuse or sexual assault. Would you have any difficulty assessing the credibility of a witness claiming sexual assault or abuse just like you would any other witness?” David reportedly said that he did not recall the question about abuse but had answered every query honestly. Following David’s comments, prosecutors asked Nathan to investigate his remarks. “While the court instructed jurors that they were free to discuss their jury service with anyone of their choosing, some of the statements, as related in the media, merit attention by the court. In particular, the juror has described being a victim of sexual abuse,” prosecutors wrote in a 5 January letter. “Assuming the accuracy of the reporting, the juror asserted that he ‘flew through’ the prospective juror questionnaire and does not recall being asked whether he had been a victim of sexual abuse, but stated that ‘he would have answered honestly’. “Based on the foregoing, the government believes the court should conduct an inquiry,” they wrote to Nathan. Maxwell’s legal team, in turn, said the juror’s published comments necessitated a retrial. Epstein, who counted Prince Andrew and former US presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump among his many high-profile acquaintances, was arrested in July 2019 for sex trafficking girls as young as 14. He killed himself in a Manhattan jail about one month later, while awaiting trial. Prince Andrew has faced increasing scrutiny over his relationship with Epstein and Maxwell following her high-profile trial. He is also being sued by Virginia Giuffre, who claims that Epstein and Maxwell forced her into sex with the royal in London at age 17. He has denied the allegations. Despite his denials, fallout has been intense. Buckingham Palace said in a statement last week: “With the Queen’s approval and agreement, the Duke of York’s military affiliations and royal patronages have been returned to the Queen. The Duke of York will continue not to undertake any public duties and is defending this case as a private citizen.”Hey guys. I’m just gonna come out and, like, say it. This year, I’m becoming a full-blown bimbo. I know what you’re thinking, lol. You’re probably thinking that’s a really stupid thing to say. Which is the point entirely. “Bimbofication” – the scientific term for becoming stupid and hot – has been bouncing around the internet for a few years now. It started out on TikTok, with American creators like Chrissy Chlapecka embracing a very specific brand of hyperfemininity. Wearing highly-flammable hair extensions and skin-tight polyester outfits, Chlapecka speaks to the camera in a baby voice, discussing everything from politics and mental illness, right through to “the feminine urge to buy my stupid little $7 coffee &amp; stare at my stupid little thousand dollar phone to fill the void”. And not gonna lie, when I first saw her videos, I was conflicted. On the one hand, they spoke to me aesthetically. I’m outrageously attracted to the colour pink. But on the other hand, which I should clarify is manicured, I was irritated. Why was she speaking like that? Why was this bleach blonde, big-bosomed woman talking like a toddler? I couldn’t work it out. Then I realised I’m not meant to. The ethos of the 2022 bimbo is to have “less thoughts” and “more vibes”. It’s a purposeful rejection of my generation’s propensity to catastrophise and diagnose. And after two years of uncertainty, we’ve come to realise there’s no point in trying to out-think things like pandemics or mathematics. It’s easier to just be hot. And for this gorgeous gorgeous girl, it feels like a return to centre. I’ve always wanted to be a bimbo, in my heart of hearts. I think it’s got something to do with being a kid in the noughties. I grew up on a diet of Playboy bunnies and Pussycat Dolls. And it’s a miracle I didn’t grow up on a diet, full stop. In Y2K pop culture, almost every woman who was afforded ample screen time was impossibly attractive and in some way, a bimbo. With Legally Blonde the rare exception, the women in these movies were a bit silly at best, and at worst, morally corrupt. Take for example Mean Girls. While I’m sure the message Tiny Fey was hoping to send when she wrote Regina George was that being a vain, popular bitch is bad and increases your chances of being hit by a bus, my eight-year-old self missed the point entirely. I wanted to be her. I wanted to drive a convertible Lexus. I wanted to be the most popular girl in school. And if I needed to be a bimbo to get there, I’d oblige. In this early 2000s version of bimbofication, the very act of performative femininity was considered vapid and worthy of ridicule. Women were just one more “like” or “umm” away from being cast off entirely, relegated to the aisle of Chemist Warehouse that stocks Paris Hilton’s eau de toilette. And it wasn’t just men who had a thing or two to say about women who wore their jeans slung low and their g-strings high with pride. Books such as Female Chauvinist Pigs by Ariel Levy put the “phenomenon” of “raunch culture” on blast, suggesting women who wore Playboy bunny paraphernalia were making themselves the butt of the joke. A taut one at that. As a young girl who loved pink, this left me with few options. I hated physical sports and loved going to Kmart to nag my parents for new Bratz Dolls and a pack of Lip Smackers. I knew, though, that wearing a miniskirt probably lowered my IQ. There was no option to be hot and smart. And that’s why this new wave of self-aware bimbofication is so deeply exciting. We’re entering the decade of the bimbo, I can feel it in my 300CC breast implants. We’re reclaiming the word, appliquéing it with rhinestones and presenting it on the internet, in our own, like, words. Then we’re lying back down on our fluffy pink pillows to get our beauty sleep because we’re not pressed on whether you like it or not. Unlike the earlier manifestations of bimbofication, anyone can be one in 2022. Men, women, theys and thems. Luxuriating in extreme femme energy is our version of burning our bras – only this time it’s our fingers click-clacking across the keyboard, celebrating bimbocentric causes like Britney Spears’ emancipation. So here’s my pledge. In 2022, I’m going to be the dumbest person I know. I’m going to stop removing the excess exclamation marks in my emails … a technique I used to employ so people might take me more seriously!!! And sorry, I’m not going to rein in my use of the word “sorry”. I’m not going to unsoften myself in order to be taken seriously. I’m going to walk on a treadmill in a full face of makeup, listening to Kim Petras sing about her coconuts, nodding along because yass queen. Do you know what I mean? If you don’t, that’s OK. In fact, that’s hot. Lucinda Price is a writer, presenter and comedianNorth Korea has already conducted four test launches of ballistic missiles this year, but they could be a mere precursor to more serious provocations, as Kim Jong-un’s regime attempts to break the nuclear stalemate with the US. Superficially, the recent tests were a reminder of the North’s ability to manufacture more sophisticated weapons – perhaps including those capable of evading missile defences – despite years of international sanctions. But with every launch, North Korea also sends a carefully calibrated political message to the White House. In 2017, it marked American independence day by firing a long-range missile, demonstrating its theoretic ability to strike the continental US. And after more than a year of inactivity, it communicated its displeasure at the failure of nuclear talks with a volley of short-range projectiles in spring 2019. The messaging from Pyongyang has now taken on a more ominous tone. It began the this year with warnings from its leader that it would no longer be bound by its self-imposed 2018 moratorium on nuclear and long-range missile tests. On Thursday, it went a step further, with reports suggesting the North no longer sees a resumption of nuclear tests and intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launches as a provocation too far. The country will bolster its defences against the US and consider restarting “all temporarily suspended activities”, the country’s official news agency, KCNA, said in an apparent reference to nuclear and ICBM tests. The decision came after Kim called a meeting of the politburo of the ruling Korean Workers’ party on Wednesday to discuss “important policy issues”, including how to counter US “hostility”, and hours before the UN security council was due to meet to discuss the regime’s recent missile tests. “We should make more thorough preparation for a long-term confrontation with the US imperialists,” the politburo said, according to KCNA. Rhetoric aside, the growing sense of frustration in Pyongyang is palpable. Under Joe Biden, the US has summarily rejected North Korean demands that Washington make concessions – an easing of sanctions, an end to joint military drills with South Korea and the removal of American strategic weapons from the Korean peninsula – to smooth the path to the resumption of denuclearisation talks. Kim has spent the past 12 months applying pressure on Biden with a series of missile launches, while stopping short of provoking the US president with the testing of a nuclear device or ICBM. But his caution has elicited only condemnation from the US and its allies and, last week, the first fresh sanctions – targeting five North Korean officials linked to the regime’s missile programme – of Biden’s first year in the White House. We have yet to reach the “fire and fury” levels of 2017 but a return to dangerous brinkmanship looms larger as Kim – whose standing at home has been battered by the pandemic and a weak economy – again considers his nuclear playbook to apply pressure on the Biden administration, which has offered “talks without preconditions” but showed little enthusiasm for easing sanctions until Kim takes verifiable steps to dismantle his weapons programme. Yang Moo-jin, a professor at the University of North Korean Studies in Seoul, said: “It is possible that the situation could go back to the vicious cycle of provocations and sanctions we saw in 2017.” Yang added that the regime could possibly test a long-range missile or similarly powerful weapon to coincide with the 80th and 110th anniversaries of the birthdays of Kim’s late father and grandfather in February and April. Daryl Kimball, executive director of the Arms Control Association in Washington, urged the Biden administration to kickstart international efforts to restart nuclear talks that have been stalled since Kim’s failed summit with Trump in early 2019. “The North Korean nuclear and missile problem has not disappeared and will only grow worse in the absence of active, serious diplomacy,” Kimball said.The steep way up the former incline railway, on the north side of Kit Hill, is edged with yellow gorse, stunted trees and lumps of granite, shrouded in emerald moss and polypody ferns. Near the top of the hill, which dominates the valley, discarded blocks lie where they have been tipped downslope. The derelict quarry closed in 1955 after providing finished granite for parapets, embankments, lighthouses and monuments. At its busiest, between the two world wars, almost 100 men worked there, blasting, cutting, shaping, polishing and loading up stones for lowering towards the junction with the single track railway, which then curved towards Gunnislake and the viaduct at Calstock to link with the upcountry network. Granite ledges, crevices and wet hollows now host lichens, mosses, ferns, cotoneaster shrubs and willow, with pondweed in the standing water. On this gloomy Sunday, two hardy swimmers emerge from the deep, black water below the sheer quarry face – 20 minutes immersion in a temperature of 6C (according to the swimmers). Other visitors to this popular country park walk briskly with their dogs, or more slowly with children, following signed tracks or standing a while, peering at the expanse of dingy landscape across the Inny Valley and into Devon, on the other side of the meandering Tamar. Patches of wan brightness shine out, briefly lighting new houses on the edge of distant Launceston, and emphasising the unseasonally lush greens of nearer stock-free pastures on the Duchy College farm. Narrow paths, strewn with rotting oak leaves, lead down the sheltered side of the hill, wending across wet and uneven ground where turf, brambles, whortleberry and swathes of brown bracken disguise the splitting pits where moorstone was broken up by hand, and early stream-works for tin ore. A jumble of overgrown clitter (rough stone) helps to protect the maturing woodland of thorn, oak, ash, rowan and holly; perhaps cuckoos and warblers will return in the spring. On the edge of the open land, beside the former track bed of the railway that terminated at Kelly Bray, the elusive sun reappears, peeping above the summit of the shadowy hillside, once the workplace of miners and quarry workers. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe national aged care regulator has intervened in a south-west Sydney nursing home at the centre of a Covid outbreak after finding it failed to meet quality standards relating to infection control and effective management of the outbreak. On 6 January, Guardian Australia reported on a major outbreak at the Bupa Clemton Park facility that saw more than 60 residents and staff become infected with Covid-19, and one fully vaccinated person in palliative care die. After the report the aged care quality and safety commission formally intervened, ordering the facility to stop new admissions for six months for failing to meet compliance standards of the Aged Care Act. The facility has also been ordered to appoint interim nursing management. A letter provided to Guardian Australia and distributed to friends and relatives of residents on Wednesday confirmed regulatory action had been taken on 11 January in relation to the ongoing outbreak at the facility. “Bupa Clemton Park will not receive payment from the Australian government for new consumers until 11 July 2022,” the letter from national director of aged care compliance, Elsy Brammesan said. “Limiting the number of consumers who can be accepted by the service helps them focus on fixing the problems for current consumers. “The ongoing operation of Bupa Clemton Park continues to be the responsibility of Bupa Aged Care Australia Pty Ltd, and the above action is not expected to change that arrangement. “The commission will continue to visit the service to monitor their progress in fixing the issues against the quality standards.” Dimitrios Kapeleris’s father is a resident of Bupa Clemton Park who acquired Covid-19 early in the outbreak. While his father was asymptomatic during his infectious period, Kapeleris said he had since stopped eating and was highly agitated after a month confined to his room. “It’s concerning that they still haven’t got things right this late into the outbreak,” Kapeleris said. “Given 52 residents have been infected and upwards of 40 staff – wearing full PPE – there’s something amiss in infection control procedures, there’s something seriously wrong.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Asked whether Kapeleris felt more comfortable with his father being housed at the nursing home now the commission has intervened, he said simply “no”. “It raises questions,” he said. “Why have they intervened? What aren’t they doing properly and why aren’t they doing it properly? We don’t have that information yet. “It’s disheartening, it’s heartbreaking, it’s demoralising for us to watch our parents and knowing this is indefinite for them.” Kapeleris previously warned staff about taking adequate precautions in relation to air filtration and ventilation, which were agreed to a week after Guardian Australia’s article was published. “They finally got the filters to ensure clean indoor air but it took a lot of effort on my part to get them to move,” he said. “I was just surprised they weren’t doing this of their own accord.” Kapeleris said while communication also improved later in the outbreak, Covid-19 updates still missed “basic details, such as only reporting active cases not total cases, and not providing specific breakdowns of where cases were occurring. “I don’t know in my dad’s section how many cases they have now,” Kapeleris said. “I ask for that information and still don’t get it.” According to the latest update, about 26 residents had tested positive in his father’s section of 36 people. Overall, 51 residents had been infected with the virus, as well as 44 staff. There were eight Covid-positive residents remaining in the facility with no active infections among employees. “It makes you think ‘why are they holding on to this information?’,” he said. “If they don’t have a handle on what they’re doing wrong and they’re not doing enough to address it, there’s no end in sight.” A Bupa spokesperson said they were “disappointed” by the decision but the facility was cooperating with the commission to manage the outbreak. The spokesperson said an external nurse adviser had been brought in to assist the facility for the next six months to address the commission’s concerns, and further education and training were required among all staff. In addition, the nursing home is required to participate in regular teleconferences and provide reports to the commission as part of progress monitoring towards compliance and ending of the Covid-19 outbreak. “Dealing with the pandemic over the past 21 months has created extraordinary difficulty and worry for our residents, their families, and our employees. We apologise to them for the additional distress this will cause,” the spokesperson said. “We’re closely examining how the commission reached its decision. “We’ll also work closely with the commission to understand how we can once again reach full compliance at Bupa Clemton Park, which is what our residents and their families rightly expect and deserve.” Four weeks into isolating, Kapeleris said he would just be grateful for his father to be able to leave his room. “To go to the outdoor terrace … my dad used to go out there with his friend and tend to the plants, and water them,” he said. “Visiting will be great, but the first step is to get them into the fresh air, to interact with other residents. I’m worried about my dad … they’ve put him on liquid supplements. He’s lost three kilos in a week and a half.”In her first press conference of the year, held outside in the central North Island sun, prime minister Jacinda Ardern was almost drowned out by a wave of cicada calls. The clamour is synonymous with New Zealand summertime, a reminder that the country had managed to snatch a long, hot, largely unrestricted holiday season from the mouth of a late-2021 Delta outbreak. But as New Zealanders trickle back from vacation to their homes and workplaces, they do so with the knowledge that respite will probably be fleeting. “Omicron is knocking at our door now,” Ardern told reporters over the buzz. “We won’t stop Omicron, but we can try and slow it down.” At least three cases of the new variant have been confirmed among border workers and their contacts in Auckland, and there are fears it made have already spread into the wider community. For now, New Zealand is one of a very small handful of countries keeping Omicron at bay. That path is an increasingly lonely one – very few medium-sized economies have stayed dedicated to Covid-zero or heavy-duty suppression. China, the notable exception, faces increasing questions over how sustainable its elimination strategy is. While Beijing remains fiercely committed to that path, however, New Zealand’s leader is now resigned to battle Omicron, describing its transmission across the country as a matter of “when, not if”. “Omicron is in every corner of the world at the moment. And we also know that there will be other variants. And we know that we will experience in New Zealand cases at a level that we haven’t experienced before,” Ardern said. In the meantime, the country will turn to its tried and tested strategy: delay. This has been a central tactic to New Zealand’s Covid game plan. The country had some advantages from the first days of the pandemic: physical isolation and distance bought it time to observe the damage inflicted on overseas health systems, and to respond by closing its borders and moving to wipe out the disease in-country. Over and over again, Ardern’s government chose to sustain that initial advantage – opting for conservatism in the face of Covid, watching other countries’ trajectories, buying time to build vaccination rates. Epidemiologist and public health prof Michael Baker says New Zealand’s “strategic advantage is that we can delay the inevitable.” “The turn of phrase ‘delaying the inevitable’ [makes it sound] as though: why bother? But I would say delaying the inevitable is an extremely good idea with Covid-19,” he says. ‘Concerning gaps’ In the face of the highly-transmissible variant, however, questions linger about what New Zealand’s future will look like when widespread infections finally arrive - and whether it has used its hard-won time to adequately prepare for the coming wave. While vaccination rates are high – about 94% of the adult population is now double-vaccinated and children aged 5-12 this month began receiving their jabs this month – the country’s health system is small and vulnerable to overwhelm, especially outside major cities. A government report on preparedness for Omicron, leaked to Māori Television this week, highlighted concerns that intensive care beds were severely limited, with just one-third, or 108 ICU beds currently free. In several of the country’s 20 district health boards, there was no ICU care available. Even if initial evidence holds and Omicron is a ‘milder’ variant, the speed at which it spreads could still quickly overwhelm New Zealand’s health system, Baker said. “As everyone points out, even a small proportion of a big number is still a big number,” he says. While Ardern has said that an outbreak Omicron would not trigger a lockdown, Baker says they may be necessary to tamp down widespread transmission. “That’s really the essence of mitigation and flattening the peak – is to say well, for all countries, their ability to look after very sick people is always going to be limited.” Epidemiologist Dr Jennifer Summers said via Science Media Centre that there were “concerning gaps in New Zealand’s preparation for delaying and managing an Omicron outbreak” and Ardern ruling out lockdowns was “worrying”. “The health system will be under further immense pressure once Omicron enters the community ... ruling out potential public health measures that could be used to minimise the impact of Omicron is short-sighted,” she said. From the opposition, the government has faced criticism that it has squandered its window of opportunity by failing to roll out widespread access to rapid testing, make large-enough increases to hospital capacity, or outline clear plans for mask use or ventilation in schools or workplaces. In the face of Omicron, opposition leader Christopher Luxon said, the government was “embarking on a second year of Covid complacency: a lack of urgency, a lack of a plan, and making things up as they go”. Even as the country fights to buy itself a few more weeks, its remaining Omicron-free days may be limited. Soon, delay won’t be available as a tactic, Baker said, “given how rapidly Omicron will arrive and spread. That’s if it’s not spreading already - which it could be.”Tens of thousands of students in England are studying for degrees at institutions that could soon be punished for low quality and poor value for money, under plans drawn up by the higher education regulator. The Office for Students (OfS) has published a consultation detailing its minimum acceptable outcomes for students, which sets thresholds for drop-out rates, course completion and graduate employment that universities and colleges will have to pass to avoid further investigation. The consultation document from the OfS says that more than 60,000 students on full-time undergraduate courses are currently or recently enrolled at institutions in England that could fail to meet its minimum standards, as have more than 150,000 part-time undergraduates. The new regulations would mean that universities, colleges and other providers are likely to be sanctioned if fewer than 80% of students studying full-time for their first degree continue past their first year, or if fewer than 75% complete their degree, over the previous four years. Institutions could also be investigated and penalised by the OfS if fewer than 60% of their graduates go on to work in what it classifies as skilled employment. Nicola Dandridge, chief executive of the OfS, said the proposals were “a landmark moment” in efforts to tackle poor quality provision in English higher education. “Many universities and colleges in England run high quality courses that deliver positive outcomes for students. The thresholds that we have proposed will not affect them. They are instead designed to target those poor quality courses and outcomes which are letting students down and don’t reflect students’ ambition and effort,” Dandridge said. The new regulations would also create a series of thresholds for part-time and some postgraduate students. The proposed thresholds are unlikely to trouble most mainstream universities in England, although some subjects such as agriculture could attract the OfS’s attention. Private or alternative providers outside the traditional university sector are most at risk of sanction, with some having high drop-out rates and low numbers of students completing their degrees. Sanctions available to the OfS include fines and restrictions on student loan eligibility for institutions that fall below any of the thresholds, including by individual subjects. The OfS said it would look closely at each case, including the use of disaggregated data by sex, ethnicity, previous eligibility for free school meals and other indicators that could influence an institution’s performance. The OfS is also proposing to resuscitate the teaching excellence framework (Tef) awards, which would be compulsory for universities and colleges that meet the thresholds. Ratings of gold, silver or bronze would be awarded by an expert panel appointed by the OfS, using “evidence submitted by universities and colleges, numerical indicators and submissions from students”. But taking a leaf out of the school inspectorate Ofsted, the Tef panel could also award a new “requires improvement” category for universities and colleges “where the panel is unable to identify excellence”. Michelle Donelan, the universities minister for England, said: “Our university system is acclaimed as world class, but there are too many pockets of poor quality. “Through this tough regulatory action, we are protecting students from being let down by these institutions, while also ensuring those delivering outstanding teaching are properly recognised.” Universities UK, representing vice-chancellors and principals, said: “Universities should also consider how courses contribute to public services such as the NHS, to business creation and skills needs in local areas, and their contribution to cultural activity and the environment. “We look forward to continuing to work closely with the OfS as we consider this consultation and the proposals.”Research into the gene editing of plants in the UK will become much easier with new rules brought forward by the government that will encourage field trials and other development efforts. Ministers said cutting red tape on gene editing research would help to develop new strains of crops that need less pesticide, have less environmental impact and provide better nutrition. The new rules, introduced in the form of a statutory instrument laid in parliament on Thursday, will apply only to research, rather than allowing gene-edited crops into widespread cultivation or consumption. It is part of a gradual approach towards gene editing by the government, after public consultation last year. The preferred direction of travel is clear, however, with ministers having repeatedly voiced support for gene editing and genetic modification as aids to modernising farming. Jo Churchill, the minister for agri-innovation and climate adaptation, said: “New genetic technologies could help us tackle some of the biggest challenges of our age, around food security, climate change and biodiversity loss. Now we have the freedom and opportunity to foster innovation, to improve the environment, and help us grow plants that are stronger and more resilient to climate change.” Field trials will still require notification to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, and any future crops or foods would be subject to separate authorisation requirements, as at present. The new rules apply only to gene editing, the process of working on a plant’s existing genome, to speed up what could be achieved through natural selection, rather than genetic modification, which can include importing genes from other species. The government cited sugar beet that is resistant to common viruses, wheat strains that contain less of a possible carcinogen and are adapted to the climate crisis, and tomatoes resistant to mildew, as promising areas of research for UK scientists. Campaigners have expressed concern that the government’s moves over the past year, since Brexit made it possible for the UK to ditch some of the EU’s strict rules on GM, may be the prelude to much greater use of gene editing and GM. Pat Thomas, the director of Beyond GM, a pressure group, said: “Today’s announcement is a sop to the biotech research establishment that doesn’t really address the most significant hurdles that developers need to face, which are that farmers don’t really want to grow genetically engineered crops and citizens don’t want to eat them.” She added: “There’s a lot of techno-optimism about what kind of gene-edited foods might materialise one day. But none of the crops Defra is talking about is close to coming to market. After 35 years of use, genetically engineered crops have not delivered much in terms of real value and they have largely been a distraction from more meaningful discussions about what kind of food system we want and need to transition to.” Scientists welcomed the rule changes. Prof Nick Talbot, the executive director of the Sainsbury Laboratory, in Norwich, said: “We can achieve the outcomes of plant breeding – which has been so successful in controlling diseases and improving yields – but in a much more precise manner … to produce nutritious crops requiring much lower fertiliser inputs and with greater resilience. We need innovation to help us escape from the chemical treadmill of current agriculture. In the face of the climate emergency, doing nothing is no longer an option.”Lorraine Kelly is pulling at her hair and shrieking: “Aaarrrrgghhh!” It is the morning after news leaked about Downing Street’s bring-your-own-booze party, held during those painful early months of lockdown and attended by the rule-flouting prime minister himself. Even after discussing it on her weekday breakfast TV show, Lorraine, the presenter is still trying to process the revelations. “Just when you think you can’t make it up!” she says. “Jesus, honestly, if they told me now that they’d had a masked ball for 1,000 people, like the Met ball or something, I’d just go: ‘Yeah, yep.’ And why on earth do they need an inquiry into it? If I said to you: ‘So, you went for a wee coffee today at Starbucks?’ you either did or you didn’t; you don’t need an inquiry into that!” You can probably trust Kelly when it comes to taking the country’s pulse: she has been a regular fixture on our TV screens for 37 years. She says scandal such as this gets to her because she has spent time over the past two years speaking to those who couldn’t say goodbye to loved ones, or had to limit numbers at funerals. “And we tried, when things were really dark, to find something to hold on to, whether it was amazing NHS workers or Captain Sir Tom. There was a sense of communities coming together. But we’ve kind of lost that a bit and it’s become toxic and fractured again, which is really disheartening.” Kelly is known for her on-screen warmth – smiley eyes, that melodic Scottish lilt – and those qualities certainly help camouflage her no-nonsense interviewing approach. Piers Morgan once called her an “iron fist in a velvet glove” and she admits to liking that; there are plenty of public figures who have sat on her sofa unprepared for the punchy line of questioning. She says her approach comes from her early reporting days. “I started on local papers and you did everything,” she says. “Some of the Scottish football managers back then looked a bit askance at a woman doing sport, but it was great, because they were totally disarmed.” I am certainly disarmed by Kelly’s video-call setup, which is almost as makeshift as my own: camera aimed up her nose, a tangle of coats hanging in the background, a picture of Spock framed in the corner of the screen. (“Oh that?” she says, spinning around with a grin. “I’m the geekiest geek there ever was.”) Chatting to her is a joy – her answers tend to pick up steam, barrelling downhill until I have to step in to ask the next question, at which point she slows herself down, beams a big smile and tackles the next one. We speak shortly after her live morning show has aired. Today’s involved a spot of hula-hooping with Dr Hilary Jones (“My pelvis won’t thrust!”), a chat with Martin Lewis about the cost-of-living crisis, a feature on a dog that has learned to talk, encouragement for people to get their Covid booster shots and some innuendo about playing with balls. Our own chat ping-pongs around in a similar way, from space travel to transgender rights, via knitting and her experience covering national tragedies such as Lockerbie and Dunblane. We even alight on her tax affairs, which have been a source of amusement – and criticism – since a judge ruled in Kelly’s favour against HMRC in 2019. The judge said Kelly was not liable for the bill in question because she was a “theatrical artist” performing the “friendly, chatty and fun” role of Lorraine Kelly on TV. Before all that, though, we discuss the show’s viral social media clips. In recent years, these have focused on the times when Kelly’s sunny on-screen persona has been tested beyond breaking point. In 2019 alone, she dismissed an awful Jennifer Arcuri interview with a caustic: “S’point in that?” and caused the temperature in the GMB studio to drop by several hundred degrees when she was asked by the host Susanna Reid if she remembered working with the Tory MP Esther McVey during her days on GMTV. Kelly responded with a stone-faced: “Yep … yes, I do.” Is it fair to say that the past few years have seen Kelly go rogue? “I think I’ve always done that,” she says. “It’s interesting, people’s perceptions of what I do. People, especially politicians, think they’re coming on to do a cosy little show, and it’s really not! If you’ve done something wrong, you will get held to account. So, when Jennifer Arcuri was in … honest to God, I was sat in the studio watching her being all coy, going [here, Kelly does what can only be described as a moronic tittering noise] and she said literally nothing. So I just said: ‘What’s the point of you being on?’ Who do you think you are to do that to the viewers? You should never take them for granted like that.” Did she plan to say her bit to Arcuri in advance? “You can’t plan it! It’s a live show. Most things that make the headlines are off the cuff. Of course, you have to have an edit button – and that’s where the training and experience comes in. I know the legals, how far you can go, because I’ve been doing it for a very long time. But at the same time I’ve got this glorious freedom to speak my mind.” Kelly says she only thinks about the show, not how a 20-second clip might look on Twitter, although that is undeniably how many people get to see her highlights these days. Her frosty encounter with McVey was a particular hit, with many wanting to know the story behind it. McVey has implied that it stems from the fact that, back in the day, she was promoted to partner Eamonn Holmes, but Kelly maintains it was McVey’s stance on gay rights that got her goat. Kelly is a longstanding LGBTQ+ ally who received Attitude magazine’s Honorary Gay award in 2015 and has appeared on RuPaul’s Drag Race UK as a guest judge. “I thought to myself: she’s come out and said the most appalling things about a section of society that are really hard done by and have enough going on without someone like that having a pop at them. And I didn’t really say anything, did I? But isn’t it amazing what you can say without saying anything?” Recently, Kelly has been getting a different kind of reaction – abuse from anti-vaxxers, because of her insistence that viewers should get a booster. “Loads and loads,” she says. “But even if I disagree vehemently with someone, you still have to have the debate.” This idea of no-platforming people leaves her uncomfortable. “Debate helps crystallise your own thoughts – and you should allow yourself to be challenged. There are some times when it’s not the right thing to do, but in general you can’t just say: ‘I hate you, I don’t want to engage with you, goodbye.’ “You don’t want is to make martyrs of people who have opposing views. You don’t want them to be … well, we call it ‘cancelled’, but what really is cancelled? Sometimes it’s better to give people space to talk, particularly toxic politicians. Let them talk for a wee bit; they’ll tie themselves up in knots and contradict themselves, then you can go in for the kill.” When Kelly invited Kathleen Stock on to her show, she again seized the chance to debate someone with whom she disagreed. Formerly a professor of philosophy at the University of Sussex, Stock resigned from her post last year amid campus furore over her gender-critical stance on trans rights. “I thought: let her speak,” says Kelly. “You’ve got to.” During the interview, Kelly questioned whether Stock had been “cancelled”; Stock agreed that she had a bigger platform now than before (“And I intend to use it”). Kelly is proud that they were able to have the conversation on national TV. “I was able to disagree with her. Because I think trans women are women and trans men are men. That’s my belief. And, at the end, people can make their own mind up. But it was important for me to say that and to show my support.” When I watched the clip, I wondered if there had been a moment that crystallised Kelly’s advocacy of trans rights. Speaking now, she offers one up. “I remember getting the school bus to school in East Kilbride and the driver was a lady called Jane. Jane was a trans woman and she was going through the process of transitioning. And you can imagine the abuse she got, because it was the 70s. But I used to chat to her, got to know her as a person, and she was a brilliant woman. I often wonder what happened to her. “But I’ve got a lot of pals who happen to be trans or they happen to be whatever … who cares?! They’re all just human and that’s a part of who they are.” She sighs. “People should just be a bit more tolerant, because trans people are currently going through, I think, what gay people went through. It’s a hard road, it really is.” Kelly was born in 1959 to two working-class teenagers from the Gorbals area of Glasgow. Her mum, a homemaker, was a Catholic; her dad, a TV repairer, was a Protestant. Her maternal grandmother thought they should put her up for adoption, but her parents were in love and held firm. Their house was tiny, with an outside toilet, but full of love and books. Kelly had planned to study English and Russian at university, but instead went to work on the East Kilbride News (it is a point of pride that, in 2004, she was made the rector of the University of Dundee, so her mum could finally have a picture of her in a gown up in the house). After moving to TV, Kelly reported on two major tragedies in 1988, the Piper Alpha oil explosion in the North Sea (“I really don’t know how anyone got out of that alive”) and the Lockerbie air disaster. “Weirdly, the thing I remember most was not the horror and the smell and the devastation – but everybody in town taking down their decorations. It was just before Christmas and when I saw people doing that it suddenly hit me. I went back to the place I was staying and just howled.” After Lockerbie, Kelly thought she would never have to do anything harder. “But Dunblane was the worst by a mile,” she says of the school massacre in 1996. “That hit really hard.” It is a mark of Kelly’s approachability that one of the bereaved mothers, Pam Ross, got in touch with her after the tragedy – not for TV, but to talk privately. Ross had lost her five-year-old daughter, Joanna, and invited Kelly to attend the funeral at her home. “I was there in the house. And Joanna was also in the house, upstairs, in her bed, in a little white coffin with her wee nightie on. And one thing I always remember is that her handprints were still on the window.” Kelly is still in touch with Ross; proper friends even after all these years. “She’s got a big birthday coming up!” she beams, before returning to the tragedy. “A lot of people think that after Dunblane there was an instant ban on guns. There wasn’t. The parents had a massive, massive fight on their hands and they were told by one Tory in particular that it was all a kneejerk reaction. And do you know who that was? Boris Johnson.” (“Nanny is confiscating their toys,” Johnson wrote in 1997. “It is like one of those vast Indian programmes of compulsory vasectomy.”) Kelly has seen it all during her time on the breakfast sofas. Daytime TV has been pioneering, she says proudly, because it talks about things a lot of other media ignores. “You couldn’t even say the word ‘cancer’ when I started. It was nuts! Now we have breast and testicle examinations on the show.” She proudly namechecks its Change + Check breast cancer campaign, which has helped save 53 women’s lives since it launched.With her trademark being down to earth, the tax ruling caused problems for her. She says she is happy to address this, “because I’ve never got my chance to put my side of the story across”. Despite all the media coverage around whether or not she was “performing” the role of Lorraine Kelly, the case rested on whether she was an employee of ITV or a freelancer, as Kelly and ITV believed she was. At one point, she was prepared to pay the outstanding fee, which was only a fraction of the total bill of £1.2m quoted in reports. But then, she says, the tax office started demanding interest on it. “So I thought: no, not having this. So we took them to a tribunal and it got thrown out. The judge said it wasn’t a borderline case and we shouldn’t have ever had the hassle. “I don’t want people to think I would do anything to get out of paying what I should be paying. That goes to the core of who I am and how I was brought up. I’m a firm believer in the NHS, a firm believer in better education and housing and looking after people who can’t help themselves. I was brought up in a very working-class background where you pay your dues.” So where did this notion of Kelly being an actor playing the Lorraine Kelly role come from? “Now that I can laugh at,” she says. “It was, sadly, a bit of a misinterpretation, but I knew what [the judge] meant. Obviously, it’s given people great hilarity and I can live with that.” Tax issues behind her, Kelly is looking ahead positively. Lockdowns attracted a bigger, younger audience to her show and Kelly says it has managed to hold on to a lot of those. Amid all this Tory drama, I wonder what she thinks about the opposition – and Keir Starmer in particular. “He seems a very decent man, but maybe needs a wee bit of a rocket up his bum?” she says. “Because there are times where there does seem to be an open goal and you’re like …” She grabs at her hair again and shouts: “Aaarrrrgghhh!” Lorraine is broadcast on ITV on weekdays from 9am and on ITV HubSchools are using “misleading and biased” information materials funded by the alcohol industry to educate pupils as young as nine about drinking, according to a study. Teachers in thousands of UK schools employ lesson plans, factsheets and films produced by bodies with close ties to the drinks trade even though they “portray alcohol as a normal consumer product to impressionable young minds”, the researchers found. The materials are intended to deter young people from underage drinking, but they are potentially harmful because they downplay the harms drink can cause and seek to “blame-shift” responsibility for problems from manufacturers on to young people, the researchers say. Academics from the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine analysed teaching materials about alcohol and its health impact put together for use in schools by three bodies: Drinkaware for Education, Smashed and Talk About Alcohol. “Alcohol industry-sponsored youth education programmes serve industry interests and promote moderate consumption while purportedly educating children about harms and influences of alcohol use,” concluded the authors, who included Dr May van Schalkwyk and Prof Mark Petticrew. “The ongoing exposure of children and young people to such conflicted and misleading materials needs urgent attention from policymakers, practitioners, teachers and parents, and resources dependent on industry support should cease being used in schools,” they added. The academics’ findings, which have been published in the medical journal PLOS ONE, are based on their analysis of materials produced by the three bodies – including worksheets, teachers’ guidance notes and PowerPoint presentations – between 2017 and 2019. They conclude: “All programmes promoted familiarisation and normalisation of alcohol as a ‘normal’ adult consumer product, which children must learn about and master how to use responsibly when older.” The materials also “employ selective presentation of harms, including misinformation about cancer.” Some misleadingly imply that only heavy or excessive drinking raises the risk of the disease, whereas research shows low levels of drinking also increases the risk of some types such as breast and mouth cancer, they say. Drinkaware for Education is an educational initiative run by the organisation Drinkaware, an industry-funded body that “aims to change the UK’s drinking habits for the better”. It produces a range of “curriculum-linked education resources aimed at teaching nine- to 14-year-olds about the harms and risks associated with alcohol” that are aimed at teachers. Smashed is a theatre-based educational programme that aims to educate school pupils about underage drinking and also supplies materials for teachers. Since 2005 it has been sponsored by Diageo, the drinks firm that makes Guinness, Smirnoff and other brands. Diageo’s website states that “Smashed Online will be made available to over 1 million students aged 12-14 across 5,500 schools in the UK”. Talk About Alcohol, which produced a teacher manual and lesson plans, is a programme run by the Alcohol Education Trust, a charity that says it “supports young people aged 11-25 in making more informed life choices through the 4,500 schools and youth organisations we support”. The Alcohol Education Trust’s donors include bodies funded by the alcohol industry, but also the national lottery and police and crime commissioners. Van Schalkwyk and Petticrew highlighted a slide in a PowerPoint presentation produced by Drinkaware for secondary schools containing the words “drinking alcohol makes you happy” beside an image of young people drinking wine as an example of “normalisation”. “The materials we analysed contribute to the alcohol industry narrative that it is people’s poor choices and a lack of control or responsibility as well as peer pressure that are to be understood as the problem, shifting blame on to individuals, in this case children and young people, and away from the inherent harmful nature of alcohol itself,” they said. Drinkaware has removed the materials analysed by the researchers from its website. A spokesperson said: “The materials included in this research are out of date and don’t reflect our current guidance. They should have been removed from our website and they now have been. We’re sorry this didn’t happen sooner.” Helena Conibear, the Alcohol Education Trust’s chief executive, accused the authors of “gross misrepresentation” and including “assertion”, “polemic” and selective quotation in their findings. “We hope our programme has played no small part in the very encouraging falls in underage drinking, drunkenness and hospital admissions over the last decade,” said Conibear. Research by University College London and the National Foundation for Education Research showed that Talk About Alcohol delays the age at which children start drinking, and it had won awards from Teach First and The King’s Fund, she added. A Diageo spokesperson said: “Since the Smashed project launched in the UK over 15 years ago, thousands of young people have explored the dangers and consequences of alcohol misuse through the programme, without reference to any specific kinds of alcohol or brands. Underage drinking has been falling in the UK over the last decade.” It stressed that studies had found that about four in five 16- to 24-year-olds in the UK either do not drink at all or stick to the chief medical officer’s guidelines on maximum consumption, and that the proportion of young people who are teetotal has risen to 23%.This should not be too hard, I thought, as long as I stay disciplined. All I have to do is read 27,000 comic books, then write about them. I had just signed a contract to write All of the Marvels, a book about reading every superhero story Marvel has published since 1961 as one single gigantic narrative. The Marvel story is omnipresent – its characters are everywhere, in movies, on television, even gracing shampoo bottles and bags of salad – yet also unknowable. It purports to be one big story: any episode can refer to, and be compatible with, any earlier one. But not even the people telling the story have read the whole thing. That’s not how it was meant to be experienced. I did not, however, read six decades of stories in order. That would have been unbearable – and it is one of the two mistakes Marvel-curious readers often make. It is a surefire route to boredom and frustration as the fun lies in following your whims. The other error is trying to cherrypick the greatest hits, the pivotal single issues. Taken in isolation, these are peaks without mountain ranges. Their dramatic power comes from their context. Instead, I would go grazing, looking at whatever seemed most fun that day: the plot-dense 1980s Spider-Woman, then the monstrously huge dragon Fin Fang Foom, followed by a bunch of 1970s romance comics that gave veteran cartoonists (who had been drafted into the superhero game) a chance to get back to their roots, specifically, drawing young women wearing very fashionable clothes and crying. I read the stories on couches, on the bus, on the treadmill. I read them as yellowing issues I had bought when they were first published, scored at garage sales as a kid or snagged from a discount bin at a convention as an adult. I read them in glossy, bashed paperbacks from the library and as gems borrowed from friends. I read a few from a stack of back issues somebody abandoned on the table next to mine as I sat working in a Starbucks. I read a hell of a lot on a digital tablet. I did not intend to read any at the Burning Man festival in the Nevada desert in the summer of 2019. The only comics I had brought with me were copies – to give away – of 1998’s X-Force #75 , in which the team attends the same event, transparently renamed the “Exploding Colossal Man” festival. But somebody had set up a memorial shrine for Stan Lee, Marvel’s longtime figurehead, and at its base there was a box labelled: “Read me.” It contained some battered but intact 50-year-old issues of The Amazing Spider-Man, Thor and Tales of Suspense. What was I going to do, not read them? And I had an absolutely great time. The best of Marvel’s comics, old and new, were as astonishing, thrilling and imaginative as popular entertainment gets. There was also plenty of sophomoric, retrograde stuff, rushed out to serve an audience of credulous kids or bloodthirsty nostalgics. I was often aware that I was gorging on something that had only been made for snacking, indulging the worst part of the collector’s impulse: the part that strives for completeness (just like the Beyonder in Secret Wars II!) rather than enjoyment. Fortunately, by the time I had by the time I’d waded in too far, a useful transformation had come over me. I realised that I was able to find something to enjoy in just about any issue: examples of a certain creator’s unique use of language or weird cultural references that could have appeared at no other moment. That may have been Stockholm syndrome, I admit. But when someone recently asked me if I had actually read every issue of NFL SuperPro, a mercifully short-lived series about a super-powered American football player, I said: “Of course! And #10 includes both a parody of the mythopoetic men’s movement of the early 1990s and a character whose power is literally to throw money at problems – coins come flying out of his hands.” The reading stage went on for longer than I thought it would. It turns out my brain can only handle so much gaudily coloured, hyper-violent soap opera in a single day. The high point may have been wrestling with the thoughtful, exquisitely drawn, yet problematic 1974-1983 title Master of Kung Fu, which introduced the character of Shang-Chi, who recently made it to the big screen. A taut, introspective espionage thriller whose antagonist is Fu Manchu, the series became, over time, both more impressive and – for its racist portrayals – more wince-inducing. Or it may have been rediscovering writer Chris Claremont’s legendary 16-year run on Uncanny X-Men, whose freaky inventiveness and compassion for its cast of mutants and outcasts made it the comics equivalent of David Bowie’s career. Then there was the joy of reading Ryan North and Erica Henderson’s disarmingly tender The Unbeatable Squirrel Girl series with my son. Its protagonist has the “proportional speed and strength of a squirrel”, but her real power is a knack for creative nonviolent conflict resolution, a rare quality in a superhero. The low point was definitely the week and a half I spent locking myself into a New York apartment, forcing myself to plough through 30 years of the blood-drenched adventures of my least favourite character, the Punisher, who has so far slaughtered upwards of 1,000 drug dealers, security guards and the like. (I counted.) I also developed a fascination with the extremely minor 1961 series Linda Carter, Student Nurse. It is not good, by any reasonable standard, but it is remarkable as an example of Marvel’s forgotten titles from the 60s about ordinary young women, and how their characters and tone were absorbed into the superhero line. Its protagonist turned up again a decade later, in the cast of the even shorter-lived Night Nurse, and again in the 2000s as a nurse who runs a secret medical clinic for injured superheroes. For a while, she also dated Doctor Strange, the Sorcerer Supreme, who lived in New York’s Greenwich Village and is due to appear on screens this year, in Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness. I saved myself a fine dessert: the last title I checked off my spreadsheet was Thunderbolts, the long-running, constantly mutating, gleefully perverse series about a team of supervillains masquerading as heroes, who do very good things for very bad reasons. As I had hoped, I gradually got a sense of the grand, accidental shape of the Marvel story and the way it reflected its times. Once you see Iron Man as a 60-year running commentary on the US’s military-industrial complex, you cannot unsee it – from the protesters picketing Tony Stark’s weapons plant in the 1970s to the drone technology he deploys in the 2000s. I noticed Black Panther’s curious history, how the gorgeous concept of Wakanda, his African home, evolved from dozens of writers and artists improvising on each other’s inventions over decades: from the Afro-technological utopia of that fictional nation’s first appearance in 1966, to the political intrigue added in the 1970s, and the regional factions that debuted in the late 1990s. The writing process also took longer than I had figured it would: turns out it is not easy to get a solid grip on a story more than half a million pages long. After finishing an initial version, I ended up scrapping it almost completely and starting over. What made everything eventually click was realising that I could be a tour guide for readers. The last stage of writing went painfully slowly, during the awful months when the pandemic overlapped with Donald Trump’s presidency. But my immersion in the Marvel story had become a useful lens, even in that moment. It became clear that Dark Reign, with its interlinked storylines that appeared in 2009, had been unnervingly prescient, both about what a totalitarian monster rising to power in the US might look like (in this case, the ultra-wealthy, mediagenic, murderously cruel Norman Osborn, AKA Spider-Man’s old archenemy the Green Goblin) and about what might bring him down (the reunion of a fractured coalition, here in the form of the Avengers, as well as some smart reportage). I refuse to claim that there is some kind of canon of essential issues that everyone can enjoy. There is no such thing. What I can do is offer pathways into the mountain of Marvel, and suggest perspectives from which that enormous story can offer the joy for which it was designed: a 1966 issue of Fantastic Four that shows the frantic inventiveness of Jack Kirby and Lee in their golden era; a decades-spanning cluster of Thor and Loki comics that provide an ingenious meditation on fiction, myth and lies; a set of Vietnam war-era issues that chart the evolution of Marvel’s relationship to politics. You want to know my favourite characters? I am not going to tell you, because it doesn’t matter. What I care about is giving you the tools to find your own. All of the Marvels by Douglas Wolk is published by Profile BooksIf the world of Call of Duty seems fraught enough when you are playing it, try being in it. That could be the consequence of Microsoft’s proposed $68.7bn (£50.4bn) acquisition of Activision Blizzard, the video games maker behind the shoot ’em up franchise. Announcing the deal, Satya Nadella, Microsoft’s chief executive, said that gaming would “play a key role in the development of metaverse platforms”. The metaverse is a catch-all term for an immersive experience that blends the physical and digital worlds through a mixture of virtual and augmented reality. This concept is years away from being fully realised, but it is envisaged that participants – using digital representations of themselves, or avatars – will access it through a virtual reality headset, or augmented reality (AR) glasses that put a digital layer over what they see in the real world. In the metaverse they can socialise with friends, carry out their job – or take part in a video game. John Egan, chief executive of market intelligence firm L’Atelier BNP Paribas, says that with the Activision deal Microsoft has made it “very clear” that gaming will be at the centre of how metaverse concepts work. And it is not just using the games, but also deploying the creative and technical talent behind them to build virtual worlds. “Imagine Call of Duty. You’d be dropped into a Battle Royale-like environment, on to a planet like the way Fortnite is now, though bigger by a factor of several thousand. You’ve got an entire planet, so your experience can go on for weeks at a time.” Egan adds that Call of Duty would work in what he calls a “digi-physical” environment, where AR comes in to play and the game is superimposed on participants’ glasses, or even contact lenses. “Microsoft could create virtual layers over existing urban infrastructure, within which people can use mixed reality lenses, like glasses or contact lenses, to interact with each other. So imagine something like a skateboard park that becomes a Call of Duty arena. And people use their phones as a gun, and they’ve got their glassware on as the mixed reality infrastructure to do that interaction.” Of course, not every metaverse world will be like Call of Duty – and not everyone would want to go anywhere near it. Egan says Activision games such as Crash Bandicoot, featuring the antics of an anthropomorphic marsupial, offer a more family-friendly alternative. Analysts have also pointed to the fact that Activision will immediately bolster Microsoft’s gaming business – it owns the Xbox platform and the Minecraft and Halo franchises – regardless of its metaverse plans. The Bill Gates-founded company will gain access to 390 million monthly users, adding to its Game Pass subscription service, which already has 25 million users. Dan Ives, a managing director at the US investment firm Wedbush Securities, describes Microsoft’s metaverse vision for the deal as “the cherry on top of the sundae”. “We believe for Microsoft this was the right deal at the right time to boost its gaming strategy and streaming ambitions. Nadella recognised Microsoft’s consumer business needed a shot in the arm,” he says. The agreed deal would also need to get past US regulators, who served notice on Tuesday that the tech industry would face a tougher regime. Lina Khan, chair of the Federal Trade Commission, the US competition watchdog, and Jonathan Kanter, head of antitrust at the department of justice, announced a review of merger guidelines – with tech among their areas of concern. Kanter said: “We need to understand why so many industries have too few competitors.” It could be argued that this is a “vertical” deal between two businesses that do not compete directly: Microsoft’s Xbox platform and Activision’s games. But regulators are likely to look at whether Microsoft could shut off Activision titles from rival platforms such as PlayStation. Microsoft said on Tuesday it did not intend to “pull communities away” from PlayStation. Rebecca Allensworth, professor of law at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee, says Khan and Kanter’s review signals a toughening of the environment for tech. “Generally, there is a lot of muscle right now behind antitrust enforcement in tech,” she says. “Changing the merger guidelines to be harsher against tech mergers is a part of that. The comments on Tuesday highlighted the idea that the guidelines need to be able to recognise competitive harm from mergers that are vertical or mixed vertical. That’s the merger between Activision and Microsoft.” Nonetheless, she says that it is “still very hard to challenge vertical mergers” and the deal may go through. However, L’Atelier’s Egan added that even if the deal got past the FTC and justice department, there was also the question of integration. On Monday Activision said it had fired or pushed out more than three dozen employees and disciplined another 40 since July, to address allegations of sexual harassment and other misconduct at the company, which has nearly 10,000 employees to Microsoft’s 190,000. “Microsoft has an extraordinarily high level of employee satisfaction,” says Egan. “It’s a really good company. You wonder if one of the biggest threats of this is Microsoft kind of letting the wolf in the door. How are Microsoft going to assimilate an organisation with a culture that is beset by issues to do with misogyny, diversity and harassment over the last number of years which they have failed utterly to remedy? How are Microsoft going to resolve that?” Should the deal go through, Microsoft will have real-world concerns too.Christian Wakeford said he was elected as a centrist and remains a centrist after his defection to the Labour party, amid calls in his Bury South constituency for a byelection. Wakeford, who supported a backbench bill in 2020 that called for any MP who switches parties to face a recall petition, said it’s “quite clear” his former party would lose the seat at a byelection. “I think it was quite clear that even the prime minister wasn’t calling for a byelection today, and I think it’s been quite clear that they know they’d lose”, he told broadcasters. However, in Prestwich town centre, voters from across the political spectrum would like to see that belief tested at the polls, a view also endorsed by Jamie Driscoll, Labour’s mayor in the North of Tyne. In a letter to Boris Johnson released on Wednesday afternoon, Wakeford said he believed “the policies of the Conservative government that you lead are doing nothing to help the people of my constituency and indeed are only making the struggles they face on a daily basis worse”. Sham Raja, chair of North Manchester’s Conservative Association, said he had been watching PMQs when Wakeford crossed the floor to sit with Keir Starmer’s party. The MP, elected in 2019, made his shock announcement just minutes before. Raja found the defection “completely disgraceful”, calling for a byelection to see if Wakeford would still win under a “Labour banner”. “We won several seats in Greater Manchester because of Boris Johnson, because of Brexit and because of the Conservative party, and they should be grateful.” Pamela McArdle, 73, who has voted Conservative for decades but had not had a local Tory MP since 1997, said she was “cross” with Wakeford, who said that the prime minister “is running out of road and he is running out of brass neck to hide behind”. “Boris Johnson is one person,” McArdle added. “You don’t walk away because you disagree with them.” Rachel Hopkins, who normally supports Labour, echoed calls for a byelection. “It would be a better outcome than somebody changing colours in such an extreme way. If he was going to the Lib Dems, it would be a bit more credible, but going from Tory to Labour feels a bit ridiculous. I don’t really buy it”. Molly Griffiths, a 29-year-old staff nurse, welcomed the news as she enjoyed a pint in the sun. “I’m very Labour, so it’s good news. But it’s not a good look in the way that one day he wanted the vote of no confidence for Conservatives and then the next he changed to Labour. Is he still going to hold the same Conservative views?” Wakeford referenced issues such as free school meals, cuts to universal credit and the cost-of-living crisis, as well as scandals related Dominic Cummings and Owen Paterson, that had led to his decision. The MP, who worked in the insurance industry and as a local councillor before his election, said the decision had taken “a lot of soul searching” after “many sleepless nights”. “This is something that has taken many months to come to and it’s not been an easy decision, if anything it’s been the most difficult decision I have ever had to make. But I do think it’s the right decision for me, I think it’s the right decision for Bury South.” Claire Richards, 35, who said Wakeford had helped her with a problem, agreed it was a good move for the area. “I’d vote for him whatever. He seemed a good guy”. Although greeted with cheers from the Labour benches in Westminster, and a “warm welcome” from Greater Manchester mayor Andy Burnham, a local Labour party source said the news had not “gone down well with local members. None of them voted for him to be the MP, so it will be hard to now embrace him as one of our own. This might be positive news nationally but locally it is not going to end well.” “He was worried about his P45, wasn’t he?”, said Lol Grant, 51, in reference to Wakeford’s wafer-thin majority of 402 votes. Grant, who works with children with special educational needs, was particularly aggrieved after Wakeford voted against placing a legal duty on water companies not to pump sewage into rivers. “Now he’s behaving like that shit that he voted to allow flow in our pipes and he’s flowing out from one side of the chamber to the other.”Back in 1856, the American naturalist Henry David Thoreau remarked of snowflakes: “How full of the creative genius is the air in which these are generated! I should hardly admire more if real stars fell and lodged on my coat.” The six-sided snowflakes described by Thoreau are one of the many shapes that snowflakes can take on, and now a citizen science project called Snowflake ID is using people’s powers of observation to help train a specially designed camera to classify the different types of snowflake that fall. The aim of the project, run by Tim Garrett and his colleagues at the University of Utah, is not just to catalogue snowflakes, but to use this information to improve weather forecasts. For example, if forecasters know that clouds are amassing small hail-like pellets called graupel, then they can expect a faster accumulation of snow on the ground than if fluffy clusters of traditional snowflakes are gathering. Such information helps to inform decisions about which roads need to be cleared, or where the avalanche risk is high. Meanwhile, studying the shape, size and density of snowflakes falling to the ground provides information about the type of cloud cover above, enabling scientists to monitor our changing climate.Scott Morrison has abandoned a proposal to allow children to drive forklifts after it was rejected by states and territories and criticised as a dangerous “brain fart” by unions. As reported by Guardian Australia, the prime minister took the idea to Thursday’s national cabinet meeting with state and territory leaders, as part of a package of measures to tackle staff shortages caused by the Omicron wave crippling supply chains. But the plan was unanimously rejected by the states and territories, the ACT chief minister, Andrew Barr, said in a statement. Morrison said on Wednesday that “there are changes that we need to make around the age of forklift drivers, to get quite specific,” to help reduce regulations and increase labour supply. On Thursday, Morrison said that national cabinet had “agreed to proceed no further with the issue of 16-year-old forklift drivers”. “We had a good discussion about that today and it is not something we believe, collectively … we should be pursuing at this time,” he said. States appear to have been blindsided by the proposal, with a spokesperson for Queensland’s minister for industrial relations, Grace Grace, revealing Morrison had not raised it with either the minister or the department. Staff in the office of Victoria’s minister for workplace safety, Ingrid Stitt, were also unable to find evidence of communications from the commonwealth on the issue. Due to the dangers of operating a forklift, in Victoria, NSW and Queensland driving one requires a special “high risk work” licence only available to people 18 and over. Spokespeople for Grace, Stitt and NSW’s minister responsible for workplace safety, Eleni Petinos, told Guardian Australia they had no plans to allow minors to drive forklifts. “Forklifts can be extremely dangerous machines to operate and we have no plans to lower the age at which a high risk work licence can be obtained,” Stitt’s spokesperson said. “We take workplace safety seriously and understand that large technical machinery requires highly skilled operators with specialist knowledge and training to operate.” In Victoria alone, since 2019 eight people have been killed at work in incidents involving forklifts and state regulator WorkSafe has accepted 419 claims for injuries caused by the machines. The assistant secretary of the Queensland branch of the CFMEU, Jade Ingham, said the backflip on forklifts came after Morrison had failed on vaccines, rapid antigen tests and support for vulnerable workers. Ingham accused Morrison of wanting to use “child labour to fill the gaps on the frontline”. “What next? A return to children leading pit ponies into coalmines and sweeping chimneys?” he said. “If ever there was any doubt that the Morrison Liberals view workers as nothing more than an expendable commodity to be used and discarded, this desperate brain fart should make clear their utter contempt for workers’ health and safety.” Godfrey Moase, an executive director at the United Workers Union, said the age limit should not be lowered because forklifts were dangerous machines that needed to be treated with respect. He said in his career as an organiser he had been involved with the aftermath of two forklift fatalities. Morrison’s proposal “reflects an idea that workers should be kind of seen and not heard” and that “we need to lower protections,” he said. “[But] it’s those health and safety [laws] that have got us through and will get us through if we start treating people with proper respect and dignity in the workplace.” Federal Labor’s industrial relations spokesperson, Tony Burke, described the idea as a “ridiculous proposal” and a “dangerous thought bubble from a desperate prime minister who has run out of ideas”. He said warehouse and distribution workers who had put in long hours and worked in insecure conditions were “heroes of this pandemic”. “They should be rewarded with secure jobs, not dangerous workplaces,” Burke said. Online, the proposal was met with both horror and hilarity. Tim Lyons, a former union official who conducted a review for the Queensland government that resulted in it introducing industrial manslaughter laws in 2017, said that “letting kids whizz around on forklifts is insane”. “They are not dodgem cars,” he said in a Twitter post. “The kids are very likely to kill or injure themselves or someone else.” Shirley Jackson, of left-of-centre thinktank Per Capita, said he was “baffled” by the announcement. Satirists and cartoonists complained that the announcement rendered their crafts superfluous, with satirical website the Chaser choosing to reprint Guardian Australia’s original post on the idea rather than attempt a joke. However, others found that jokes were possible. The Australian of the year, Grace Tame, compared the concept to online word-guessing game Wordle.The story of a Tongan man washed away by the tsunami and who drifted and swam between islands for more than 24 hours has become one of the first to emerge from the island nation, five days after the disaster cut off communications between it and the rest of the world. Lisala Folau, a retired disabled carpenter, told Tongan radio station Broadcom FM that he swam and floated from his island of Atata via two other uninhabited islands to eventually reach the main island of Tongatapu, a total distance of around 13 kilometres. A transcript of his Thursday interview was translated and shared by a senior editor at the radio station, George Lavaka, on Facebook. Folau said he had been painting his home on Saturday when he was alerted about the tsunami. “My elder brother and a nephew came to my assistance, this time the wave has gone through our lounge, we moved to another part of the house when a bigger wave, this wave I would estimate was about not less than six metres, [arrived].” “Bear in mind that I am disabled. I can’t walk properly … and when I can, I believe a baby can walk faster than I,” he added. “We hid to the eastern side of the house, the waves were coming from the west so we escaped that wave.” He said they climbed a tree with his niece while his brother ran to seek help. When there was a lull in the waves, they climbed down but just then a larger wave hit. “When the wave break on land just below us, my niece Elisiva and I had nothing to hold onto and we were swept out to sea. This was 7pm,” Folau said. “We floated at sea, just calling out to each other. It was dark and we could not see each other. Very soon I could not hear my niece calling anymore but I could hear my son calling.” Folau said that in that moment, he decided not to answer his son, for fear that he would risk his life to save him. “The truth is no son can abandon his father. But for me, as a father I kept my silence for if I answered him he would jump in and try to rescue me. But I understand the tough situation and I thought if the worst comes and it is only me.” Folau said he figured that if he clung to a tree trunk, his family would at least be able to find his body if he died. “I floated and was grounded to the east of the island of Toketoke.” Folau said at one point on Sunday morning he saw a police patrol boat heading to Atata island. “I grabbed a rag and waved but the boat did not see me. It then was returning to Tonga and I waved again but perhaps they did not see me.” He then tried to get to the island of Polo’a, setting off at about 10am and landing at around 6pm on Sunday. “I called and yelled for help but there was no one there. My mind was now on my niece that we were washed away together and now I have survived.” Folau said he then focused on his next move. “I was now strong-minded that I could make it to mui’i Sopu.” Sopu is on the western edge of the capital Nuku’alofa, on the main island of Tongatapu. “I was thinking about my sister at Hofoa who is suffering with diabetes and my youngest daughter [who] has heart problems. All this was racing through my mind.” At around 9pm, Folau said he staggered towards a house in Sopu, eventually arriving at the end of a tar sealed public road and was picked up by a passing vehicle and taken to the driver’s home. The Guardian has not been able to establish what happened to Folau’s son and the niece he was with in Atata. However only three people have been confirmed to have died following the tsunami, none from Atata. Another son, Talivakaola Folau, took to Facebook to express his gratitude: “A story I’ll never forget in my life … While talking with family in Tonga my tears continued to fall when I think of my Dad swimming around in the ocean after the tsunami hit … My heart is broken imagining you drinking in the seawater Dad, but you’re a strong-willed man.” The story has gone viral on social media since it was first shared by Tongan journalist Marian Kupu. According to Erika Radewagen, an Olympic level swimming official from the Pacific, Folau’s survival story is impressive. “It is absolutely amazing, given that he was fleeing a catastrophic event, to be under that kind of pressure, mentally and with additional physical pressure of fleeing in the dark.” “Even very experienced swimmers have physical boundaries and set parameters, but it takes a different mindset to take do what he did. It’s not like he fell off a boat, he was escaping an erupting volcano, swept away by tsunami. There are more physical obstacles, such as ash, debris, waves and other factors that would have made his swim a lot more challenging.”Surfing great Kelly Slater could be the next big name in sport to be refused the right to compete in Australia, with the federal health minister saying the 11-time champion will not be allowed into the country if he is not vaccinated against Covid. Slater, who has not publicly disclosed his Covid vaccination status, has aired some controversial views on the Covid vaccine, including an Instagram comment in October that claimed he knew “more about being healthy than 99% of doctors”. The American tour veteran, who has no medical qualifications, has previously said he is not anti-vaccine but opposed to making vaccination mandatory. Slater has also been critical of the visa process that ended with the recent deportation of tennis world No 1 Novak Djokovic. The best surfers in the world are scheduled to arrive in Australia for back-to-back World Surf League events at Victoria’s Bells Beach and Western Australia’s Margaret River in March and April this year. “I think we’ve been pretty clear with the Novak Djokovic case of no vax, no play,” the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, told Australian broadcaster Channel 9. “It’s a pretty simple message, doesn’t matter what sport, we’re even-handed. I hope he [Slater] gets vaccinated and I hope he competes.” The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said he hoped there would be no repeat of the saga that overshadowed the build-up to the Australian Open and left Djokovic unable to defend his title at Melbourne Park. “It’s important there is clarity from the commonwealth government about who gets in and who doesn’t,” Andrews said on Thursday. “That is a good thing. Least you don’t have a soap opera, drama, that wastes everybody’s time. Tennis is bigger than any one person [Djokovic] and we’re seeing that ... whether it’s at any of the venues down at Melbourne Park.” Andrews said it was unlikely the state government would open discussions with the World Surf League over possible exemptions for unvaccinated athletes following the Djokovic debacle. “That’s kind of a moot point because the commonwealth government have been very clear,” Andrews said. “Clearer now than they have been for a while, which is good.” On Wednesday, the federal sports minister, Richard Colbeck, said there was “no chance of getting into the country” for Slater if he was unvaccinated. “I reckon he knows the rules,” Colbeck told Nine newspapers. “It doesn’t matter whether you’re a surfer, or a tennis player, a tourist or anyone else, those are the rules. They apply to everyone. “I don’t like the chances of him competing in Victoria and I’d hate to think of what the chances were of him competing in Western Australia.”Andy Warhol’s America 9pm, BBC Two The third and final instalment of this stylish, well-contextualised and thoroughly detailed look at the influential artist’s life focuses on death – or rather Warhol’s obsession with it and the huge theme it became in his later work, especially after he was shot and also his mother died. If culture vultures missed the previous episodes, it’s well worth catching up with them on iPlayer. Hollie Richardson Dragons’ Den 8pm, BBC One Have you ever wondered if Peter Jones would be any good at narrating erotic audiobooks? There is the rare chance to find out tonight as the veteran Dragon assesses a range of vegan leather handbags that include a saucy twist. Elsewhere, the fiery five size up pitches including a hard-partying summer camp concept, and a new home delivery app. Graeme Virtue The Dog House 8pm, Channel 4 In the matchmaking doghouse tonight: chihuahuas Bear and Dave try to impress seven-year-old Ollie (who would prefer a husky), while shy jack russell Roxy takes on stubborn beagle Dexter – which one will go home with 85-year-old Pim? HR Bangers and Cash 8pm, Yesterday A new series of wheeler-dealing with the Yorkshire classic car traders, and Derek Mathewson is rubbing shoulders with minor pop royalty, picking up a Morgan Plus 8 belonging to 60s heartthrob Joe Brown. Even more excitingly, he is buying a roadster once owned by the drummer from Motörhead. Plenty of miles on the clock, you’d imagine. Phil Harrison Screw 9pm, Channel 4 Three episodes into this prison-based supposed comedy-drama, it’s probably time to accept that there are few laughs amid the tense music, angsty prison officers and plots that deal with radicalisation, gun smuggling and child death. Luckily, there’s more than enough gripping, moody and occasionally inspirational drama to make up for it. Alexi Duggins And Just Like That … 9pm, Sky Comedy It is often hard to root for Carrie when she complains about things such as her downtown penthouse getting so much natural light that it’s “like the sun” – but we fans remain addicted to the Sex and the City spin-off. Tonight’s episode sees Miranda having a serious think about her future with Steve. Meanwhile, Carrie is doing her best to prove to her young neighbour that she’s still “cool”. HR Live sport EFL Cup Football: Arsenal v Liverpool 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The semi-final second-leg match from the Emirates Stadium.Top story: Byelection rumblings after Tory MP defects Hello, Warren Murray with you in the name of good morning here is the news. Boris Johnson has faced a defection by a junior MP and a demand to quit from one of the most senior Tories during a dramatic day in Westminster, with even allies of the prime minister warning the current situation cannot go on. David Davis caused shockwaves when he told Johnson in the Commons: “In the name of God, go.” Tory MPs have estimated that as many as 30 letters may have been submitted of the 54 required to bring about a confidence vote, with more expected to come in after Sue Gray, a senior civil servant, delivers her finding on alleged rule-breaking in Downing Street next week. In Bury South, some constituents want a byelection after Christian Wakeford defected from the Conservatives to Labour because of partygate. In a letter to Johnson, Wakeford said he believed “the policies of the Conservative government that you lead are doing nothing to help the people of my constituency and indeed are only making the struggles they face on a daily basis worse”. * * * ‘What are Republicans for?’ – Joe Biden has spoken of a “winter of peril and possibility” and blasted US Republicans for “a stalwart effort to make sure that the most important thing was that President Biden didn’t get anything done”. In only his second solo White House press conference – lasting nearly two hours – Biden said: “One thing I haven’t been able to do so far is get my Republican friends to get in the game at making things better in this country … What are Republicans for, what are they for? Name me one thing they’re for.” Referring to the leader of the Republicans’ obstructionist Senate minority, the president insisted: “I actually like Mitch McConnell. We like one another. But he has one straightforward objective: make sure that there’s nothing I do that makes me look good, in his mind, with the public at large … I think that the fundamental question is, ‘What’s Mitch for?’” Biden suggested his biggest mistake had been underestimating the radicalisation of the Republican party under Donald Trump. He told the story of five Republican senators who privately told him they agreed with him but told him “Joe, if I do it, I’ll get defeated in a primary.” * * * Student watchdog to police course value – More than 60,000 full-time students in England are doing degrees at institutions that could be punished for low quality and poor value for money. The Office for Students (OfS) has said 80% of students should continue past their first year and 75% complete their degree if universities and colleges want to avoid being sanctioned. Under proposed rules, institutions could also be investigated and penalised by the OfS if fewer than 60% of their graduates go on to work in what it classifies as skilled employment. There are another 150,000 part-time undergraduates at institutions that may not meet its requirements, says the OfS. The rules are being put out for consultation. * * * Alcohol lessons funded by alcohol – Schools are using “misleading and biased” information funded by the alcohol industry to teach pupils as young as nine about drinking, according to a study by the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine. Academics said the materials “portray alcohol as a normal consumer product to impressionable young minds”. They analysed materials put together by Drinkaware for Education, Smashed, and Talk About Alcohol. Teachers in thousands of UK schools employ their lesson plans, factsheets and films. Drinkaware has removed the materials concerned from its website, saying it was out of date. The Alcohol Education Trust and Diageo, which sponsors Smashed, defended their programmes and said underage drinking in the UK was falling. * * * GM crops ‘have not delivered much’ – Research into the gene editing of plants in the UK will become easier under new rules brought forward by the government. Ministers have repeatedly voiced support for genetic modification as an aid to modernising farming and reducing its environmental impact. Campaigners have expressed concern: Pat Thomas, the director of Beyond GM, said “farmers don’t really want to grow genetically engineered crops and citizens don’t want to eat them … After 35 years of use, genetically engineered crops have not delivered much in terms of real value and they have largely been a distraction from more meaningful discussions about what kind of food system we want and need to transition to.” But Prof Nick Talbot from the Sainsbury Laboratory in Norwich said it would “produce nutritious crops requiring much lower fertiliser inputs and with greater resilience”. * * * ‘I’ve read every Marvel comic’ – Did Dark Reign foresee Trump? Was Iron Man about US military might? Who was Unbeatable Squirrel Girl – and was her superpower really non-violent conflict resolution? Only one man knows … Douglas Wolk who has read all 27,000 Marvel comics. Here is what he learned. Today in Focus podcast: The Chinese agent in Westminster Britain’s security services have named Christine Lee as an agent of the Chinese state attempting to run influence operations in parliament. Dan Sabbagh explains what is behind the extraordinary statement and what it means for British politics. Lunchtime read: ‘Let them talk, then in for the kill!’ Lorraine Kelly has been a cheery face on daytime TV for nearly 40 years – all the while tackling big issues and making evasive guests squirm. She discusses going viral, covering tragedies and fighting the taxman. Sport Australian Open wildcard Andy Murray is due out on court at the as we speak, with Emma Raducanu up later – follow the buildup and the action at our live blog. Meanwhile there have been raised eyebrows at the revelation that at the same time as taking an anti-vaccination stance, Novak Djokovic holds an 80% share in a Danish biotech firm developing a non-vaccine treatment for Covid-19. Manchester United rode their luck in the first half, but were ruthless in the second to continue their push for the top four, beating their hosts Brentford three goals to one, while it was Leicester 2-3 Spurs at the King Power Stadium. The Women’s Ashes are getting under way in Hobart against a backdrop of off-field issues for both England and Australia. More than two-thirds of male football fans harbour hostile, sexist or misogynistic attitudes towards women’s sport, a study led by Durham University claims. Progressive opinions among men were strongly represented but not as common as hostility and sexism. The study was set in the context of increased visibility of women’s sport in recent years. Business Asian stock markets have been on the rise after China cut interest rates to shore up flagging economic growth and Japan reported a double-digit rise in exports. Benchmarks in Shanghai, Tokyo, Hong Kong and Seoul advanced. Wednesday on Wall Street saw the S&amp;P 500 index fall 1%. The FTSE is trending about 30 points higher in futures trading ahead of the open. A pound is bringing $1.362 and €1.200 at time of writing. The papers Boris Johnson’s tenuous situation warrants another separate round-up of today’s front pages, which we summarise as follows. The Guardian splashes with “‘In the name of God, go’: Tory anger builds as Boris Johnson clings on”. The Mirror too goes with the Davis quote. Johnson “hanging by a thread”, it writes, above the headline “In the name of God, go”. And the Metro’s take is “In the name of God GO!” squeezed between pictures of Davis and Johnson. The Mail splashes with “Boris and Carrie’s baby hit by Covid”, reporting that six-week-old Romy was badly ill but is now on the mend. Above that a story dismisses the “narcissistic rabble of Tory MPs” trying to topple the PM – and tells Davis “In the name of God, grow up!”. The Express follows a similar sentiment with its lead: “In the name of party unity, go … and back the PM!” The Times has “PM fights on as plotters pull back from the brink” – it says the prime minister has been granted a reprieve by MPs plotting to oust him as concern builds that the Gray inquiry will be more critical of the prime minister than expected. The Telegraph leads with Johnson’s defiance, “Johnson: I won’t quit if rebels force vote”. The Sun plays with the theme of the so-called pork pie plotters, “As our Bojo pork pie chart shows ...” it writes, underneath the headline “Battling PM crust ahead” and a shot of a pie sliced up according to the pressing issues of the day. The FT splashes with “Johnson buys time after defection to Labour rallies restive Tory MPs”. The i paper has a similar feel with “Johnson clings on to power … for now”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendSherrill Roland could not touch his daughter until she was nearly a year old. He had spent 10 months in prison for a crime he did not commit. “It was the first time I finally got out again and got to choose which clothes I actually put on and the first time I got to hold her,” he recalls by phone. “She gave me a big smile and I was just in awe.” Roland, 37, a Black artist from Asheville, North Carolina, was exonerated in 2015. He has dug deep into his experience of wrongful incarceration for Hindsight Bias, an exhibition running at the Tanya Bonakdar Gallery in New York until 5 February. The show only uses materials that were available to Roland while in prison and draws on his archive of letters, books and commissary lists (of items that inmates are permitted to purchase) for inspiration. From the ceiling at the gallery entrance, for example, the artist has hung four sculptures made of clear acrylic, shaped like big envelopes and etched with language that was stamped on mail he sent by the department of corrections in Washington. In the main gallery space, two 8ft by 8ft acrylic cubes recall a basketball tournament that Roland helped organise within his housing unit in conjunction with March Madness. In the rear gallery, five lightbox sculptures bear abstracted text from letters that Roland wrote to the mother of his daughter while incarcerated. But what the exhibition does not reveal is the crime of which Roland was accused. He prefers to maintain silence on the topic, refusing to breathe new life into the false charge. “It ends up bringing in too much of the other side,” he explains. “I know it may sound weird but anything that I have moving forward with my life, with my narrative, I’m trying to have as much control over that as possible. “A lot of folks who are more famous exonerees than myself, who have done more time inside than I’ve been alive, oftentimes their narratives are led with the false accusation. That’s kind of hard to get in front of when you were innocent the entire time. So for me to have control over it, I’m just not saying that in that way. It’s me in my innocence, if that makes sense. “But when I do talks and stuff like that, I try to walk down many different ways it could be or it could have gone on, so I say it’s like armed robbery or rape or something like that. We can use it as an avatar of thinking of the many prejudices that come associated with any charge.” What is known is that, in August 2012, Roland was in his first year of grad school at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro when he received notification on his phone from a detective in Washington that a warrant was out for his arrest. The alleged offence had taken place in the capital. Roland spent about nine anxious months awaiting an indictment but it never came. “I thought at that moment: finally, it’s over,” he recalls. “It wasn’t. They had opportunity to lower the felonies to misdemeanours and then they took me to a bench trial.” The bench trial has no jury, only a judge, and Roland lost the case. His life was turned upside down: from art school to prison. He was sentenced to a year and 30 days at the Central Detention Facility in Washington. With time knocked off for good behaviour and for obtaining a job inside, he eventually served 10 months and two weeks. He describes it as a dehumanising experience. “Start with the stripping of one’s identity once incarcerated. My name has less weight than my inmate number and so it’s easy to tell me no or to drop my belongings on the floor because I’m only allowed to have a certain amount of belongings anyways. “It’s easy to tell me to go back to a room or to not speak or do something because my privileges consist of just being around another person. The gravity of that is you’re going to isolation. No getting out of this seven-by-nine cell or anything like that. So these small things become large things: to humble yourself to ask for additional toilet paper or toothbrushes that stretch no longer than your thumb.” Roland continues: “Out here in the world, I can wear whatever shoes I want or dress up the outfit. We can dress blue one day. We can dress in all black or we can be full of colour. But in there, everybody is wearing the exact same thing. You are who you are and there’s no hiding who you are. There’s no dressing it up, there’s no faking it. “For me personally, it was just the pain of why I was even there in the first place. Me being lost in that space was tough because that reality was very in your face every morning, every night. It was 23 hours lock-ins, one hour out, so I had a lot of time in my head, in my cell with the person I just met.” He was forced to miss both his grandmothers’ funerals as well as the birth of his first child, Soraya, whom he would not meet in person until his release. Did his family and friends doubt his innocence? “Everybody that loves and cares for me definitely had my back and trusted in me and knowing who I am. But a lot of the assumptions were like TV: ‘How do you not know? Were you there? Did they mistake you for somebody else?’ We went through the easy ones but everything isn’t like TV and I had absolutely no answers. With those no answers came breeding doubt. “How much doubt I don’t know. But the most hurtful thing was, ‘I knew that you questioned it, though. I don’t know how much you question if I did it or not, but I do see you wrestling with questioning, and that’s the hurtful part because I can’t do anything else but tell you I didn’t do it. I can’t produce anything.’ It was a crazy, crazy situation but the situation had absolutely nothing to do with me.” Roland would eventually quash all doubts and be proved innocent. He secured a retrial six months after his release. He won it in April 2015. He then won an exoneration trial that December. The ordeal was at last over. Since then, he has tried to process what happened through performance art such as The Jumpsuit Project, in which he wears an orange prison jumpsuit and engages people in conversations about prejudice and stigma around incarceration. He says: “Opportunity sounds like a bad word, but I was granted access to a place where obviously we don’t get permission to go. I’ve had family members and friends who were incarcerated before and then when I came home I didn’t need to apologise but in a way I felt like, ‘Oh man, I had absolutely no idea.’ “I wish I could have visited them more or maybe I should have wrote you a letter more. I didn’t know what it was like until I got on that other side of the wall and mostly that’s what’s communicated through the work: trying to bring people’s eyes a little closer to these small moments that might not seem like a lot, but they are heavy on that inside.” The limits of the coronavirus pandemic encouraged Roland to hunker down and make physical objects, leading to Hindsight Bias. “I still only use the same materials I had access to while I was incarcerated. That’s my toolbox. But with this work in this space, it’s like looking in a mirror of some of these experiences. There’s some work that is very personal in it and I’m happy to finally get to a place where I can express it.” From his unique vantage point, Roland hopes to stimulate much-needed debate about reform of America’s broken criminal justice system. “A lot of the individuals I was incarcerated with, it wasn’t necessarily a conversation about innocence. It’s about fairness and justice and so, even though some individuals I was in there with may admit to making a mistake, they were being leveraged to taking more time and being abused by the system. “With my time on probation, I constantly had to drug test and do all these things when I got out. I wasn’t able to leave the city limits, even though I never have lived there. The bar was set so high. I can’t even imagine somebody who didn’t have my friends and family and that type of support, how you could manage simple probation things. You’d be right back in there.” Despite everything, Roland says he now feels very lucky to be an exoneree and have survived. “There’s a lot of people who still are incarcerated who do not get this chance. A lot of these things we won’t know go on inside that space until someone says it, so I do have a responsibility to speak about it because I was there and now I’m out.” Hindsight Bias is on show at the Tanya Bonakdar Gallery in New York until 5 FebruaryDoctors at a Nepal hospital trialling a new treatment for skin wounds say the technique, which mimics the scabbing process, has “enormous potential”. Trials at the mountaintop Anandaban leprosy hospital, south of Kathmandu, have been promising, bringing hope to patients worldwide. It is hoped that the treatment will also help millions living with diabetes, who have an increased risk of amputation. Led by Birmingham university and funded by the National Institute for Health Research, a year-long randomised trial involving 130 adults has started to measure healing rates of leprosy ulcers. Prof Richard Lilford from Birmingham university, who is the project lead, said the intervention was similar to a scab forming to cover a wound on a child’s knee. “You might remember as a child grazing your knee and a scab forming. When the scab came off a few days later – bingo! The skin underneath had miraculously healed,” he said. “Maybe substances in the scab were promoting healing. We plan to test this idea in people affected by leprosy ulcers. Using the patient’s blood, my colleagues at Anandanban hospital in Kathmandu make a kind of artificial scab which is used to dress the ulcer. This has been widely used but never properly evaluated.” The patient’s own blood cells have been used to make a membrane in gel strips known as L-PRF that mimics the body’s natural healing processes. Leprosy is a chronic infectious disease caused by a bacterium and Nepal has 3,200 new diagnoses every year. Despite positive changes in attitudes in Nepal, leprosy, a curable disease, still has much stigma and mythology attached, with thousands of cases remaining undiagnosed. “The prevalence rate of leprosy [in Nepal] is rising, though this may be due to improved reporting and active case finding,” says the trial’s research protocol. “While leprosy is curable with multi-drug therapy, Nepalese people may hide early symptoms due to stigma based on cultural perceptions that leprosy is a punishment for former life transgressions. Thus, there are often delays in presentation of leprosy, which can lead to the development of complex ulcers requiring long hospital stays.” Indra Napit, a senior surgeon at the Leprosy Mission’s Anandaban hospital, said with the new treatment he has been seeing faster healing times. “If left untreated, leprosy causes nerve damage. As a result, people affected by leprosy have frequent hospital stays to cure ulcers, which can take many months or even years to heal,” he said. “But with L-PRF even the most severe ulcers could heal far quicker. This can prevent disability and even amputation. L-PRF can be life-changing for leprosy patients, as it means they can return to their families and jobs, if they are blessed to have them. “For us at Anandaban, there are so many benefits all round. Faster healing frees up hospital beds so we can treat more people.”United Australia party leader Craig Kelly has used a parliamentary inquiry on social media and online safety to take Google and Facebook to task over the removal of his party’s videos from YouTube and his ban from Facebook for pushing unproven treatments for Covid-19. United Australia Party has spent close to $5m advertising its videos on YouTube since Kelly became leader of the party in August, accounting for about 98% of all political ad spend on YouTube in Australia during that time. YouTube has not banned the account or ceased taking money from the party, but it has removed a number of the party’s videos for allegedly violating its community guidelines. Kelly was also banned from Facebook and Instagram last year for posts promoting unproven Covid-19 treatments such as ivermectin and hydroxychloroquine. In a parliamentary committee hearing on Thursday, the member for Hughes questioned Google, Facebook and TikTok mainly using examples of each of these services taking action against content he or his party had posted. He questioned why a speech he had given in parliament was removed from YouTube, and he had “countless examples” where content had been removed. Google’s director of government affairs and public policy in Australia, Lucinda Longcroft, told Kelly that the same community guidelines that apply to the public apply to public figures such as himself. “Our policies are applied regardless of the nature of the person [or] the position may hold,” she said. Longcroft said Google’s Covid-19 policies had been developed based on advice from around the world. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “This information policy, which was developed at the start of the pandemic, is probably published on our website. It is quite detailed. It takes into account very clear guidelines from global authorities, [the] World Health Organization, as well as trusted medical and scientific authorities and governmental authorities. “And it is constantly reviewed and revised as scientific medical information is updated, and we work very closely with experts.” The UAP has so far avoided reaching the threshold of having three strikes against the account in 90 days, which would lead to a permanent suspension. The deputy chair of the committee, Labor MP Tim Watts, had himself reported nine UAP videos to YouTube, but only six of those were removed. He asked why each video removed did not count as a single strike, and Longcroft said YouTube “bundled” reported videos together. “If a number of videos are found to be violative at the same time they are bundled into one strike,” she said. “I’ll remember to stretch them out next time,” Watts replied. He also criticised Google for continuing to accept money from the UAP – even after it had allowed the party to promote videos that were later removed. “We are in the middle of a pandemic, we know he is a repeat offender, yet you’re doing nothing to stop him amplifying content,” he said. “We certainly are doing everything in our power to stop him and every other person who might promulgate misinformation relating to Covid or other on our platforms,” Longcroft said. “We do not seek to profit [from] that misinformation and our ad policies and enforcement is in line with that.” When the hearing moved to Meta, the company formerly known as Facebook, Kelly said Facebook had “blood on its hands” for blocking information on Covid-19 treatments, and asked if they thought his ban from the platform had interfered with his duties as an MP because he was unable to communicate with constituents through the platform. Facebook’s director of public policy in Australia, Mia Garlick, said Facebook was a tool politicians could use. “I think people use our services in a range of different ways. And so I don’t really want to commit to any one generalisation for all of the members of parliament,” she said. The then speaker of the House of Representatives, Tony Smith, had already ruled there was no evidence that the ban was targeted at Kelly in his capacity as a member of parliament. When TikTok appeared, officials admitted Kelly had been suspended from the platform in error, and a video he had posted had been “over-moderated”. In the absence of Twitter from the hearing, Kelly asked representatives from industry body DIGI about a tweet related to “a certain person in my electorate” calling that person “a massive fuckhead”. Kelly said it was false and defamatory and said it was a “massive failure” the tweet was allowed to be posted and had been up for three days. A tweet matching the date of posting, the number of likes and retweets mentioned was a tweet about Kelly.On Saturday, Rozina Ghulam Mustafa arrived at the market in Tando Allahyar city, Pakistan’s Sindh province, to sell the goats she had raised, milked and fed. Usually her brother sells the animals, but he sold them too cheaply because he didn’t know their true value. “He has always sold our goats at a much lower price,” she says, standing inside an enclosure with 15 of them. For Mustafa, joining hundreds of women to trade animals at Marui livestock market – believed to be Pakistan’s first women-led livestock market – was a big moment. By the afternoon, she had yet to sell any animals, but was unperturbed. “That’s OK; it’s my first time and I will learn how to trade,” she says. “For the first time I felt free, I could make the decision of buying and selling myself.” Women in rural Pakistan have always reared animals, taking care of nutrition, milking and vaccinations and keeping their barns and sheds clean. But when the time comes for them to be sold, women are excluded. Taking the animals to market is considered a man’s job. Mustafa’s 65-year-old mother, Rehmat, who accompanied her to the market with Mustafa’s brother, says that when she was younger “it was unthinkable for a woman to come to the market and sell; it was a man’s job”. “I think this change is in the right direction. If women can rear, women can buy and sell, like men. What is so complicated about it?” The market is busy. Children run between the animal enclosures and stalls selling homemade ghee (clarified butter), eggs, chickens, animal fodder and ornaments. Other stalls sell food, tea and hand-embroidered women’s clothing. The local government has a stall showcasing veterinary medicines. Perween Panhwar has just bought her first goat for 19,000 PKR (£80) to start her livestock farm. “When I heard there was a women-led livestock market, I wanted the first animal I buy for the farm to be from this market,” she says. Lakshmi Phuto has travelled 12 miles (20km) from her village to the market. She has been given 30,000 PRK from a local NGO to buy livestock to help set up her farm. By the end of the day, Phuto has bought a lactating goat for 20,000 PKR. “Just the kind we wanted, with big ears and this big in height,” she says, raising her hand about three feet from the ground. The rest of her money will be spent on “good quality food”. It is hoped that the market, organised by Tando Allahyar district government and local NGO the Research and Development Foundation (RDF), will encourage more women into the livestock sector. It is part of a six-year Growth for Rural Advancement and Sustainable Progress project to strengthen small-scale agribusinesses and reduce poverty in Sindh and Balochistan provinces, run in partnership with the International Trade Centre and the World Trade Organization. “This is a great idea!” says Mustafa Talpur, regional advocacy and campaigns lead at Oxfam Asia, who has worked in the water and agriculture sector for more than 10 years. “Having separate women’s markets or a share in existing agriculture markets will help them to engage.” Dr Mazhar Ali Rind, deputy director of the government’s livestock department, hopes similar markets will be organised across the country. “To my knowledge, this is the first of its kind in Pakistan,” he says. “Many women-led households depend on the village men with business acumen for negotiating with strangers. They allow them to take their animals to the market, and pay a fee of up to 2,000 PKR for each animal sold. But now that they have learned the process, they can do it on their own. The middlemen’s role can be eliminated.” Ashfaque Soomro, chief executive at RDF, plans to run the market at Tando Allahyar every month. “Now that these women are familiar with this place, getting here will be easier for them; many can now come on their own or in groups and will not need men to accompany them,” he says. Soomro is confident the market will grow and attract many more women. “Now we need to bring in buyers from cities like Karachi and Hyderabad.”Annoyed Currys customers seem to feature fairly regularly on your pages and the consensus seems to be “buyer beware”. However, I’ve discovered you don’t have to be a customer to have your time wasted. I was emailed an e-receipt from the Wednesbury store (almost 200 miles from where I live) for a £1,589 television. I had not made this purchase and was anxious to discover if this was fraud or error. The email address on the receipt was no longer in operation, and the web chat didn’t work so I had to call customer services. I was promised a response within 48 hours, but heard nothing more. Meanwhile, I was besieged by daily emails thanking me for my purchase, and offering associated deals. I called again, and was passed between operatives who again promised a response within 48 hours. One said he’d put me through to the fraud department and connected me to the police. All I received since then was an email asking for feedback on my recent purchase. CJ, Wareham, Dorset Your experience highlights two concerning issues: firstly Currys’s seeming indifference to a possible case of fraud or error. And secondly, its bombardment of customers who do choose to make a purchase. I’ve previously exposed follow-up phone messages from the company within hours of a sale which customers – and even some agents – assumed were from scammers. It turned out the company was using mobile phone numbers required for delivery updates to hard-sell extended warranties (Currys calls them “care plans”). It claims that its volley of after-sales communications is to make customers feel “supported”. It seems it’s less keen on being contacted by customers who need support. Only after I asked it to explain your predicament did it acknowledge it had made an error. It claims the email of the customer who bought the TV differed from yours by one digit and was inputted wrongly. Your details have now been deleted and the correct customer contacted with the receipt and, doubtless, the onslaught of sales pitches. Currys has paid you £50 in goodwill and says it’s truly sorry for the distress caused. Significantly, no remorse for its failure to address the mistake before media involvement. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsStaff at England’s Environment Agency say it has been cut back to such an extent that they cannot do their jobs and the regulator is no longer a deterrent to polluters. Three officers at the EA have described to the Guardian and Ends Report how they are increasingly unable to hold polluters to account or improve the environment as a result of the body’s policies. The officers wish to remain anonymous because the EA’s chief executive, Sir James Bevan, has “been very clear that he will sack anybody that is seen to be openly criticising the agency”, one officer said. The Environment Agency has a large budget but the officers say it is not being directed towards protecting or improving the environment. Government grants to the agency rose from £880m to £1.05bn over the past two years, and money for flood operations has steadily increased. But government funding for the agency’s environmental protection work has slumped from about £170m in 2009-10 to a low of £76m in 2019-20, and £94m last year. As a result, work that does not generate any income for the agency, such as attending pollution incidents, has been deprioritised, say the officers. Last week the Guardian revealed that the agency would no longer respond to lower-impact pollution incidents. One EA officer said there had been a “drive to make the agency almost entirely self-sufficient, so if you can’t charge for something it gets a lower priority, which is why a lot of the officer roles have been cut – those that go out to pollution events and inspect works … it’s been cut and cut and cut and left us where we are at the moment, which is with a very limited resource on that side.” In a speech on Tuesday, Bevan signalled that he would like industry to eventually pay the full cost of its regulation, alongside tougher punishments for polluters that could lead to custodial sentences for the worst offenders. A second officer said increases in charges and other agency income filled the gap left by dwindling government grants but the money did not find its way to frontline work. Instead it was directed to middle management, they said. “Part of the theory of paying for a permit is that a certain percentage is used to tackle illegal activity that operates without one,” they said. “Yet frontline officers have to watch this money go elsewhere, usually to fill newly created management roles that have no impact on frontline duties. The only sectors to benefit are the operators who want to avoid meaningful regulation. The Environment Agency appears to be making a choice to direct current funding away from frontline water quality.” Other moves by the agency that are said to stifle fieldwork include “new incident teams that don’t leave the office” and the “removal of lease cars to attend incidents”. Issuing permits for a potentially polluting activity, such as discharging effluent into a river, brings money into the agency, but one officer said that when making a decision on the activity, “we’re told, largely through the permitting process, to give business the benefit of the doubt, rather than the environment. “Unless you can find a 100% solid reason not to grant something, you will grant it. The precautionary principle, which is what a lot of these decisions should be based on, is not prevalent … we don’t really get to use it.” Permitting decisions are further undermined by the patchy nature of the agency’s data, according to the insiders. “It’s all tied up with the fact that our monitoring now is a lot poorer,” one officer said. “When you try to make a decision on an impact of something, it’s so much more difficult to prove because the data isn’t there any more. Priority is given to the applicant rather than the environment unless it’s absolutely clearcut.” The upshot is that the agency’s funding and operational decisions have “resulted in a regulator that is toothless,” said one officer. “Should a polluter be caught, any tools that were at [its] disposal to take action have been systematically removed … Officers are actively encouraged not to take enforcement action, and asked to find another solution. We are no longer a deterrent to polluters.” There is considerable anger among staff that “those who adhere to the legislation are paying significant sums, whilst those that chose to ignore the legislation escape any charge or meaningful punishment,” according to one officer. Another officer said the reduction in enforcement activity would “embolden people to break the law because they know that there’s not really a strong police force out there watching over them and able to take any form of significant action against them”. The overall feeling is that areas such as water quality are “no longer a priority and the environment in most cases is expendable. There appears to be a direction aimed at working alongside water companies, industry and agriculture, rather than regulating them. “The Environment Agency is as far removed from the ‘polluter pays’ principle as it has ever been, and what is most concerning is that this appears to be by design,” said one. Being unable to get out into the field to do the jobs they were hired to do has also taken its toll on staff morale, according to the officers. “Morale is so low, and the main reason for that is our poor performance on water quality and enforcement – it upsets people when they see the stuff they’re passionate about being red-carded and ignored,” said one officer. Another said: “The majority of staff joined the Environment Agency because of a vocation for environmental protection, and their morale is at rock bottom because they are being asked to ignore this vocation with no visible justification.” Another officer said: “You’ve got a lot of very passionate, very well meaning people, very often forbidden from doing their jobs to the full. They join the agency because they care, they really want to make a difference, [but then] their ambitions are invariably stifled and slowly blunted by an organisation that just grinds them down and gives them very few opportunities to make a difference.” An Environment Agency spokesperson said: “Our staff are vital to our work to protect the environment, people and wildlife from harm, and we are committed to providing a healthy and high-quality working environment. “Our most recent employee people survey highlights many positive aspects of working at the Environment Agency – with staff engagement at 68% and the majority reporting they like their job, feel supported in their health, safety and wellbeing, and want to stay within the organisation. However, we are not complacent and understand the last few years have been particularly challenging for all public servants. We continue to listen to and act upon feedback from our staff as a key priority.”Mass is a wonderfully acted, if claustrophobic, ordeal of emotional pain. Perhaps against the odds, it achieves in its final moments a breakthrough of understanding and acceptance – and moves beyond its rather theatrically contrived confrontation, which may have been inspired by Yasmina Reza’s play God of Carnage, filmed by Roman Polanski in 2011. But it’s impossible not to be affected by the sincerity of this debut from actor-turned-director Fran Kranz, whose film shows that the subject of school shootings and their aftermath can be treated without the ironised horror of, say, Lionel Shriver’s We Need to Talk About Kevin. The scene is a church in Idaho that has evidently offered its premises as the venue – a safe space, perhaps – for a healing encounter between the parents of a boy killed six years previously in a school shooting and the parents of the boy who killed him. (Franz allows us to register that there happens to be a slightly truculent young man volunteering at the church, who might resemble both of the boys.) Quite aside from the grief and despair, there is bad feeling about announcements made at the time through lawyers and the media, and now everyone needs closure. Linda (Ann Dowd) and Richard (Reed Birney) are the shooter’s mum and dad: Linda is in agony, needing absolution from the other couple, or from her husband, or from God, or from the universe; Richard is more buttoned-up, angry, suspicious of the emotional loss of control required of him and incidentally also sceptical about the need for gun control. Jay (Jason Isaacs) and Gail (Martha Plimpton) are tensely resolved that this meeting is their only way forward, ready to listen and forgive, but clearly very wary of any suggestion that their son’s death is somehow equivalent to the death of his attacker. Mass is performed with impeccable intelligence and sensitivity, although sometimes it feels like an exercise in award-winning acting. But I admit it: the final, unexpected dialogue scene, though arguably as stagey and showy as everything else, does deliver a punch. • Mass is released on 20 January in cinemas and on Sky Cinema.A new apartment skyscraper with just one fire escape staircase is being planned just a few hundred metres from Grenfell Tower in a move that survivors of the disaster have called “shocking”. The proposed tower would be around twice the height of Grenfell and accommodate hundreds of households, but it will rely on the same “stay put” strategy that failed on 14 June 2017 contributing to deaths, according to planning documents. That means that under current building regulations it will require only a single escape staircase. The tower would have flats up to 35 storeys as part of a complex of 1,760 new homes being planned by the owner of the Westfield shopping centre in west London. The scheme, by Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield (URW), a £46bn global developer specialising in shopping centres, includes a second tower which is also designed with a single fire escape. The planning application is going ahead at a time when the government is reviewing the provision of escape routes in building regulations “to ensure residents are safe in the event of a fire”. Grenfell United, a group representing the survivors and bereaved, said: “After half a decade of campaigning for safer homes, it’s shocking to hear that a new tower block, a stone’s throw from Grenfell, rigged with a fire safety defect before it’s even been built, is being planned.” It considers a single staircase inadequate for use by residents and firefighters if an evacuation is needed, even though it is allowable under building regulations. The developer insists building safety is a key priority. Apartments in the new complex will feature sprinklers and there will be evacuation lifts for disabled residents. It will also have 100% non-combustible facades. The strategy in the event of a fire is for residents to “stay put” on the basis that the building is designed to stop fires spreading from flat to flat. But some safety experts have said it is “madness” that single staircases are still allowed, not least after the Grenfell disaster where, once an evacuation was necessary, some residents were unable to escape through the smoke-logged staircase that was used by evacuees and firefighters, and the stay put policy was kept in place for too long, costing lives. “This is flying by the seat of our pants,” said Arnold Tarling, an independent fire engineer, who said a single staircase only worked if smoke ventilation systems, firefighting lifts, door closers and other safety systems were rigorously maintained. “Commercial buildings have to have multiple staircases. You are better cared for in a commercial building than a residential one.” As part of the wider building safety crisis, faults have been found in the construction of hundreds of apartment blocks which mean fires and smoke could spread from flat to flat, rendering the stay-put strategy dangerous. When a fire last May injured three people at an east London tower block, ventilation systems, the firefighter lift and door holders did not perform as expected. Pressure is now growing for a change in the rules on staircases. Last week the developer of a 51-storey apartment tower close to Canary Wharf withdrew its application from a planning hearing amid alarm that it featured only one staircase. Some fire experts want to bring the UK into line with dozens of other countries where two or more escape stairs are required on tall buildings. A spokesperson for URW said: “Building safety is a key priority for any of our developments and as part of the design process we have engaged a fire engineer to ensure that access and egress arrangements for fire brigades and occupants satisfies the London Plan guidelines and meet all required building safety protocols. We also work very closely with the local authority planning department, who in turn work with the London fire brigadedirectly to ensure applications are in line with regulations. In addition, our buildings have other mitigation measures in place including sprinklers throughout the buildings and the use of 100% non-combustible facades.” A spokesperson for the London borough of Hammersmith and Fulham, the planning authority, said: “The safety of residents is our number one priority. We take a tough line with developers to ensure that anything they build is fully compliant with all safety and other regulations as a minimum, and that local people are fully consulted.” A fire brigade spokesperson said: “We are aware of this development and we will be providing a response to the planning consultation.”As the Omicron variant rips through the US, children are being infected with Covid-19 in record numbers – yet their rate of vaccination has lagged, creating a surge in hospitalizations and undermining in-person schooling. Nearly a million new Covid cases – more than 981,000 – were confirmed in children in the week ending 13 January, a 69% increase from the week before and four times higher than last winter’s peak, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics. That means one in 10 Covid cases among children in the entire pandemic have happened in the past week, the organization said. Adult rates have shot up, too, with an average of more than 870,000 confirmed cases a day in the US – but children have much lower vaccination rates. Only 18.8% of kids aged five to 11, and a little more than half of 12- to 17-year-olds, are fully vaccinated, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hospitalizations for kids are soaring, although severe illness and death are much less likely for children than adults. “Tons and tons of kids are getting infected this time,” said Almaz Dessie, assistant professor of pediatrics in emergency medicine at Columbia University medical center. Yet vaccinations are lagging. After a short burst of children’s vaccinations soon after the shot was authorized for the five to 11 age group, progress dropped significantly. At the New York emergency department where she sees patients, Dessie offers Covid-19 vaccines for kids who come in with non-Covid issues, such as sprained ankles or broken bones. “We’re seeing a pretty low level of uptake, even now,” she said. The biggest surprise for Dessie has been talking to vaccinated adults who inoculate their kids against other diseases – but are holding off with Covid. “People just want a little more time just to see what happens with the vaccine, because it’s so new,” Dessie said. But when it comes to vaccination, she notes, “the benefits are pretty substantial, both to the individual child and to their community”. Paul Offit, a professor of pediatrics in the division of infectious diseases at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, recently cared for children being admitted with Covid complications. “None of them were vaccinated. No one over five was vaccinated,” he said. Although Covid complications for children are rarer than for adults, they still happen, and more cases means more chances for kids to become seriously ill. For example, multi-system inflammatory disease in children is one rare but severe outcome from Covid infection that “can be serious and fatal”, Offit said. Lagging vaccination rates have also contributed to schools struggling to stay open, as students and staff are sickened by the more-transmissible variant. Offit was recently asked about parents who are worried about sending their children to school during the Omicron surge. “OK, then vaccinate them,” he said. “We’re talking about trying to keep them safe. Here’s an idea: vaccinate your children.” Vaccines for eligible children don’t just protect their health and the health of those around them, Dessie said: they can also keep schools open and the rest of society functioning. “There are so many things that children need from school: the socialization, the social supports for low-income children, all of that,” she said. “We need kids in school, and reducing transmission in school will be most easily be achieved by having all children be vaccinated who are eligible.” Experts say that layering all precautions together – vaccines and boosters, masks, tests, better ventilation and physical distancing – can keep schools safer, but some school districts have been unable or unwilling to do so. In Oregon, hit by a 400% increase in cases in the past two weeks, a group of school nurses have decried the lack of effective precautions. “Messaging that schools are safe – without taking the steps to make them safe – does not keep children safe,” the 36 nurses wrote in a letter to Portland public schools on Sunday. School nurses have been on one of the frontlines of the pandemic, said Linda Mendonça, president of the National Association of School Nurses. “It’s been very challenging,” she said. “They’ve had to really jump into high gear and do things that they normally don’t do on a daily basis.” School nurses frequently trace contacts, test, implement mitigation strategies and run vaccination clinics – all on top of their usual work, which has already become more difficult given the pandemic’s immense physical and emotional burdens. Implementing every layer of safety is “absolutely” key to continuing in-person learning safely, she said. “Vaccination is one of the [major] public health strategies we have in our toolbox to help fight this pandemic.” Dessie said she understands families’ hesitations and fears: “They want the best for their kids. “It’s scary to be a parent right now, and it’s scary to constantly have to make decisions for your child. Everything feels like a risk,” she said. But the vanishingly rare side-effects of vaccines “are so small compared to the risk of Covid and severe disease from Covid – and all the people they can affect if they get Covid themselves”. It’s important to explain the safety and effectiveness of the vaccines, she said, and to discuss all questions families have – including the unknowns of what happens if you get Covid while unvaccinated. “We don’t know, even with mild Covid, what that means for kids,” she said. Long Covid, too, remains little understood, including in children. Vaccinating everyone, including children, is a crucial part of ending the global spread of the virus, Dessie said. “The more vaccinations you have, across our country and globally, the less likely we are to have the emergence of those new variants like what we just saw the last few months.”On the last Sunday before the 2019 general election, the Sunday Times cast its vote. “Mr Johnson is regarded with some suspicion by voters,” its editorial admitted. “He has an on-off relationship with the truth,” often preferred “bluster to grasp of detail”, and had a “colourful private life more typical of a French president”. Nonetheless, the paper urged its readers to put a liar, a bullshitter and a renowned moral incontinent in charge of the country. In making this argument, it was joined by the vast majority of national newspapers, and by the end of that week they got their wish. Over the past few days, those very same papers have discovered that a liar, a bullshitter and a moral incontinent runs the government. They are, naturally, horrified. The furies are now descending upon this prime minister. Having thoroughly chewed him up and digested every last point of polling advantage, the party he led to its first serious majority in 30 years is about to spit him out; the very MPs who most directly owe him their seats are plotting his demise. The obit already being written is about how one man, beset by monstrous flaws of character, presided over a rotten, insensate culture in Downing Street. Scarcely a word is said about how a rotten political culture chose this cracked actor to be prime minister in the first place. Even to ask the question is to divert from Westminster’s splendid game of Pop Goes the Weaselly Politician. Yet look around and count the examples of a truly ulcerous politics. Here are the columnists, gravely warning that to cling on to Boris Johnson is to endanger democracy – two years after excusing his attempts to shut down parliament and ram through his Brexit. Over there are the backbenchers, mutinying not because their leader broke his own lockdown rules but over how this might affect their careers. Heckling from the wings is breachfinder-general Dominic Cummings, apparently unencumbered by any shame over his own eye test at Barnard Castle. Centre stage is, of course, Johnson, on trial not for racking up the highest Covid death toll in Europe, but for telling people to follow one rule and doing precisely the opposite. For, in other words, hypocrisy – one of the few things, as Alan Bennett has observed, at which the English still lead the world. In saying this, I am not making light of the Downing Street parties. In spring 2020, my mother passed away. It is part of my culture for friends to come over with meals for the bereaved, to sit with them in mourning. Friends handed over carrier bags of food from the road. Given the public health emergency, there was no question of them coming inside. My wife and I sat alone. More fool us. Yet, even as I recall that painful period, the charges on which Johnson is now arraigned still strike me as odd. Winking at rules, lying about it afterwards … what did people think he was going to do? He practically bragged about his ability to pull off such feats. He converted what most of us would consider vices into political virtues, which is partly why the election of 2019 was an event of such consequence. Bringing great institutions into disrepute? It was much-corroded institutions that cheered him into No 10. Johnson won every single ballot of Conservative MPs in 2019, and swept the vote of party members. He repaid the debt by filleting the parliamentary party of many of its most competent members, on the grounds they disagreed with his hastily scrawled plan for Brexit. During an election campaign in which he hid from an interviewer in a giant fridge, and pocketed a journalist’s mobile phone after refusing to look at a photo of a sick child sleeping on a hospital floor, most of the media persisted in treating him not as a threat to freedom of the press but as the best standup on the Leave circuit. What fuelled Johnson’s ascent was how well he learned a lesson of predecessors on the right: you could break the institutions that held the UK together as a social democracy and dissolve its political trust. You could be a political vandal, an economic bulldozer and a class bully, and still the press would praise you as statesmanlike, while the public handed you a landslide. From Margaret Thatcher onwards, the right has broken up the public sector into something the lobbyists, the consultants and the profiteers can freely loot. Electricity, water, council housing, the railways: all have been turned into so many troughs for the pinstripe hordes to sup at. Underneath the blond mop and behind the great toothy grin, Johnson’s pitch has always been that he will destroy the rest. Of course he’s bad at government: he believes government is bad. To stave off the inevitable, Johnson has come up with an escape plan of rightwing policies, charmingly referred to by the government of Ghana – which would apparently be receiving some of Britain’s asylum seekers – as Operation Dead Meat. It is the same programme of bulldozing institutions, but this time played at manic intensity and speed. Scapegoating senior civil servants for the wine suitcases in Downing Street. Freezing the BBC licence fee and warning Auntie that soon the cupboard will be entirely bare. Almost certainly the next thing to be thrown overboard will be parts of the net zero programme. These aren’t aimed at winning back the public, but kissing up to the rightwing press and the Tory headbangers who can keep him in No 10. What’s left is a punitive state: the military supposedly seeing off desperate Afghans in small boats, the police deciding who is or isn’t entitled to go on a demo. The antithesis to all this is not a return to normalcy led by the political management class, whatever the talking heads might say. The Right Hon Member for Greensill or the chancellor for BlackRock were just as determined at trashing the public sector. All those decrying Johnson as a sociopath would do well to read the recent paper in the peer-reviewed BMJ Open, which finds that over just four years in England alone David Cameron’s austerity was responsible for more than 57,000 deaths. The route out of this debacle begins with recognising that a mere change in personnel at No 10, even at the very top, will alter next to nothing. It would be far better to repair the country’s shattered institutions, and allow communities to build their own, both economic and political. This also means a dramatic shift of power away from Westminster. Until then, we are left with the pathetic sight of a rule-breaker who vows more law and order. A public-school populist who dissembles like any other politician. An authoritarian whose authority has drained away. Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnistIn her early years in Whitehall, Liz Truss was known to civil servants as the “human hand grenade”, a nickname for her that Boris Johnson has since adopted. Like many of the memes around Truss, it is one she has embraced with gusto. Those close to the prime minister say it was not always intended as an accolade. “She does tend to blow things up. He used to say anything passed her way needed to be handled with care,” one staffer recalled. But with Johnson on the verge of blowing up his own premiership, it may be the human hand grenade waiting to pick up the pieces. The foreign secretary, who was an early Johnson loyalist, is the other name mentioned in the same breath as Rishi Sunak in the fight to be Johnson’s successor. Truss, 46, is often described as the party members’ darling, for many months topping ConservativeHome’s poll of members asked for their favourite minister. “The role Liz has always said she wanted is chancellor. I think that could still be where her heart lies, but when she kept topping those polls, it turned her head,” one former aide said. But when it comes to a leadership challenge – rather than their pet favourite – the mood of members seems to change and Truss is suddenly the underdog. In an Opinium poll of Conservative members, Sunak beats his closest rival by 28 points. The stats get even worse when you go to the country: Truss is the 23rd most famous Tory politician, according to YouGov, with Sunak and other potential rivals such as Jeremy Hunt, Michael Gove and Sajid Javid all in the top 10. Those close to Truss say none of this will daunt her. “People have underestimated her for her entire political career,” a former aide said. In many ways her strategy has been similar to Johnson’s, who courted sceptical MPs over many months with dinners hosted by Jacob Rees-Mogg. Truss has been hosting social events for MPs that have become known as “fizz with Liz”, though her allies swear she doesn’t use the term herself. Scottish Tories including Douglas Ross, who called for the PM to resign, had drinks with Truss last week. Another group met the foreign secretary on Monday night before she flew to Australia for a tour. Each Monday she holds surgeries in the Commons tea room for MPs to bring their concerns. “She pressed the button on leadership stuff around three months ago,” one MP said. “But the problem is that everyone knows about it now. She went too early.” Sources close to Truss deny her contact with MPs amounts to electioneering. “She has always hosted these meetings, since she was trade secretary, because she values what MPs think. She is more in touch than many.” Many MPs feel she will need a major turn in fortunes to win enough support to make it on to the ballot paper. There are already rumours of a deal between other candidates to keep her out. “I would be very surprised if she would get through,” one minister said. Another colleague added: “MPs base their decision on whether the person will keep them their seat and whether they actually like the candidate. You need at least one of those two. I’m not sure she fits either of those categories for many people.” “The party will not choose Liz,” a Tory adviser said. “She is flag-waving, sure, but she doesn’t have the charisma of Boris. She appeals to the TaxPayers’ Alliance and IEA wing of the party but she has no crossover appeal,” they added in reference to the Institute of Economic Affairs free-market thinktank. Yet many colleagues also dismissed Johnson’s chances of making the ballot paper, such was his unpopularity among them. Like Margaret Thatcher, Truss has an intriguing backstory, unlike Sunak’s Winchester, Oxford, hedge fund trajectory. She grew up in Leeds with leftwing parents, attended a high-achieving comprehensive, and her mother took her on peace marches. At Oxford she chaired the Lib Dems but began to develop a new philosophy – of the need for individuals to keep their own money to ensure personal freedom. That drew her to the Conservatives, she has said. Selected for the plum South West Norfolk seat in 2010, her career in politics almost came to an abrupt end after members found out – and objected to – her affair with the MP Mark Field. “It’s quite a credit that she’s managed to turn that reputation around and become the membership’s darling, but that’s because she gets what’s important to them: pride, optimism, a belief in the power of the individual,” the staffer said. Under David Cameron, her first cabinet post was as environment secretary, leading to her infamous viral speech at the Conservative conference in 2014 – a rage against cheese imports in which she exclaimed: “That is a disgrace!” “I think that did change something for Liz, it actually meant she was one of the first politicians of this generation to spot the potential of social media,” the former adviser said. When she arrived as international trade secretary, staff handed her social media strategies for Twitter and LinkedIn but she told them: “Instagram’s my thing.” She taught aides to use Boomerang, a setting on Instagram to create short clips. In recent years, images of her – in red and blue pantsuits, hair tightly curled, boarding jets, strolling purposefully past famous buildings or riding in a tank in Estonia – have been carefully curated. Even a picture of her daughter’s birthday cake carries the caption “You can’t stop progress”. The posts are littered with hashtags such as #freeworld #selfdetermination and #nolimits. Truss’s other moment of political crisis – after her battle in her constituency and awkward cheese speech – followed her appointment by Theresa May as justice secretary during the legal row over the triggering of article 50 and the Daily Mail’s infamous front page declaring three high court judges “enemies of the people”. The story broke when Truss was dining in one of London’s Inns of Court, surrounded by senior members of the judiciary. “She will not have been lacking in advice. But the statement she came out with was mealy mouthed. And she couldn’t recover from it,” one senior legal figure said. “Theresa came to realise that it was not a wise appointment,” one former cabinet minister said. “She forfeited the confidence of the judiciary.” Within 11 months, Truss had been reshuffled to become chief secretary to the Treasury, ostensibly a demotion, but one which allowed her to set out her stall as a free-market thinker in a number of high-profile speeches. One ally said: “People often say about Liz: ‘I’m not sure what she stands for.’ And that could not be further from the truth; she has set out exactly what she stands for.” “Britain is a nation of Uber-riding, Deliveroo-eating, Airbnb-ing freedom fighters,” she said in one speech, a retort to critics of the gig economy. “And to turbocharge our future we need to champion these values, and let people off the leash by liberating every corner of the economy.” She took swipes at environmental regulation, the banning of plastic straws and cups, with digs at enjoying “the warm glow of wood-burning Goves” when her colleague Michael Gove was at the environment department. In the Treasury she often told colleagues the answer to their problems was not more public spending but freedom for the market. “I aim to be the disrupter in chief; I want to challenge those who aim to block change, stop development and restrict success.” Yet when serious challenge has been made to her low-tax beliefs, Truss has been pragmatic, speaking out in private against Sunak’s national insurance rise in late summer last year but then, once it was policy, declining to join Jacob Rees-Mogg in January urging Sunak to cancel the rise. If the choice does come down to Truss or Sunak, one contrast will be Truss’s closeness and loyalty to Johnson. Asked at Conservative party conference last year to name her favourite foreign secretary from history, Truss did not miss a beat. “Boris Johnson.” On Thursday evening last week, after a brutal day for the prime minister, Truss defended him in the media, saying Tories should support him “100%”. In 2019 she was his first cabinet backer. Before that, Johnson was struggling to attract names for his leadership campaign. Those who had publicly backed him were low-grade backbenchers, some with dubious reputations. He was becoming agitated with his team, and seeking higher-profile support. Truss broke cover to declare her allegiance, going on BBC Radio 4 to defend Johnson on a litany of awkward topics, from extramarital affairs to the imprisonment of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe. “She was canny, she decided Johnson could win, unlike Priti [Patel] who ummed and ahhed about it for ages,” one senior member of the team recalled. Though campaigners are hesitant to class her as part of the inner team, she attended a number of the preparations for government meetings, off-grid with key advisers such as Lord Frost, to discuss priorities. “Some of it was to keep her busy,” the staffer recalled. During the 2019 election, Truss pitched to Johnson that a US trade deal should be one of the key pledges of the campaign. The senior team in Downing Street were gobsmacked, believing it would give Jeremy Corbyn an open goal to talk about selling off the NHS to the US. “How about we do not talk about this at all?” one said. Another said: “She wanted to show what great things could be achieved post-Brexit – it’s typical Liz optimism – but the problem is we weren’t going to get one.” Many of those close to Johnson now consider Truss was a success as international trade secretary despite some initial reservations. Under her, the UK signed a deal with Japan and rolled over a number of strategically important deals – with Canada, Israel, Singapore and others. “She has been much better in the roles that suited her – in the Treasury, at trade and she may well be better at [the Foreign Office]. It plays to her strengths,” the former cabinet minister said. Others more dismissively consider her as just a valuable frontwoman. “She was good at getting out there, talking about great British produce, and the actual work is done by officials,” a senior No 10 official said. “It’s like putting someone in for a driving test in a self-driving car.” One Whitehall source said that was unfair. “She is an economist, and in the negotiations she had serious grip of the detail. She knew what tweaks she wanted to make. And she often got her own way.” If Johnson wanted to keep his rival busy, he has succeeded. Truss’s brief is enormous: foreign secretary, Brexit negotiations, international development and equalities minister. Truss may now be in the job which comes with maximum peril for her leadership chances, but any success is likely to significantly bolster her standing. “Ireland is going to kill her,” a former Foreign Office official predicted. “She wants to prove her Brexiter credentials but there is no way to win with this strategy. That threat in the Sunday Telegraph [on triggering article 16] was not the correct approach. “Now, if she caves in, the right will abandon her, and that’s the very constituency she needs for the leadership.” Though many MPs consider true Brexit believer status to be less important, Truss backed remain in the 2016 referendum, speaking about not wanting her own daughters to “need a visa or permit to work in Europe, or where they are hampered from growing a business because of extortionate call costs and barriers to trade”. “She has done incredibly well at erasing her remainer past,” a senior Conservative said. “But I think when we get to a leadership contest, she will have a huge challenge going against Rishi Sunak, Michael Gove, Nadhim Zahawi. “Not particularly because they were true Brexiters but more because the question will be: are you true to yourself? Rishi, Michael and Boris too, they all took personal hits for their beliefs. She will never do that.”My first experience of office life was daunting. You might expect one’s first experience of working in an office environment to be pretty gentle: making the tea, a bit of filing, running errands for the boss. Not a bit of it, in my case. Aged 20, with no experience of office life, I was the boss. And, just to add a little spice to the task, I was totally blind. My job as a community service volunteer at Youth Action York was to persuade a sceptical group of teenagers to give a helping hand to local elderly or disabled people who were struggling – assisting them with their shopping, perhaps, or tidying up their garden. It felt like a challenge, and my teenage volunteers made sure it was. The phone would often ring, only for me to find the handset wasn’t where I expected it to be. Eventually, I would realise it had been hidden – usually in a filing cabinet or drawer, which may have also been locked. The teenage volunteers found this very funny – and, actually, so did I. At a time when braille was added to magazines by spraying on small plastic dots, they sometimes took to melting the bottom lines of pages too, much to everyone’s amusement. I can feel the disability lobby revving up as they read this. That is bullying, they will say, and what’s more, by laughing along with them, I was contributing to my own discrimination. But I didn’t feel like that back then, and I don’t think that now. They were spiky teenagers, and they were doing to me what they routinely did to each other: looking for the weakest point and giving it a jab. Until I began working in that office, I’d been at a special blind school, where the teasing was merciless, and where I’d learned what real bullying could be like. But many of the Youth Action teens became my first close full-sighted friends and remained so long after I left York. It was the nearest I’d got to acceptance by a group of streetwise kids. In any case, I found revenge a far more satisfying and effective tactic than querulous complaint. I had a couple of packs of braille playing cards and started to play poker with some of the volunteers on quiet afternoons. I enjoyed a rather good run of luck, and a bit of money changed hands before I let on that, with a very keen sense of touch, you could read which cards you were dealing as you dealt them. My workmates were indignant, but impressed. It’s not true, of course, but as long as they thought it was, and that they had been cheated, I felt honour was satisfied. I’d evened up the score.It wasn’t until my elder daughter applied for university that I became aware of personal statements – 4,000 characters (about 600 words) with which the applicant can persuade the seat of learning that they are made of the right stuff. I sought guidance from an old friend whom I happened to be catching up with, an eminent lawyer with several university-educated children. Are these statement things important, I asked. “Yes, they are,” he harrumphed. “Certainly far too important to leave to some daft 18-year-old to write.” At around the same time, I was assured by an admissions tutor at a Russell Group university that these statements were hardly ever read; they just looked at the predicted grades. So, take your pick. My offer of assistance with my daughter’s offering was rejected in the strongest terms with the kind of industrial language I hoped she would not use in the statement itself. Lee Elliot Major, Britain’s first professor of social mobility, said this week that personal statements have become “a systematic disadvantage to poorer students”, as it’s the middle-class applicants getting all the help. He is quite right, of course. But that problem takes root at a much younger age. A friend was the deputy head of an elite girls’ private school in London, with responsibility for admissions. I asked her what on earth she asked 11-year-olds. To her despair, most of them seemed to have memorised a script prepared by their parents. “There was stuff about geopolitics I really couldn’t follow. One girl told me what kind of hedge fund she wanted to run,” my friend wailed. She said the best answer she ever got to the question: “Why do you want come to this school?” came from a girl who said: “It’s on the Piccadilly line.” This would be my advice, certainly: keep these things simple. • Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnist • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. An earlier version said university applicants can use up to 4,000 words in their personal statements. In fact, they can use up to 4,000 characters.The former White House press secretary Stephanie Grisham told the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack that Donald Trump hosted secret meetings in the White House residence in days before 6 January, according to two sources familiar with the matter. The former senior Trump aide also told House investigators that the details of whether Trump actually intended to march to the Capitol after his speech at the Ellipse rally would be memorialized in documents provided to the US Secret Service, the sources said. The select committee’s interview with Grisham, who was Melania Trump’s chief of staff when she resigned on 6 January, was more significant than expected, the sources said, giving the panel new details about the Trump White House and what the former US president was doing before the Capitol attack. Grisham gave House investigators an overview of the chaotic final weeks in the Trump White House in the days leading up to the Capitol attack, recalling how the former president held off-the-books meetings in the White House residence, the sources said. The secret meetings were apparently known by only a small number of aides, the sources said. Grisham recounted that they were mostly scheduled by Trump’s chief of staff, Mark Meadows, and that the former chief usher, Timothy Harleth, would wave participants upstairs, the sources said. Harleth, the former director of rooms at the Trump International Hotel before moving with the Trumps to the White House in 2017, was once one of the former first family’s most trusted employees, according to a top former White House aide to Melania Trump. But after Harleth sought to ingratiate himself with the Biden transition team after Trump’s defeat in the 2020 election in order to keep his White House role, Trump and Meadows moved to fire him before Melania Trump stepped in to keep him until Biden’s inauguration. Grisham told the select committee she was not sure who exactly Trump met with in the White House residence, but provided Harleth’s name and the identities of other Trump aides in the usher’s office who might know of the meetings, the sources said. The Guardian previously reported that Trump made several phone calls from the Yellow Oval Room and elsewhere in the White House residence to lieutenants at the Willard hotel in Washington the night before the Capitol attack, telling them to stop Joe Biden’s certification. Trump increasingly retreated to the White House residence to conduct work as his presidency progressed, according to another former Trump administration official, as he felt less watched by West Wing aides than in the Oval Office. Towards the end of his presidency, the former Trump administration official said, an aide to former White House adviser Peter Navarro tried at least once to quietly usher into the residence Sidney Powell, a lawyer pushing lies about election fraud, to speak with Trump. A spokesperson for the select committee declined to comment on Grisham’s interview that took place the first week of January. Harleth did not respond to questions about the meetings in the White House residence when reached last week by phone. Over the course of her hours-long interview, Grisham told House investigators that the mystery surrounding Trump’s promise at the Ellipse rally that he would march with his supporters to the Capitol might be resolved in Trump White House documents, the sources said. The former president’s purported intention to go to the Capitol has emerged as a crucial issue for the select committee, as they examine whether Trump oversaw a criminal conspiracy coordinating his political plan to stop Biden’s certification with the insurrection. Trump’s promise is significant as it served as one of the primary motivations for his supporters to march to the Capitol alongside militia groups like the Oath Keepers, and was used by far-right activists like Alex Jones to encourage the crowd along the route. But Trump never went to the Capitol and instead returned to the White House, where he watched the attack unfold on television – after being informed by the Secret Service before the insurrection that they could not guarantee his security if he marched to the Capitol. The select committee is now trying to untangle whether Trump made a promise that he perhaps had no intention of honoring because he hoped to incite an insurrection that stopped the certification – his only remaining play to get a second term – one of the sources said. Grisham told the select committee that Trump’s intentions – and whether the Secret Service had been told Trump had decided not to march to the Capitol – should be reflected in the presidential line-by-line, the document that outlines the president’s movements, the sources said. The chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, has told reporters the panel is already seeking information from the Secret Service about what plans they had for Trump on January 6, as well as what evacuation strategies they had for then-vice president Mike Pence. But the presidential line-by-line, which gets sent to the Secret Service, could also reveal discussions about security concerns and suggest a new line of inquiry into why an assessment about conditions that were too dangerous for the president were not disseminated further. Grisham also told the select committee about the necessary coordination between the Trump White House, the Secret Service and organizers of the “Save America” rally at the Ellipse on 6 January in order to ensure Trump’s appearance, the sources said. The former Trump aide suggested to the select committee that Trump was determined to speak at the rally once he heard about its existence, the sources said, and was constantly on the phone to oversee the event’s optics, the sources said.The recent change in travel advice allowing UK citizens to travel to France again has put the country back on the agenda for the ski season. While skiers scramble to secure packages to the famous mega-resorts, there are dozens of smaller, lesser-known ski villages that offer excellent value for money while combining thrilling skiing with old-time charm and glorious natural surroundings. Here are a few that offer a change of scene and pace. Hauteluce, Savoie You would hardly know this traditional farming village, tightly clustered around a tall baroque church spire, was a ski resort. There are no big hotels or pylons, but one chairlift discreetly rises from the back of the village, connecting to the Espace Diamant, a surprisingly large ski area given its low profile, with 192km of runs across six resort villages. Lying at 1,150 metres in the Beaufortain region with epic views of Mont Blanc, Hauteluce has an “eco museum” displaying historic objects from everyday life. Nearby is the smart La Ferme du Chozal hotel (doubles from €175 a night room-only, six-person apartments from €1,600 per week) with spa and restaurant. Valloire, Savoie The traditional Alpine town of Valloire is famous as a point on the classic Tour de France route between the Col du Télégraphe and the Col du Galibier – one of the highest passes in the cycle race. It’s less well known as a ski resort, but the sport has grown a lot here over the years and benefits from a link to the modern resort of Valmeinier, together creating a varied ski area of 150km of pistes across the Maurienne valley. The Résidence Odalys le Hameau (from €405 per week sleeping four), just 10 metres from the slopes, has simple self-catering apartments and an indoor pool. Saint-Véran, Hautes-Alpes Many smaller ski resorts lie at a lower altitude than the big hitters, but not so Saint-Véran in the unspoilt Queyras valley, which sits at 2,040 metres and stakes a claim to be the highest (and, they say, the most beautiful) village in France. Situated in glorious Queyras regional natural park and known primarily as a place for enthusiastic ski tourers to get into the backcountry, it also has a small network of lifts for downhill skiers. Try the Chalets du Villard, whose rooms and separate gîtes have access to a sauna and restaurant (studio rooms from €102 per night sleeping two or €160 sleeping four, room only; gîtes from €465 per week sleeping four). Barèges, French Pyrenées Among 40 ski resorts across the French Pyrenées, the high mountain town of Barèges is an excellent choice, noted for its thermal waters and proximity to the Grand Tourmalet ski area, the region’s largest, which also incorporates La Mongie. Freeriding on the 2,877-metre Pic du Midi, with 10km of descent, is a big draw, though it’s almost as fun to ride the cable car up to the top just for a cappuccino on the sun terrace. Balneotherapy centres provide relaxing immersion in the famous waters, while kids might prefer an igloo-building lesson. The recently revamped 13-room Hotel le Central (doubles from €75 a night, room only) has a pool and handy in-house ski hire and servicing. Pays de Gex, Monts Jura A good all-round resort for a variety of snow-bound activities, Pays de Gex connects four characterful ski areas in the Monts Jura mountain range, 30 minutes’ drive from Geneva and covered under one ski pass costing a bargainous £19 a day. There’s great diversity among them: challenging Lélex-Crozet has a vertical drop of 800 metres, Mijoux-La Faucille offers dreamy cruising, Menthières has family runs, while 160km of cross-country tracks wind through the Domaine de la Vattay. Be sure to try bleu de Gex-Haut Jura, the local blue cheese. And consider Hôtel-Restaurant Bois Joly in Crozet, with magnificent balcony views and serving traditional fare featuring morilles, marrons and escargots. A seven-night stay costs from £506 for two people room only, booking.com Aravis valley, Savoie/Haute-Savoie The Aravis valley resorts of La Clusaz, Manigod, Saint-Jean-de-Sixt and Le Grand-Bornand are a serious option for skiers of all levels, linked by ski bus, with 230km of varied runs between them. La Clusaz is a good all-rounder with some gnarly off-piste on the Massif de Balme. Manigod’s woodland learner slopes are lovely for first-timers, while Le Grand-Bornand suits intermediates, with some black runs. The area excels when it comes to unusual extracurricular activities, too, such as a 7km night-time sledge run by torchlight or twilight fat-tyred e-bike descent in Le Grand-Bornand. All are easy to reach from Aravis Lodge (three nights’ half-board from £429pp, skiweekender.com), a chalet-hotel with sauna which runs a free shuttle bus. Montgenèvre, Hautes-Alpes This snow-sure resort on the French-Italian border lies at one end of the Milky Way ski area, where its own 60km of slopes are extended to 400km under the Grand Montgenèvre ski pass, which also covers the Italian resorts of Pragelato, Sestriere, Cesana, Sansicario and Sauze d’Oulx; the two countries’ cultures mix here. Montgenèvre has two boardercross courses, and some folk make day trips to the extreme off-piste resort of La Grave an hour away. Try Le Napoleon’s modern collection of self-catering apartments, with shared access to an indoor pool, hammam and sauna. A seven-night self-drive package costs from £420pp including Eurotunnel crossing with Ski Solutions Sainte Foy, Savoie Increasing numbers of skiing families are cottoning on to Sainte Foy, north of the Tarentaise’s Vanoise national park, as a fantastic alternative to its lively neighbours of Vald’Isère and Tignes. Gorgeous cruisy runs funnel down into the valley, making it hard to get lost, while experienced riders and skiers can discover awesome off-piste lines in the backcountry by hiring a guide when conditions are right. Peak Retreats has seven-nights’ self-catering at the centrally located Etoile des Cimes Sainte Foy Ski Apartments (from £656pp per week including Eurotunnel crossing), which has an indoor pool and spa Pralognan-la-Vanoise, Savoie One of the lesser-known resorts among 110 that are spread through the Savoie Mont Blanc region, Pralognan-la-Vanoise is only one valley over from Courchevel but a world away in terms of cost and atmosphere. This underappreciated gem in the Parc de la Vanoise combines decent downhill (10 reds, four blacks, 10 greens, five blues) with beautiful terrain for snowshoeing and cross-country skiing. One of France’s few curling rinks is open for visitors here, or try cold Toumo yoga, which originated in Tibet and is performed outdoors in the snow and glacial rivers. Hotel Edelweiss, with spa, sauna and gym, became the resort’s first four-star this season (from €980 per week B&amp;B sleeping two, five course dinner €35pp). Or self-cater in an apartment at Les Hauts de la Vanoise (from £500 per week sleeping four). Gérardmer, Vosges For those whose idea of a winter break involves lots of cosy time padding around a timber cabin watching snowflakes, rather than hammering the sort of pistes you see on Ski Sunday, this might be the one. A 10-minute drive from Gérardmer, whose ski area has 21 runs, night skiing and 30km of cross-country ski trails, is Vosges Cabin, a modern minimalist refuge in a nature reserve in the Vosges mountains. The owner describes the area as more akin to Germany’s Black Forest than the Alps, and the cabin features huge box windows for gazing out at woodland and sparkling Lac du Gérardmer, as well as a hot tub and sauna. Sleeps up to 16 in five en suite bedrooms and a bunk room, from €200-€450 a night depending on numbers, welcomebeyond.comAn extraordinary battle pitting New York multimillionaires against their billionaire neighbours is expected to reach fever pitch on Thursday when local politicians in the Hamptons vote on proposals to close an airport in the super-rich enclave. The East Hampton town board is expected to vote in favour of a plan to “deactivate” the local airport that buzzes with helicopters and private jets ferrying the uber-wealthy from Manhattan to their luxury beach houses. Residents who are wealthy enough to live in the Hamptons, but not enough to regularly fly in and out, have fought a months-long battle to close the airport that some claim has become so busy it is “like living near JFK”. On the other side, billionaires who regularly use East Hampton airport have been funding a campaign to keep it open. Flight logs show aircraft belonging to the former Google chair Eric Schmidt, the hedge fund manager and New York Mets owner Steve Cohen, and the New York Patriots and New England Revolution owner Bob Kraft regularly use the airport. The disagreement has been described as “the 2% v the 1%” and “the have-everythings v the have-a-lots”. After months of fiery council debates, the town board has proposed a complicated compromise whereby the airport closes as a Federal Aviation Administration facility on 28 February but reopens a couple of weeks later as a “publicly owned private-use airport”. This would allow the town’s officials to limit traffic and noise. Peter Van Scoyoc, the town’s supervisor, said: “The majority of the public has indicated that allowing the airport to continue operating as it has been is unacceptable, and that traffic volume, noise, environmental and safety concerns must be addressed.” The proposed plan would “provide [the] town with maximum flexibility to enact use restrictions” while retaining the “right to close [the] new airport completely if limits don’t provide needed community relief”, he added. The airport handled 31,464 flights in 2019, the latest year for which figures are available, up from 26,010 in 2015. Flights peaked at 266 a day in August 2019, according to a research paper published by the town. During months of online meetings to discuss the plans, Barry Raebeck, the head of the campaign group Say No to KHTO (East Hampton airport’s code), said: “Somebody who’s flying in in a huge jet, they are so self-important. They look down their nose at the East Hampton town. They just think: ‘We’re so rich and powerful. We can do whatever we want. We’ll hire some lawyers and we’ll just sort this out later.’” Another local resident said: “This airport serves a select few while dumping on the rest of this community. It has become unbearable and unsustainable. From Thursday to Monday we are subjected to an endless line of helicopters dumping on us from morning to night, with the heaviest traffic coming at times when we are trying to enjoy time with our family.” Proponents for keeping the airport open in its current form said people arriving by air spend about $20m (£14.7m) a year in the town.Even in a normal Sundance year, as Hollywood wraps up and heads to the mountains, it’s difficult to predict what will and won’t hit. What might look promising on paper too often tanks on screen while, time and time again, the smaller, less obvious titles resonate instead. What was set to be a hybrid physical-digital edition (after last year’s digital only fest) has now become online only, an inevitable downgrade after the rise of Omicron. It’s another low-key line-up surrounded by question marks, but here are the films to look out for: Sharp Stick Ever since the end of her landmark HBO show Girls, there has been a slight awkwardness to Lena Dunham’s creative output – from the ill-advised remake of Camping (Jennifer Garner is no Vicki Pepperdine) to her involvement with the one season, one star nightmare of Generation. But there’s every reason to be excited about Sharp Stick, her first film as director in over a decade. Despite a patchy final season, Girls remains something of a masterwork and her new film – about an affair between a babysitter and her employer – promises something interestingly knotty and exploratory. Dunham was inspired by female-led 70s dramas such as An Unmarried Woman and A Woman Under the Influence and stars in the film herself, alongside Jon Bernthal, Zola breakout Taylour Paige and Kristine Froseth. Master This year’s festival has a number of genre titles that deal with racial dynamics (Nikyatu Jusu’s Nanny posits a Senegalese woman in a tense, potentially supernatural scenario with her white employers while Tarantino mentee Krystin Ver Linden’s Alice shifts from slavery drama to blaxploitation thriller) but none sound quite as tantalizing as Mariama Diallo’s debut thriller, Master. More specific plot details are being kept understandably under wraps but we know that it follows three women at an elite university, built on the site of Salem-era gallows, battling discrimination as well as something even more horrifying. Regina Hall, an actor finally and deservedly getting her due, stars. Good Luck to You, Leo Grande While the film surrounding her didn’t quite live up to her performance, Emma Thompson’s Sundance crowd-pleaser Late Night was at least a welcome reminder of the actor’s substantial comic prowess. She returns this year with Good Luck to You, Leo Grande, starring as a retired teacher who feels like her sex life has never been quite as exciting as it should have been. To fix this, she hires a sex worker. Director Sophie Hyde was last at the festival with her wonderful, criminally underseen gem Animals, and will undoubtedly be a similarly sure hand here, working with a script from comedian Katy Brand. We Need to Talk About Cosby The crushing weight of what “America’s dad” Bill Cosby has been accused of by multiple women is the focus of W Kamau Bell’s damning four-part documentary, We Need to Talk About Cosby. In the series, Bell talks to survivors but also speaks to others who comment on not only the cultural impact of having to redefine someone from hero to villain but also the system that allowed for such abuse to go unnoticed for so long. “I never thought I’d ever wrestle with who we all thought Cosby was and who we now understand him to be,” Bell said of the project. “I’m not sure he would want me to do this work, but Cliff Huxtable definitely would.” 892 While the Star Wars franchise undoubtedly squandered John Boyega by the end, the British actor’s movie star charisma was one of the trilogy’s most exciting reveals. After an award-winning turn in Steve McQueen’s Small Axe, he’s aiming for more trophies with fact-based drama 892. Based on a 2018 article, the contained drama will see Boyega star as a haunted veteran struggling to deal with normal life who decides to rob a bank. The script is from award-winning playwright Kwame Kwei-Armah while Boyega’s supporting cast features Nicole Beharie, the under-utilized star of Miss Juneteenth, Connie Britton and Michael K Williams in his final screen role. Fresh After the success of Get Out, a buzzy Sundance premiere back in 2017, the term “social thriller” has surged in popularity among industry types, linked to everything from Tyrel to Us to Luce to Promising Young Woman, used to describe genre films that speak to deeper issues and the specific time of creation. In Mimi Cave’s directorial debut Fresh, it has been used to describe the story of a woman, played by Normal People’s Daisy Edgar-Jones, whose boredom of dating apps leads her to take a chance on a stranger, played by Sebastian Stan, who hides a dark secret. The film boasts Adam McKay, fresh off Netflix hit Don’t Look Up, as producer and has already been bought pre-fest by Searchlight. Call Jane While it’s sadly never not a topical time for a film about the restrictive nature of abortion access in the US, 2022 makes for a particularly troubling period and so this year, two particular films will carry an added prescience. Both look at The Jane Collective, an underground service in Chicago that pre-Roe vs Wade, helped women secure safe abortions. Documentary The Janes takes a broader look while Call Jane focuses on a housewife, played by Elizabeth Banks, who joins the group after her pregnancy leads to a condition that the medical system isn’t willing or able to help with. Carol screenwriter Phillis Nagy directs while Sigourney Weaver and Kate Mara co-star. jeen-yuhs: A Kanye Trilogy One of the most anticipated documentaries of the festival zeroes in on one of the most difficult subjects imaginable: Kanye West aka Ye. The immensely talented yet forever troubled musician isn’t directly involved with the project but he’s given it his blessing – a sprawling three-film look at an unusual life, two decades in the making. Directors Coodie &amp; Chike started recording West back in the late 90s and have kept their footage private ever since, but now, they’re hoping to show us another side of an artist we think we already know.Novak Djokovic could be deported from Australia because it was “plainly open” to the immigration minister to conclude the world No 1 tennis star was opposed to vaccination against Covid, the full federal court has said. Chief justice James Allsop on Thursday delivered the court’s reasons for rejecting Djokovic’s challenge to his visa cancellation. The court found it was reasonable for the minister to be concerned his presence “may encourage rallies and protests that may lead to heightened community transmission”. The decision resulted in Djokovic’s deportation just a day before the scheduled start of his Australian Open title defence. The Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, had cancelled Djokovic’s visa on the basis his presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he was a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. Djokovic’s lawyers disputed claims the tennis star was an anti-vaxxer, arguing that was based on one statement in April 2020 “well before Covid vaccines were available” and that Hawke had failed to ask the tennis player his views. The judges noted that in order to deport Djokovic the minister only had to be “satisfied that his presence is, or may be, or would, or might be … a risk”. To win, Djokovic would have had to have shown the minister could not have been satisfied “logically or rationally on the available material”. The judges concluded that it was open to Hawke to find that “Djokovic had a stance that was well-known on vaccination and that he was opposed to it” on the basis of the April 2020 news article. In that interview, Djokovic reportedly said he was “opposed to vaccination” although he had qualified this by saying that he was “no expert” and “would keep an open mind”. “Further, there was no issue that Mr Djokovic was not, by January 2022, vaccinated,” the judge said in their reasons, meaning it was “plainly open” for Hawke to infer “he was opposed to vaccination or did not wish to be”. The full court noted that Hawke was satisfied that Djokovic’s stance could encourage anti-vaccination groups and found the evidence supported “an affinity of these groups with his views”. “It was not irrational for the minister to be concerned that the asserted support of some anti-vaccination groups for Mr Djokovic’s apparent position on vaccination may encourage rallies and protests that may lead to heightened community transmission.” They also accepted that people “simply uncertain or wavering as to whether they will be vaccinated” might be influenced because “an iconic world tennis star may influence people of all ages, young or old, but perhaps especially the young and the impressionable, to emulate him”. The judges noted that there was evidence “Djokovic had recently disregarded reasonable public health measures overseas by attending activities unmasked while Covid positive to his knowledge”. Djokovic had admitted to attending events after testing positive to Covid-19 on 16 December, including knowingly attending a media interview and photoshoot on 18 December after he had been notified of the results. Djokovic’s lawyers argued Hawke failed to consider the impact on anti-vaccination sentiment if he were deported, but the judges concluded it was not necessary for him to do so. They also found Hawke “was aware of any number of different consequences that might ensue if the visa were cancelled” and had not ignored adverse consequences. Djokovic was taken into immigration detention after his visa was cancelled on 6 January, before it was restored by the federal circuit court on 10 January. On Thursday, The Sun reported that Djokovic was considering suing the Australian government over his detention, arguing it amounted to ill-treatment. Djokovic’s mother claims he was “subjected to torture, to harassment”, an apparent reference to the conditions at the Park hotel in Melbourne where he was kept with refugees and asylum seekers, who had reported finding maggots in their food in December. Hawke exercised a personal power to re-cancel Djokovic’s visa sparking the federal court case, which upheld the cancellation and resulted in his deportation the evening before the start of the Australian Open on Monday.An American film-maker has been put on trial in Italy for “offending the honour or prestige” of an Italian prosecutor after testifying in a criminal case against a former health ministry chief and representatives of a pharmaceutical company accused of supplying Italians with tainted blood products. Kelly Duda, who revealed how contaminated blood taken from prisoners in Arkansas was sold around the world, faces up to three years in prison if found guilty of an offence that dates back to Italy’s fascist period. Duda, who also gave testimony to the UK’s tainted blood inquiry in 2007, was contacted by Italian lawyers after his 2005 documentary about the Arkansas scandal, Factor 8, revealed that thousands of unwitting victims in several countries, including Italy, had died after receiving contaminated medications imported from the US. The cases in Italy dated back to the 1980s and 1990s, when 2,605 haemophiliacs were infected with HIV and hepatitis through plasma drawn from the blood of inmates in Arkansas. Duda’s investigation revealed that for three decades the state of Arkansas profited from blood collected from the prisoners, as part of a plasma programme run on behalf of the state by a now-defunct healthcare company. The blood products were sold worldwide, and the prisoners were paid a pittance. Before the documentary and being asked to testify, Duda had no connections to Italy and had not even visited the country. “For me, Italy first came up in 1999, when I discovered that the US FDA had enacted two international recalls of tainted blood, from the Arkansas prison system, and one of the countries this blood had gone to was Italy,” he said. “When I was asked to testify, I debated about whether to do it [and] in the end, I thought I was doing something good as so many people had suffered. But I ended up in a hornet’s nest.” In December 2017, Duda travelled to Naples to testify for the prosecution in a manslaughter trial against Duilio Poggiolini, a former chief of the health ministry’s pharmaceutical division, and 10 representatives from Marcucci Group, a pharmaceutical company which produced and marketed blood products. The defendants were acquitted in 2019. During what Duda described as a chaotic and confusing hearing, prosecutor Lucio Giugliano allegedly attempted to block and discredit his testimony – even though he was a prosecution witness – including evidence of a link between tainted blood from the Arkansas prison and Marcucci Group. After the hearing, as Duda shook hands with Giugliano, he told him: “In my country, what you did today as a prosecutor would be disgraceful.” Giugliano then told the judge that Duda had just committed a crime and the American was briefly detained. Two years later, Duda learned he would face a criminal trial in Rome on charges of having offended a prosecutor’s honour or prestige. Giugliano was not present at a hearing on Wednesday and the trial was postponed until July. Duda, who is being tried in absentia, said: “The prosecutor tried to block his witness – as in, me – from giving evidence and then only asked me questions designed to discredit me. And for this now I’m the one on trial? It’s mind-boggling, but I’m looking forward to defending myself.” The Council of Europe (CoE) published an alert about Duda’s case on its journalism protection platform, to which Italy is yet to respond, and he is being supported by Ossigeno per l’informazione, an organisation established to defend the rights of journalists. The crime that Duda is charged with dates back to 1930, during the rule of Benito Mussolini. Several other journalists have faced similar cases, including the Guardian’s Lorenzo Tondo, who is facing two libel claims by a prosecutor in Sicily over a Facebook post and a series of articles published by the Guardian. The CoE posted an alert about Tondo’s case in November, flagging the claims as potential acts of state “harassment and intimidation”. Libel cases filed by prosecutors against journalists have increased in Italy in recent years. “This crime is the heritage of a fascist setting and it’s incomprehensible that it still exists,” said Andrea Di Pietro, Duda’s lawyer. “Even the supreme court has said in several cases that prosecutors, especially prosecutors, must submit to criticism.”The late 2000s saw the discovery of a people now known as the Denisovans, a 40,000-year-old Neanderthal-Homo sapiens hybrid. Knowledge of the Denisovans remains rudimentary, in part because no fully extant skeletons have so far been found. In the first chapter of Sequoia Nagamatsu’s debut novel, and a decade into our future, scientists working in the remote reaches of the Altai mountains of Siberia come across the remains of a prehistoric female they name Annie. In contrast to earlier discoveries, her body is intact, mummified by the permafrost in which it has been encased, and now released from its icy sarcophagus by global heating. But this marvellous discovery has unforeseen consequences. Annie’s brain is infected with a previously unidentified and now reactivated pathogen, and the expedition is placed under quarantine. But in an inevitable chain of biosecurity breaches, the disease that becomes known as the Arctic Plague quickly spreads to the rest of the world. Written in the years immediately before Covid-19, How High We Go in the Dark seems unnervingly prescient. It describes healthcare services stretched beyond breaking point, stadiums used as morgues, shortages and curfews, first and second waves and variants of concern. Nagamatsu pays particular attention to the disproportionate ways in which social class and material poverty become determining factors in how communities experience the impact of the pandemic. “Something slowly changed between us as the virus evolved,” says Aubrey, a forensic pathologist who is working on the long-term effects of the disease. “Maybe it was the lack of space, being trapped together like that all the time, apart from the hours we spent at work, everyone afraid, with no place to go.” It is entirely possible that certain phrases and scenarios have been tweaked and highlighted during an editing process that will have taken place during lockdown. Yet the overall mood and tone of Nagamatsu’s fictional future is all the more affecting for being so much in sympathy with our lived present. The fact that he steers clear of the sensationalist and overfamiliar tropes of generic apocalypse, opting, instead, for a more subtle and unerringly humane response, gives the book both authority and pathos. How High We Go in the Dark is made up of more than a dozen discrete episodes, separate beads along the narrative timeline from the discovery and release of the virus, through the worst years of the pandemic, on into its lingering aftermath. The book then leaps 6,000 years ahead, revealing how decisions taken now might lead to radically divergent futures. Each segment is told from the point of view of a different character and highlights a significant aspect of evolving reality: accelerating developments in genetic modification; a revolutionary star drive; the cultural impact of public grieving. The commercialisation of death is shown through euthanasia theme parks, elegy hotels, lost lives preserved within the plastic carcasses of robot dogs. There is an argument that a novel constructed from what are, effectively, individual short stories will lack overall narrative focus. There is an equal and opposite argument that what might be lost in terms of a unified story arc is more than adequately compensated for by the rich, complex labyrinth of possibilities that this more exploratory approach allows. Nagamatsu’s skill lies not only in his evocative imagining of alternative realities, but also in how he builds bridges between them. What starts as a series of snapshots is assembled into a glimmering montage of interconnectedness: characters recur, relationships develop, what we initially glimpse at one remove assumes a pin-sharp focus. Like a Polaroid photograph, How High We Go in the Dark takes time to show its true colours. When they finally appear, the effect is all the more dazzling. A common criticism of science fiction is that while its ideas may be huge in scope, its interest in individual human beings – their psychology, motivations and spiritual character – has traditionally been sketchy or nonexistent. From the opposite benches, SF devotees castigate the literary mainstream for its navel-gazing and quotidian subject matter. This argument, with minor variations, has rumbled on for most of the past century; as one of the increasing number of newer writers who have grown up with sci-fi an integral part of their media landscape, Nagamatsu is clearly unencumbered by questions of genre, pro or contra. His novel, with its emphasis on family, mutual acceptance and the often unorthodox ways in which we are all connected, will be admired as much by fans of Becky Chambers’s hugely popular Wayfarers series as by readers of Richard Powers’s Booker-shortlisted Bewilderment. How High We Go in the Dark is a truly genre-transcending work in which sense of wonder and literary acumen are given boundless opportunity to shine. • How High We Go in the Dark by Sequoia Nagamatsu is published by Bloomsbury (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Retired salesman John Stimpson is 80 today. He will be celebrating with a cake at Slimming World this evening, followed by dinner with his family on Friday. Stimpson has one achievement in particular to mark: he has just completed his goal of building 30,000 swift boxes, which could house half of the UK’s breeding population of 60,000 pairs. Stimpson has been making these peculiarly shaped boxes for 13 years using three saws and three drills in his garage attached to his bungalow near Ely in Cambridgeshire. What started as a retirement hobby morphed into a full-time job after orders increased, and he sometimes works 13-hour days to get them all done. He sells them for £20, which is enough to cover his costs. He has also made about 700 boxes for barn owls and 800 for blue tits, finches, blackbirds and thrushes. According to the British Trust for Ornithology, a high percentage of swift boxes put up in the UK have been made by Stimpson. It wasn’t until he went through his order book last July that he realised quite how many he’d made. “I don’t get bored. It’s amazing the number of life problems that have been solved in this garage. Your mind thinks over things,” he says. He hopes he will still be making the boxes when he is 99 (the age his mother is), but his pace will probably slow. It is estimated that half the human-made nest boxes in the UK are inhabited, so Stimpson has probably housed 15,000 pairs of swifts. He talks about his achievement with modesty. “It’s a nice thought,” he says. “I’m quite proud of it at the end of the day. After failing academic exams in the 50s, I feel I’ve made a mark.” Stimpson retired early, after working as a Weetabix salesman for 20 years then selling horticultural labels at Burall Bros for another 19. He has lived in the village of Wilburton for 51 years with his wife, Jill. He says it was thanks to his grandfather – who was a farm worker – taking him out that he learned to love nature. “I get so much pleasure from wildlife. Building these boxes is one way I can pay it back.” Like many people, Stimpson has noticed an alarming loss of wildlife in his lifetime. The clouds of swifts, swallows and house martins of his childhood have disappeared. He feels angry that his two granddaughters cannot enjoy the abundance of the past. A loss of nesting sites is driving the decline of swifts in the UK, whose numbers are believed to have dropped by about 57% in 22 years. These migrants – which are now on the UK’s red list – are site specific, meaning each spring they come back to the same spot after flying thousands of miles from Africa. The problem is that lots of old barns and draughty houses have been upgraded and patched up and nesting sites have disappeared. In spring, swifts screech when trying to find a place to nest and attract mates. Some birds will frantically flap their wings in vain, trying to find their old nesting spot. “To hear these birds screaming is quite distressing,” says Stimpson. “There’s no need for it. We can have our houses airtight, but we can still make homes for them,” he says. Thirteen years ago no one was making swift boxes, so Stimpson started. “I’m not a carpenter, I’m a salesman, but I thought I’ll certainly give it a go,” he says. When he started he could make three a day, now on a really good day he can make 30. “I still want to make as many boxes as I can. I don’t like letting people down. My word is my bond,” he says. His boxes have been sent all over the UK, as well as to Sweden, France, Spain and Italy, and his computer is full of pictures of swifts in his boxes from grateful recipients. Government and big wildlife organisations have too much bureaucracy, says Stimpson, and don’t end up doing much to stop wildlife loss. “We seem to have too many pen-pushers and not enough workers,” he says. “We could do an awful lot more than we’re doing. I don’t care if it’s Tory, Labour, Liberals or the Monster Raving Loony party. They need to address this.” He believes local action groups are much more effective and has been working with a number of them, including the Suffolk Bird Group, who run Save our Suffolk Swifts (SOS Swifts), and Action for Swifts. “The number of swift groups that have started up in the last five to eight years is quite staggering. And they seem to go from strength to strength,” he says. Volunteers want to emulate the success story of barn owls. In 1987, these farmland birds were at their lowest ebb with 4,500 breeding pairs. Thanks to volunteers, today there are about 12,000 breeding pairs in the UK, with 80% living in human-made boxes. There are small success stories all over the country. Eddie Bathgate noticed Suffolk’s swift population crashing in the 1990s and 2000s, so he set up SOS Swifts in 2016. Now there are more than 1,200 of Stimpson’s boxes around the county, including 120 in Bathgate’s home town of Woodbridge, 27 of which hosted nesting pairs last summer. In Cumbria, volunteers from Sedbergh Community Swifts have put up 140 boxes, all made by Stimpson, except for seven, which were copies made by local schoolchildren. An ad hoc survey of 99 boxes last summer found 46% of them were occupied. “Swifts are the one thing where an individual can make a significant difference,” says Dick Newell, from Action for Swifts, who has 66 pairs of nesting swifts in his village of Landbeach in Cambridgeshire, 20 of them nesting on his house. “They are terrific birds. I’ve been an engineer. I like problem solving, and these birds present so many problems that we can solve.” Newell says developers should be obliged to put a swift brick in every new-build, and he has been working with housebuilding company Taylor Wimpey to make this happen. Exeter city council has started incorporating them into new buildings, as well as the Duchy of Cornwall, and local councils are getting on board. Others are working on bee bricks and hedgehog holes in new developments. “John Stimpson has provided space for nature on a scale that I don’t know if anyone else has done, and he’s nearly 80,” says Bathgate. “We have to hope that someone will step into his shoes, although I don’t think he has any plans for retirement.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresAll right, time for us to sign off now. You can find all the daily Covid statistics in the summary post pinned at the top of the blog. Today’s other notables: • The TGA has granted provisional approval to the protein-based Covid-19 vaccine, Novovax, and also granted provisional approval to the first two oral Covid-19 treatments in Australia, Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir + ritonavir) and Lagevrio (molnupiravir). • We learned that prime minister Scott Morrison planned to ask the states to allow under-18s to drive forklifts at today’s national cabinet meeting as part of measures to ease the staff shortages crippling supply chains, and then reversed on the plan after it was roundly criticised – and lampooned – with one union official calling the idea a “brain fart”. • The full federal court published its reasons for dismissing tennis player Novak Djokovic’s challenge seeking to restore his visa, concluding it was open to minister Alex Hawke to find that Djokovic was anti-vaccination. • Morrison has insisted that claims the federal government is requisitioning rapid antigen tests are “categorically untrue” and allegations made regarding this will be referred to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. • Victoria will allow IVF treatments to resume despite a pause on elective procedures in the state after significant public outcry. • The foreign minister, Marise Payne, met with her British counterpart, Liz Truss, in Sydney today, announcing the two governments have vowed to coordinate sanctions over state-backed hacking attacks, saying they want to “raise the costs” for countries that conduct hostile activity in cyberspace. • An Australian air force aircraft has just arrived in Tonga carrying supplies in the assistance effort to help the Pacific nation after the devastating volcano explosion on the weekend. • Australia’s unemployment rate has dropped to its lowest in more than 13 years, sinking to 4.2% in December from 4.6% in November. Please do join us again tomorrow morning for what promises to be a fabulous Friday full of news. I hope you have a lovely evening. First Nations groups have today slammed Australia for missing the deadline to introduce new safeguards against torture and abuse in jails. Four years ago, the Australian government ratified a treaty – the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture – to bring all its detention sites, including juvenile justice centres such as Don Dale and onshore immigration detention centres, under independent scrutiny to stop abuses. The independent watchdog, known as a national preventive mechanism, would have standing powers to conduct regular and random inspections of prisons, immigration detention centres, juvenile detention centres and held psychiatric facilities. The deadline for setting up those independent monitoring mechanisms was today. In August it was already becoming apparent that Australia would miss this deadline. Only three states have fulfilled or are in the process of fulfilling their obligations under OPCAT. First Nations groups have responded today, with co-chair of justice coalition Change the Record, Cheryl Axleby, calling the lack of action “a national disgrace”. For three decades First Nations peoples have been dying in police and prison cells and we have been calling for governments to take the deaths, mistreatment and abuse of our people in custody seriously. The Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture, and the Closing the Gap agreements, were an opportunity for governments to implement independent oversight and accountability of police and prisons to prevent more tragedies. Instead, they have done nothing. A prison sentence should never be a death sentence – yet since the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody over 500 of our people have died behind bars. The Commonwealth, state and territory governments have had four years to meet this deadline. It is a national disgrace that we are still waiting for action to end the discriminatory laws, policies and practices that see our people die behind bars. There have been a few more reasons than usual to take care in the water this summer – tsunami warnings anyone? But I reckon I might avoid any more ocean dips entirely after reading this one. I appreciate that bluebottles are fascinating but NO THANKS. The national aged care regulator has intervened in a south-west Sydney nursing home at the centre of a Covid outbreak after finding it failed to meet quality standards relating to infection control and effective management of the outbreak. On 6 January, Guardian Australia reported on a major outbreak at the Bupa Clemton Park facility that saw more than 60 residents and staff become infected with Covid-19, and one fully vaccinated person in palliative care die. After the report, the aged care quality and safety commission formally intervened, ordering the facility to stop new admissions for six months for failing to meet compliance standards of the Aged Care Act. The facility has also been ordered to appoint interim nursing management. More details here: We heard from the prime minister earlier today in the wake of the National Cabinet meeting; the official statement from that meeting is here if you missed it, or just feel like going through it all again. I won’t judge. My colleague Josh Taylor has been watching the parliamentary inquiry on social media and online safety, which today featured United Australia party leader, Craig Kelly. Kelly used his platform at the inquiry to take Google and Facebook to task over the removal of his party’s videos from YouTube and over his ban from Facebook for pushing unproven treatments for Covid-19. United Australia Party has spent close to $5m advertising its videos on YouTube since Kelly became leader of the party in August, accounting for about 98% of all political ad spend on YouTube in Australia during that time. YouTube has not banned the account or ceased taking money from the party, but it has removed a number of the party’s videos for allegedly violating its community guidelines. Kelly was also banned from Facebook and Instagram last year for posts promoting unproven Covid-19 treatments such as ivermectin and hydroxychloroquine. Read the full story here: Sydney’s Wayside Chapel, which serves the homeless and others in the Kings Cross and Bondi areas of eastern Sydney, is among the not-for-profit groups struggling to secure rapid antigen tests. The chapel’s pastor and chief executive, Jon Owen, says: We’re in the process of having to beg, borrow and steal to secure any rapid antigen tests so we can maintain just basic minimum staffing levels to keep our operations going. On his first day back after contracting Covid himself, Owen said getting RATs would likely be a significant investment, “easily” running into the thousands of dollars, with more costs to come. “We’re doing everything we can to keep our doors open,” he said. He added that they “need to make sure that our staff are negative” as they work with people who often have co-morbidities and other vulnerabilities. Previously, people would just get a PCR test and isolate, and now the staff of about 140 people have to take RATs, and also offer them to the “few hundred people a day” that they serve. The problem is common across the not-for-profit sector, Owen said. We’re all in the same boat, trying ... to do the best that we can for our people, racking up the debts along the way. Securing those RATs, though, is not easy even if there’s money found. We’re going to hospitals, we’re going to pharmacies ... We’re hearing rumours ‘this shops got some’, or ‘that shops got time’ ... it’s a bit of a mad scramble. Surfing great Kelly Slater could be the next big name in sport to be refused the right to compete in Australia, with the federal health minister saying the 11-time champion will not be allowed into the country if he is not vaccinated against Covid. Slater, who has not publicly disclosed his Covid vaccination status, has aired some controversial views on Covid vaccines, including an Instagram comment in October that claimed he knew “more about being healthy than 99% of doctors”. The American tour veteran, who has no medical qualifications, has previously said he is not anti-vaccine but opposed to making vaccination mandatory. Slater has also been critical of the visa process that ended with the recent deportation of tennis world No 1 Novak Djokovic. Read the full story here: A Sydney woman who worked as a medical intern at a Sydney hospital despite not being qualified or registered to practise was today convicted in the Local Court of NSW and sentenced to two years imprisonment to be served by intensive corrections order in the community. The woman, Zhi Sin Lee, was also fined $10,000 and ordered to pay legal costs of $3,400. This is the first time a term of imprisonment has been imposed under the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law. Lee is not qualified as a medical practitioner and is not registered. In 2020, she was part-way through completing a Doctor of Medicine qualification at the University of New South Wales but failed a number of disciplines and was advised she would not be eligible to graduate. Despite this, she accepted a position as a medical intern at Bankstown-Lidcombe Hospital for the 2021 intake of intern medical practitioners and worked 126 shifts between 18 January and 9 August. Her employment was immediately terminated when the hospital discovered that she was not registered. The Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency charged Lee with one count of falsely claiming to be qualified to practise in breach of section 116 of the National Law. She pleaded guilty to the charge on 18 November 2021 and was sentenced today. Magistrate Bartley said Lee “put her own interests ahead of the risk to patients … and knew she was risking the welfare of her patients,” noting it was concerning that her offending took place in a public hospital in the middle of a pandemic with “repeated, calculated dishonesty”. However, Bartley accepted that Lee had demonstrated remorse. An Australian air force aircraft has just arrived in Tonga carrying supplies, according to a statement released by the federal government. The joint statement from foreign affairs minister Marise Payne, defence minister Peter Dutton and minister for international development and the Pacific Zed Seselja, said supplies on the flight include shelter materials, hygiene supplies, PPE for people clearing ash and water containers, communication equipment and “a skid-steer loader with a sweeper to support runway operations”. The statement said: The delivery of supplies today is part of the initial package of urgent humanitarian assistance. This is in addition to the Australian Government’s existing stores in Tonga, which are already being distributed to the most affected regions via two Guardian Class Patrol Boats and a landing craft that were gifted by Australia to His Majesty’s Armed Force’s (HMAF). The C-17A flight today was made possible thanks to the tireless efforts of Tongan authorities who have worked to clear a thick layer of volcanic ash from the runway at Tongatapu Fua’amotu International Airport to enable the planes to land. Recognising Tonga’s Covid-19-free status, we will deliver the supplies in a COVID-safe way. We are carrying out our work in close partnership with the Tongan Government. HMAS Adelaide, which is currently in Brisbane, is also preparing to deploy to Tonga with supplies and aid, and is expected to depart late today or early tomorrow. The board of People With Disability Australia (PWDA), one of Australia’s peak disability rights and advocacy organisations, is calling on the Disability Royal Commission (DRC) to launch an emergency public hearing into the impact of the Omicron wave of Covid-19 on people with disability, saying it is critical that the commission “take action before it is too late”. Board members of PWDA have written an open letter to DRC chair Ronald Sackville urging him to convene a hearing into “the failure of Australian governments and responsible parties to adequately keep people with disability safe during the Covid-19 pandemic and specifically during the Omicron wave”. The letter says: We, the Board of PWDA, call upon our Disability Royal Commission to immediately convene an emergency public hearing into the failure of Australian governments and responsible parties to adequately keep people with disability safe during the Covid-19 pandemic and specifically during the Omicron wave. We note that Omicron presented unique challenges which should have been addressed by protective strategies and positive measures undertaken by government. We further note that people with disability and their families are still living in crisis, continue to be unprotected and have been failed by the responsible bodies charged with our care. The letter goes on to list the matters they propose be considered in such a hearing, which include death rates from Covid among people with a disability, failing supports and services, the vaccination rollout, inadequate access to rapid antigen and PCR testing, welfare payments and penalties, and more. You can read the full letter and the list here. They go on to say: The number of people with disability who have been lost to Covid-19 and preventable death is steadily increasing and we fear that the situation will worsen without urgent measures. Health authorities are, as you can imagine, watching like wedge-tailed eagles a few metrics to gauge how big a strain Omicron will place on hospitals. The ACT estimated a week ago that average hospitalisation rates of patients with the Omicron variant was about two to three days, compared with seven days for Delta. That ratio is holding steady, with the greater churn of patients helping to give the hospitals some leeway to cope with the extra cases presenting. Governments’ continuous call for people to get vaccinated sounds monotonous, but the latest NSW data from the Health Department’s critical intelligence unit helps to explain why they keep repeating the mantra. In the week to 16 January, the percentage of unvaccinated Covid patients in ICU represented 43.8%, or far higher than their share of the population. About 4.7% of those over 16 have not had at least one vaccination shot, while 6.2% are not double vaccinated. Covid patients, meanwhile, occupied 40.4% of the state’s ICU beds as of 16 January, up about 7.4％ in a week, the data shows. Qantas Airways Ltd said on Thursday it would seek to terminate its contract terms with long-haul flight attendants in a move that would lead to large pay cuts after union members voted against more flexible rostering, Reuters reports. Qantas said it is the first time in its history that it has sought to terminate an employment terms agreement, or a contract between employers and unions, which is a rare and heated move in industrial relations in Australia. If successful, cabin crew pay and conditions would revert to a much lower Australian minimum industry standard while a new agreement is negotiated. The move sets the airline up for a high-profile union battle at a time when it also needs to reach agreements with short-haul crew for it to seal the business case for a major Airbus SE narrowbody aircraft order. “Qantas should withdraw this threat,” said Michele O’Neil, president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, adding that flight attendants had made sacrifices during the pandemic and had the full support of the union movement in their fight. Qantas’ latest contract offer to long-haul flights attendants was rejected by 97% in a vote in December. The airline said a union counter-offer was “unworkable” as it would have raised costs by A$60 million ($43.30 million) over four years. Qantas International Chief Executive Andrew David said in a statement: We’re seeking termination because we can’t effectively run our business without the rostering changes we desperately need to properly restart our international network in a post-COVID world. Under the current agreement, cabin crew operating on the A330 fleet cannot be used on the 787 and A380 fleets, making it more difficult for Qantas to shift aircraft types. The airline is running just 20% of its pre-COVID-19 international capacity in the current quarter with the emergence of the Omicron variant leading to tougher border restrictions in some countries. Qantas said Australia’s Fair Work Commission was expected to deal with the application in the coming weeks, with the airline requesting an expedited hearing. It said it was open to putting the same deal the union had rejected back on the table. The full federal court has just published its reasons for dismissing Novak Djokovic’s challenge seeking to restore his visa. In their judgment, the three justices set out the test for minister Alex Hawke to cancel the visa: It is not the fact of Mr Djokovic being a risk to the health, safety or good order of the Australian community; rather it is whether the minister was satisfied that his presence is or may be or would or might be such a risk. The judges concluded that it was open to Hawke to find that “Mr Djokovic had a stance that was well-known on vaccination and that he was opposed to it”. They noted: Mr Djokovic was not, by January 2022, vaccinated. It was plainly open to the Minister to infer that Mr Djokovic had for over a year chosen not to be vaccinated since vaccines became available ... It was plainly open to the Minister to infer that Mr Djokovic had chosen not to be vaccinated because he was opposed to vaccination or did not wish to be vaccinated.” There are currently 54 Covid patients in NT hospitals, with five patients requiring oxygen. One patient is in ICU. Those new cases – as for the last few days – includes a lot of people in remote communities and high risk communities. Here’s the breakdown for today: 15 cases in Galiwinku 4 cases in Yirrkala 10 cases in Umbakumba. The source of the infection is from interstate travel. Health staff are in the community undertaking testing, contact tracing and providing the COVID-19 vaccine. 6 cases in high-risk settings in Darwin including hostels, sober up shelters and rough sleepers. This is in addition to four cases yesterday. Danila Dilba Health Service and Larrakia Nation are working together to undertake Covid-19 testing in high-risk settings. 2 cases at the Darwin Correctional Centre 2 cases at the Barkly Work Camp 8 cases at the Alice Springs Correctional Centre with further testing being undertaken today 1 case in the Old Timers Aged Care Facility in Alice Springs 3 cases in Santa Teresa 14 cases in Yuendumu 10 cases in Ntaria and surrounding homelands NT authorities have also lifted the lockdown in Yirrkala from 2pm local time today. There are now no restrictions on the reasons to leave home. Full details on the NT Health website. Ash from Saturday’s volcano eruption in Tonga is moving away from continental Australia and over the Indian Ocean, according to the latest Darwin Volcanic Ash Advisories. The ash cloud initially had an altitude of approximately 40,000 feet – 12km – and higher, a Bureau of Meteorology spokesperson said. It has since moved to between 42,000 and 63,000 feet (12.8 to 19.2km). According to the BoM: The ash cloud continues to influence the sunrise over western parts of Australia. As the sun rises, it reflects off the particles, resulting in colourful hues. The ash cloud has caused minimal impacts to Australian aviation services, as most commercial airlines fly at 36,000 feet or lower. The Australian and British governments have vowed to coordinate sanctions over state-backed hacking attacks, saying they want to “raise the costs” for countries that conduct hostile activity in cyber space. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, met with her British counterpart, Liz Truss, in Sydney today. They will be joined by the defence minister, Peter Dutton, and the British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, for a broader 2+2 meeting tomorrow. Payne said they had agreed today to launch a Cyber and Critical Technology Partnership to “help shape a positive technology environment and maintain an internet that is open, free, peaceful and secure”. Without naming any particular country, Payne said they wanted to impose “greater costs on malign actors who would undermine the region’s prosperity and security for their own ends”. She said in a statement issued this afternoon: “Australia is committed to working with partners such as the UK to challenge malign actors who use technology to undermine freedom and democracy. We will work with allies to maintain an internet environment that is open, free, peaceful and secure, consistent with international law, and which maximises opportunities for economic growth. Australia and the UK share the goal that technology is used to uphold and protect liberal democratic values, and to benefit our societies, economies and national security.” Describing the first initiatives under the partnership, Payne’s statement says the UK and Australia will: Increase deterrence by raising the costs for hostile state activity in cyberspace – including through strategic coordination of our cyber sanctions regimes; Strengthen the resilience and response capabilities of countries in the Indo-Pacific region to malicious cyber activity via joint capacity building activity. This will include tackling the increasing threat from ransomware through a joint initiative delivered in partnership with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime – a valuable step in helping the region to bring an end to criminal activity in cyberspace; Develop an action plan on global standard setting to ensure global standards deliver on our security priorities, economic interests and reflect our values; Advance the Women in Cyber agenda, including through our Women and International Security in Cyber Fellowship. While the prime minister was speaking, WA health authorities released that state’s Covid numbers for the day. There were five local cases of transmission and five from interstate travel. No Covid patients are in hospital in WA at this time. Scott Morrison has backed down on his plan to allow children to drive forklifts as part of plans to ease the staff shortage currently crippling supply chains. “We agreed to proceed no further with the issue of 16-year-old forklift drivers,” he said this afternoon after a national cabinet meeting with state and territory leaders. The PM floated the idea, described by unions as a “brain fart” that would lead to tragedy, yesterday. Morrison took the idea to national cabinet today, just as Guardian Australia revealed earlier (on this very blog) that he would do. “We had a good discussion about it today and it is not something that we believe, collectively, that is something we should be pursuing at this time,” Morrison said this afternoon. And that’s it from the PM today. Hope you’re all still with us, we probably all need a cup of tea after that. A question on wage growth and unemployment: With the unemployment rate at its lowest point since 2008 and the tightening labour market, which has yet to translate to upward pressure on wage growth, when do you expect to see wage growth to start appearing? Morrison’s answer shifts quite clearly into campaign mode. I’m sure there’ll be a lot more commentary about some of these claims, as there already has been: To see unemployment fall, as you say, to the lowest level since 2008, and particularly to see youth unemployment fall below 10%, this shows the Australian economy, despite the challenges of this pandemic, the Australian economy has proved incredibly resilient and strong. And it reinforces the approach that our government has taken from the very outset of this pandemic. It has been about saving lives and has also been about saving livelihoods. On saving lives, there’d be more than 40,000 Australians that would be dead today if we had the same experience of Covid as so many other countries like Australia around the world. We have about 250,000 more people in jobs today than when the pandemic started. That shows that we have been keeping people’s livelihoods in place as well. Saving lives, saving livelihoods, protecting against the future, one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, that is what our response has been delivering. Reporter: Is there any evidence or modelling regarding potential infection rates of people returning [to work] without daily rapid antigen tests or with them? Have we been watching what’s happening in Canada and the US for example? Kelly: It’s a balance as I said. We know that the ideal is, in some countries, we have a 21 day isolation. ... Every time you shorten the period, there is an increase of transmission in multiple ways and the advice that was put out from Atagi is very clear that there’s a bunch of mitigation measures that you can do to make workplaces safer: masks, distancing, and all the things we know about good hygiene ventilation and all that. Rapid antigen tests or other testing regimes, or indeed, symptom checking when people come in, is a standard approach that many businesses in healthcare and aged care have been doing from the beginning of the pandemic. RAT tests as part of that ... we think we’ve got the balance right. The discussion has turned, following comments from the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, to consideration of whether the definition of “fully vaccinated” should mean three doses of a vaccine rather than two. Basically, Morrison says it’s an “item of discussion”, but as so many people haven’t yet had a booster, and Atagi hasn’t advised on that specifically yet, the federal government hasn’t changed its mandate policy: The commonwealth government doesn’t mandate those arrangements, decisions are taken solely by states and territories. We have only supported mandates in the case of health and aged care settings and certain disability settings and there’s been no change to the commonwealth view and I know already, in some states, they are doing mandates on boosters. This is a bit of a sidebar to the Covid news, but it’s important to note that Morrison was asked about Ukraine: Reporter: What are your concerns about the thousands of Russian troops amassed near the border? What action is the Australian government considering, given your meeting tonight with the UK foreign and defence secretaries? Morrison: On the Ukraine, it’s a matter that we can following closely, especially with our partners, we are moving in concert with them. ... [There are] some 1400 Australians that live in the Ukraine and so we are very mindful of that issue and their safety. It is obviously a tense situation and it’s one that we will continue to work with our partners on in terms of any response ... but there [has been] no request made and none are anticipated. Morrison continues on concessional access to RATs through pharmacies: Chemist, pharmacies, the warehouse distributors, all those, they are private companies. Making supplies available to the public like a supermarket. And they have the distribution channels, they have their arrangements – what we are doing is ensuring that those who are concession card holders get equitable access to those private products and [are not] penalised because of the cost of acquiring those products. We are dealing with it from an equity point of view. There is no health requirement for them to go there and buy them, if there was a health requirement for them to do it, they’d be able to access them ... [at] a public testing site. Reporter: Prime minister, if it is your government’s responsibility to buy rapid tests for the aged care sector, why is not your government’s responsibility to buy them and procure them for the concession card scheme been run through pharmacies? Morrison: We are providing concessional access to private supplies. We are not nationalising pharmacies. We are not nationalising supermarkets and food stores. The question implies that and that is not what we do. They source their supplies. We have agreed to provide for equity purposes concessional access to things that are bought in the pharmacy. Like we did with many products. I want to be clear. If you require a test, by a public health order, if you are a close contact, then you can get a free test from the state testing clinics. (You know, I’m not sure that the question is actually suggesting the nationalisation of supermarkets and food stores.) Kelly says children who are close contacts should not be attending school: The definition of a close contact is the same for children as it is for adults. Household members. That brings into play that same approach, if you are close contact of a case in your house, you should not be coming to school. He adds: We want to keep schools open and want to get them open and part of the surveillance testing is about that, about giving confidence to get kids back to school and teachers back into the classroom as well. Reporter: Why has the federal government agreed to go 50-50 on the cost of testing in schools ... if the health advice is that that is not necessary, why not spend that money on more tests for the general population that are looking to get their hands on them? Morrison: We are seeking to work constructively with states and territories. States and territories will make decisions keep schools open. That is our objective. We need the schools open ... If schools aren’t open, you could see that the peak furloughing of our workforce go from 10% to 15%. Which would have a devastating effect on our economy and the broader functioning of society. Keeping schools open is a high priority for all of us. The medical advice on this is next but I can certainly tell you, from the chief medical officer and across the AHPPC, that is not a strong recommendation that surveillance testing is necessary for that purpose. There are other policy purposes that the states need to consider to ensure schools are open. Reporter: Professor Kelly, do you have any modelling on what we should expect in terms the spread of Omicron once school in the classroom does start again? Kelly: Having children back in the class will increase the movement around cities. We know that. Towns right across Australia, it happens every year. We shared some modelling with the national cabinet today which demonstrated that every January, there is a drop in the mixing and the number of contacts on average, contacts that have people outside the house, that is the standard holiday phenomenon. We do expect that [the transmission potential] will increase as schools go back. That is something we need to deal with and we are very much and agreed, in agreement to get schools back. That is important. Kelly says, however, that it is important for children to return to school: The reasons [are] health: physical, mental, social, developmental for children. We need to take that on its merits and balance like we have been doing for essential workers, that issue. Reporter: How do you ensure that priority groups get the rapid antigen tests on time without the supplies being redirected to Commonwealth orders [given priority on the commonwealth orders]? Morrison: We’re not redirecting supplies to commonwealth orders. And we have not put in place any arrangements to do that. We deal with the suppliers directly, as do the state and territory governments, and enter commercial arrangements with them. ... We are not nationalising the means of production or distribution as a government. Even though some might want to do that, our government would never do that. That is not what is taking place. He adds: The priorities were for rapid antigen testing – firstly, it is to deal with our healthcare workers and aged care workers ... [as] agreed by national cabinet last week, and secondly, it is to deal with those that are symptomatic and are close contacts. And to deal with the highly [vulnerable] populations, particularly Indigenous communities and groups of that nature. That is where we are seeing the tests need to be. ... The concessional access is being provided to the private market to about 6.7 million Australians. That is where the rapid antigen test had been prioritised, and those other parties that national cabinet agreed to last week. Questions now. A reporter asks: Is the government distorting the rapid antigen test market by trying to build those stockpiles? Morrison: I do not believe the government is doing that. As to why suppliers would be telling others these falsehoods, you have to ask them why they are doing that. I am making it clear that if you are being told that you can’t get access to it, or that your suppliers are no longer going to supply you because the commonwealth has been taking your supplies, that is not true. It is just not true. The chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, is speaking now. He’s starting with the high rates of Covid across the country, and the high death rates. A reminder that we saw the deadliest day of the pandemic in Australia just this week. We are seeing a lot of cases, we know that right around Australia, even in WA, there are some cases now, [though] much less than in other states. That time will come. At the moment, 1.15 million cases reported since the beginning of the year. We are still in January. That has led, as we know, to a number of hospitalisations ... We expected to see a lot of cases in this wave. And we have. This is because the high transmissibility of the virus and we have certainly seen that. We did say and ... I continue to stand by the fact that this is a much less severe type of the virus than previous waves. When you get such high caseloads, you have, unfortunately, some people that are experiencing severe disease. The pattern we have seen all the way through the pandemic remains the same, though. We are seeing younger people in hospital because there are a large number of cases in younger people. In terms of intensive care, it remains very rare. Only about 0.1% overall needing to be admitted to ICU. It is a very much lower rate than what we have seen throughout the rest of the pandemic. Similarly with the death rate, it is about that 0.1%. One in a thousand. That is much less for younger people. The rate of death increases with age. Now, Morrison is reiterating comments made earlier about the issue of rapid antigen tests and claims the commonwealth was hoovering up supply: Final point I want to [make] before handing over to the chief medical officer: you may be aware of some false claims regarding commonwealth government requisitioning of rapid antigen tests. I want to stress that these are false claims. I will read to you a statement from the Department of Health: The commonwealth government through the Department of Health is reporting false claims of the requisitioning of rapid antigen tests to the ACCC. These claims are categorically untrue. They have also been made in relation to at least one state government and will be a matter for the ACCC. Supplies of rapid antigen testing kits are not being redirected to the commonwealth and at no time has the department sought to place itself ahead of other commercial and retail entities. On the matter of return to school, Morrison says: Return to schools will be announced individually by each jurisdiction over the next few days and some will make their announcements today. The school operational plans will be consistent with the principles that we agreed last week. Where surveillance testing is elected to be done by a state or territory, including for early childhood education and childcare centres, the ... federal government will be supporting that 50-50 through the national partnership agreement with those states and territories and that will be done on an individual jurisdiction basis. On the forklifts issue, Morrison says: We agreed to proceed no further with the issue of 16-year-old forklift drivers. We had a good discussion about it today and it is not something that we believe ... we should be pursuing at this time. We also agreed to proceed through the transport minister’s national cabinet subcommittee on the proposals regarding licensing, and ensuring that we can have an experience-based licensing system for our road transport ... operators and other truck drivers. They can also recognise New Zealand licenses to ensure that we can get more of those truck drivers into truck cabs now that are needed because of the following impacts of Covid. Morrison is talking about supply chain pressures now, and has said the government ill not be reducing the close contact isolation time from seven days to five: The measures we have taken to alleviate the pressures, particularly around close contact levels and isolation, are having a positive impact [on] the distribution centres, production side of things ... The challenge still remains to ensure that we keep working on the workforce pressures and the logistics and distribution and transport sector. We agreed today that we should retain the arrangements for close contacts for essential workforces ... It is all about getting the right balance between getting people back to work and not over stressing the hospital system, which is under a lot of stress. We believe we have that balance right. The close contact definition that we have for essential workers is doing the job of alleviating the pressure and at the same time, helping us stay within our capacity to continue to support our hospital system. We will also not be changing at this point the isolation period for a positive case of seven days. Scott Morrison is beginning the presser by spruiking the current unemployment numbers. Unemployment has fallen to 4.2%, down from 5.2% at the time of the last election, down from 5.7% when the government was first elected. 1.7 million more Australians and jobs since, including 1 million more women in since then ... It peaks during the pandemic. ... There is nothing that pleases me more than young people getting into jobs. That has been one of the highest priorities for our government. We’re going to Canberra now where the prime minister is speaking after national cabinet. Still in South Australia, 290 people are in hospital, 29 people are in intensive care and nine are on ventilators. Sadly, nine men and two women have died in the state from Covid. The premier, Steven Marshall, says the unexpectedly large number may be due to anomalies in the reporting lines. We should also get Covid news from South Australia, the Northern Territory and Western Australia sometime this afternoon, so you’ll have a full picture of the national Covid situation before too long. We’re standing by to hear from Canberra, where national cabinet has been meeting. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is expected to speak shortly. Australia’s drugs regulator has for the first time approved oral treatments for Covid-19 which should help address supply shortages of other treatments. The approval applies to two drugs – Paxlovid and Lagevrio. They have been “provisionally” approved, which means they can be administered by health professionals in limited circumstances but the manufacturers must submit further data as the drugs are used more widely. The director of infectious diseases at Mater Health Services, associate professor Paul Griffin, said on Thursday: We’ve got great safe and effective vaccines. We’ve got intravenously administered antivirals and monoclonal antibodies, which have certainly helped us. But what we’ve been missing right now is an oral therapy that changes the course of the Covid illness. So how do these pills work and who will benefit most from them? Read all the details here: Three service industry peak bodies, who’ve been collectively flattened by the Omicron wave, have banded together around a six point plan to stop their members going under. The Australian Retailers Association, Restaurant and Catering Australia and the Tourism and Transport Forum are calling on state and federal governments to step in, as they’re hit with “ongoing supply chain challenges, a record low in consumer confidence and up to 50% of workers going into isolation during January” – all with “almost no government support”, as ARA chief executive, Paul Zahra, puts it. “Omicron [is] impacting business more than any other time in the pandemic,” Zahra said in a statement. Some of the asks are probably more palatable to epidemiologists than others. Here they are: Easy, affordable access to rapid antigen tests, with costs underwritten by the federal government, “so businesses are not lumped with additional costs – on top of the trading impacts they’re currently suffering”. (I think we’d all like that one.) An expansion of close contact isolation exemptions to include workers in retail, hospitality and tourism. Prioritisation of specialised workers on the skilled migrant list. Here, they point out “the retail, hospitality and tourism industries were already dealing with skills shortages before the Omicron wave”. Rent relief for businesses with a turnover of up to $50m nationally (NSW currently has rent relief available to businesses turning over less than $5m, and in Victoria it’s $10m). The reinstatement of targeted, temporary cash grants. And finally, the removal of duplicate reporting requirements for positive cases nationally, something which has already taken place in Victoria. It’s certainly true that service industry business owners are having a very rough time of it at the moment. But spare a thought for the workers too – “staffing shortages” mean that employees are catching Covid; and for service workers, “supply chain challenges” can manifest as screaming customers. Yes, it’s not great that you can’t buy chicken at the moment, but please remember to direct your frustration appropriately (away from supermarket staff). Just a little heads up that we’re expecting to hear from the prime minister at 2.40pm AEDT – just under half an hour from now. The federal Department of Health has just released a statement about claims that RATs are being redirected to the commonwealth and away from businesses and other organisations, pharmacists, and so on. Here’s what it says: The Commonwealth Government through the Department of Health is reporting false claims about the requisition of Rapid Antigen Tests (RAT) to the ACCC. These claims are categorically untrue. They have also been made in relation to at least one state government and will be a matter for the ACCC. Supplies of RAT kits are not being redirected to the Commonwealth and at no time has the Department sought to place itself ahead of other commercial and retail entities. Where such claims have been made, the Department has written to the relevant retailer to reassure them that is not the case and seek further detail or evidence of the claims made by suppliers. The Department is liaising closely with the ACCC and is highlighting the pattern of conduct and providing specific examples of such claims. While we are aware there are supply constraints within the market, it is expected supply will normalise over the coming weeks. The Department of Health reaffirms that the Commonwealth Government has not requisitioned RAT supplies within and entering Australia. Any such claims are false, and where notified to the Department will be referred to the ACCC. Providing help to Tonga and responding to Russia’s “unprovoked military buildup” near Ukraine were on the agenda when a top US official spoke with the head of the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade today. The US State Department has provided the following summary of a call between the deputy secretary of state, Wendy Sherman, and the Dfat secretary, Kathryn Campbell: The Deputy Secretary and DFAT Secretary discussed coordination of regional support for Tonga following the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai eruption and tsunami. They also highlighted their ongoing commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in the face of Russia’s unprovoked military buildup. In addition, they discussed economic recovery and resilience in the Indo-Pacific region, as well as their resolve to end the COVID-19 pandemic. Deputy Secretary Sherman and Secretary Campbell reiterated their commitment to continuing to advance peace, security, and prosperity to ensure a free and open Indo-Pacific. The progress of the ash cloud from the Tonga volcano is changing the way the sunset and sunrise looks in parts of Western Australia. The Queensland branch of the CFMEU has called Scott Morrison’s push to let children drive forklifts in order to ease the Omicron staffing crisis a “brain fart” and a tragedy waiting to happen. Assistant secretary, Jade Ingham, said the prime minister had failed on vaccines, rapid antigen tests and support for vulnerable workers “and now expects child labour to fill the gaps on the front line”. He said state and territory leaders “must dismiss this idiocy out of hand”: There is a good reason that most states including Queensland set a minimum age of 18 – accompanied by practical and classroom training and testing – for a high-risk work licence, yet Mr Morrison seems determined to trash workplace safety to compensate for his own failure to prepare and plan. What next? A return to children leading pit ponies into coal mines and sweeping chimneys? If ever there was any doubt that the Morrison Liberals view workers as nothing more than an expendable commodity to be used and discarded, this desperate brain fart should make clear their utter contempt for workers’ health and safety. Today’s political cartoon is from Jess Harwood. It will give you that deliciously uncomfortable feeling of being torn between exasperated laughter and tears of despair. Just an update to the awful news earlier today about the baby whose body was found in southern NSW: AAP are reporting that a woman who was arrested in relation to it has now been released without charge. Police say investigations are ongoing, with Strike Force Walumil established to investigate the incident. A postmortem examination will be held to determine the cause of death. The home where the body was found is now a crime scene and specialist forensic officers are examining it. Forklifts. Here’s the full story, from Ben Butler. Good afternoon, lovely readers. Thank you Matilda Boseley for taking us through the morning! With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Stephanie Convery! See you tomorrow! Despite Greg Hunt stating point blank that the federal government has not commandeered any RAT supplies, a state Labor MP in Queensland has taken to Twitter to accuse the feds of taking 34,000 tests off Queensland Rail. Hunt has said any company that claims this is lying, and the federal government will endeavour to report them to the ACCC. Fresh pictures of the devastation in Tonga have emerged as some phone services are reestablished five days after an enormous volcano eruption and subsequent tsunami cut off contact with the outside world. A series of photos tweeted by the Tongan consulate late on Wednesday show trees and buildings flattened and covered in ash. Others show debris piled up outside homes and damaged vehicles. “Nuku’alofa, the ‘city’ of The Kingdom of #Tonga, covered in volcanic ash,” the consulate wrote. The photos came as telephone links between Tonga and the rest of the world were partially restored, though restoring full internet connectivity is likely to take a month or more according to the owner of the archipelago’s sole subsea communications cable. You can read the full report below: Australia has marked another deadly day of the pandemic with 60 deaths on Thursday. Here is a summary of the daily numbers so far: NSW Deaths – 25 Cases – 30,825 Hospitalisations – 2,781 (212 in ICU) Victoria Deaths – 15 Cases – 21,966 Hospitalisations – 1,206 (122 in ICU) Queensland Deaths – 9 Cases – 16,812 Hospitalisations – 830 (48 in ICU) South Australia Deaths – 11 Cases – 3,777 Hospitalisations – 290 (29 in ICU) Tasmania Deaths – 0 Cases – 1,185 Hospitalisations – 29 (two in ICU) ACT Deaths – 0 Cases – 892 Hospitalisations – 62 (three in ICU) NT Deaths – 0 Cases – 459 Hospitalisations – 54 (one in ICU) Western Australia Deaths – 0 Cases – 10 Hospitalisations – 0 62 people in the ACT are now in hospital with Covid-19 (up from 60 yesterday), with 3 in ICU (down from five yesterday). Queensland chief health officer Dr John Gerrard has given details on those nine Covid-19 deaths recorded in the state over the latest reporting period, including an 18-year-old. Sadly, today we have nine deaths to report. This includes an 18-year-old with significant underlying medical problems, a person in the 70s, five people in the 80s, one in the 90s and one person over the age of 100. Of these nine people, three were unvaccinated, five were double vaccinated and one had had a booster. Our thoughts is with their family and friends. United Australia party leader, Craig Kelly, has just been grilling Google and its Covid misinformation policy. Or, as Kelly called it, “the line between what is misinformation and what is a genuine valid opinion in a democracy”, which is of no surprise as he himself admits the United Australia party has received strikes for content they’ve posted on YouTube. Google’s director of government affairs and public policy in Australia, Lucinda Longcroft, said the policy was developed based on advice from the World Health Organization and health authorities around the world, including the federal health department. Kelly then pulled out papers backing his support for the unproven use of ivermectin as a treatment for Covid-19, and proceeded to argue against boosters for children, and questioned the medical expertise of Google’s content moderators. He said: So you think it’s quite acceptable for people with no medical qualifications to ban and censor, on the platform, medical experts and professionals that have an alternate opinion? He also asked about the removal of a speech made in parliament, which he said YouTube did, and said he had “countless examples of it”, and asked whether public figures were treated differently when it came to Covid-19 policies. Longcroft argued that the rules that apply to the public also apply to public figures. The committee is now hearing from Meta, the company formerly known as Facebook. Queensland deputy premier Steven Miles is laying out the details of the state’s new quarantine facility, which is set to take its first 500 guests in February. The first 500 beds, as you know, we will begin to put guests into in February. The facility itself is broken into two parts of 250 beds. These parts can be operated individually and for different purposes. So the decision has been made that, on opening, the first part will be used for those travellers who still need to quarantine. The second part that will be used for Queenslanders directed into isolation because their accommodation is not suitable. That will allow us to downscale the number of hotels that we need. A little more on the decision by the NSW planning department to recommend the state’s independent planning commission approve the expansion of Whitehaven’s underground coalmine near Narrabri, despite admitting they have no clear policy to determine what is an acceptable impact on the climate. Some possibly relevant context here: Readers might recall there have been some high-profile decisions in NSW in recent years – by the commission and the courts – that have rejected developments on grounds that included their impact on the climate. They include the Rocky Hill mine near Gloucester and Kepco’s proposal for a mine in the state’s Bylong Valley. Last year, the legal firm the Environmental Defenders Office, representing bushfire survivors, won a case in the state’s land and environment court that found the NSW Environment Protection Authority had failed in its duty to address global heating and had to develop policies to protect the environment from climate change. The anti-mining group Lock the Gate Alliance has described the planning department’s admission as unusual. The alliance’s spokesperson, Georgina Woods, said the direct and indirect emissions the Whitehaven project would cause were the highest of any project put to the planning commission to date. The department’s decision to recommend approval to this huge new source of greenhouse pollution is particularly infuriating because, for the first time, the department actually sought advice about the project’s carbon emissions. The department’s admission that New South Wales has no coherent policy about how to prevent and manage the greenhouse emissions of the state’s coal mines is damning, but that policy failure should not mean this damaging project gets waved through. The project will now go to the IPC for consideration and there will be a public hearing so watch this space. The NSW government does not have a clear or consistent policy to consider the acceptable level of impact of new developments on the climate crisis, according to the state’s planning department. The admission is contained in a report, published late Wednesday, recommending the Independent Planning Commission approve an application from Whitehaven Coal to expand its underground coalmine at Narrabri in the state’s north-west. The project would produce 11 million tonnes of coal per year and over its life would result in about 31 million tonnes of scope-1 greenhouse gas emissions - that is, those emissions that are a direct result of the mine’s construction and operations. The project’s scope-three emissions, which occur largely from the burning of coal after it is sold into the market, mostly overseas, would be 456 million tonnes over the life of the mine. In its assessment, the Department of Planning, Industry and Environment noted that NSW now had a large set of climate change policies, including a net zero by 2050 target, a policy to cut emissions by 50% by 2030 and a push to “generally ratchet down” emissions. But policies that guide the assessment of developments such as mines and industrial facilities were not clear on how to assess emissions consistently, “nor is there any clear timeline to measure any ratcheting down”. The department wrote there was also no clear guidance on mitigation and abatement measures. Australia’s unemployment rate has dropped to its lowest in more than 13 years, sinking to 4.2% in December from 4.6% in November, according to the ABS. The economy added 65,000 jobs, the survey covering 28 Nov-11 Dec found, cutting the jobless rate to the lowest since August 2008, or just prior to the global financial crisis. The last time the rate fell below 4%, if that’s where it’s headed, was in the 1970s, when the ABS tracked changes by the quarter, ABS’s Bjorn Jarvis said. The latest data shows further recovery in employment following the large [actually record] 366,000 increase in November,’ Jarvis said, adding the survey does not pick up changes after the first two weeks of December, when Omicron really got going ... Recovery in New South Wales and Victoria continued to have a large influence on the national figures, with employment in these two states increasing by 32,000 and 25,000 people between November and December. Their employment was around where it had been in May, having fallen 250,000 and 145,000 during the lockdowns. The Queensland numbers have just come through and the state has sadly recorded another nine deaths from those infected with Covid-19. The state also racked up another 16,812 infections in the latest reporting period. Remember how the RBA said it wouldn’t lift the official cash rate from its record low 0.1% until 2023 if not 2024, and the financial markets were betting rates will rise from this June? Anyways, we have one of the big four banks moving their prediction forward today. In a note this morning, Westpac chief economist, Bill Evans, says that the bank has shifted its “first move” by the RBA from February 2023 to this August. We have not changed our call for the first hike in the overnight cash rate by the RBA since June 2021 when we were early to challenge the “not till 2024” consensus ... We now expect one hike of 15 basis points (0.15%) in August to be followed by a further hike of 25 basis points in October. Rising wages and inflation are the reasons for the shift, and that comes even as the bank reins in its growth forecast for GDP. Westpac Economics is now forecasting growth for 2021 and 2022 of 3.2% and 5.5%, respectively. That is revised from the pre-Omicron profile of 2.8% and 6.4%, with a net reduction of 0.5 percentage points, the bank said. In terms of the Tonga situation, it looks like New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, will be holding a press conference in the next hour or so and should have some more information about conditions on the ground. In case you were wondering how Josh was going with the online safety committee: OK, I have some terrible news for you. The Harry Styles concert scheduled for later in the year in Melbourne has been cancelled. The Victorian premier has just confirmed. Please respect my privacy in this time of grieving. Skerritt has added that false claims from suppliers have been rife in recent months. We have had a lot of trouble with companies making false claims, we have even submitted applications was when they have an application for approval. We have a lot of false claims of [companies] wanting to approve a product and they haven’t even submitted any data. The police are looking into this I won’t comment any further in any detail. We have had comments and issues of falsified letters of approval, companies saying “here, this product is approved by the TGA”. That is a forgery. Unfortunately, while we have a lot of companies doing some really good work, getting product out there in the supply chains, there are some who clearly are doing the wrong thing. Reporter: For complete clarity, can you and professor say that there has been no requisitioning, no seizures, no redirection, nothing on rapid tests purchased for private sector customers? And are the companies who are telling their customers that their federal government has taken stock from the medical stockpile, are they lying? Greg Hunt: They are lying. That is why I am reporting them to the ACCC. We have heard that in relation to claims between states where companies have made those statements. We have followed that through. I have to point this out. There are people in the market that will make statements and promises and not be able to deliver. What we are seeing is that, whether it is commonwealth, state or territories, or community or private sector, that some supplies have overcommitted and not been able to deliver. There are different reasons and excuses put out. There is a global spike in demand. That is having an impact, not just in Australia, but the world. As a consequence of these false claims, I have asked my department to report where we are aware of them. Google has defended not banning United Australia party from YouTube, after Labor MP Tim Watts said in a hearing on social media the party had a page “riddled with videos spreading Covid-19 misinformation, undermining public health efforts during a pandemic and the vaccine role”. Watts pointed out that UAP had spent over $5m on Google advertising since August, which made up 98% of all political advertising on Google in that time, meaning Google had profited from it. Google’s director of government affairs in Australia, Lucinda Longcroft, told the hearing action was taken against people regardless of their political status and who they represent, and people get a three-strikes in 90 days policy where they can be banned for life if they get three strikes. When Watts pointed out that Google had accepted money for advertising videos that were later found to violate guidelines, Longcroft said Google was “doing everything in our power to stop [UAP founder Clive Palmer] and every other person who might promulgate misinformation relating to Covid” and the company is not seeking to profit from it. Longcroft refused to say how many strikes UAP had received. Watts pointed out six of the nine UAP videos he reported to YouTube had been removed and asked how that didn’t reach three strikes. Longcroft said YouTube “bundled” them into a single strike. “I’ll remember to stretch them out next time,” Watts replied. Labor MP and deputy chair of the social media and online safety parliamentary committee Tim Watts has taken Google to task this morning over not publishing what videos are being most viewed on YouTube similar to what Facebook makes available through its CrowdTangle product. He told the officials at a hearing on Thursday it would provide insight into what is being most shared on the service. Google’s Australian government affairs and public policy director Lucinda Longcroft just pointed to other information Google provides: We are also committed to transparency around the way in which our algorithms and recommendation systems work. We publish a blog, we publish YouTube guidelines on the way our recommendations work. We publish on our websites very clear directions as to how YouTube works, how search works, and these are quite extensive - in one case a 170 page report - on the way in which our recommendation systems work, surface content that is, in most cases, the most relevant and useful as well as safe for users. So we are committed to that transparency in the way our recommendation systems work as well. Facebook and TikTok will also appear before the committee later today. There is an expectation United Australia Party leader Craig Kelly - who is on the committee - may ask questions of the tech companies after being banned from Facebook and Instagram, and having YouTube videos removed for allegedly violating community guidelines. A few economic numbers out there today, although they are tempered by being a bit pre-Omicron, or will be. Jobs figures for December are out at 11.30am. A month ago, we reported the economy added a record number of jobs in November, sending the unemployment rate down to 4.6% as east coast lockdowns ended. The numbers out today though only cover the 28 November-11 December period, which precedes the ramp-up of Covid cases and the subsequent disruptive effects on staff absenteeism, cancelled dining or travel events. The CBA is predicting the jobless rate will sink further, dropping to 4.4%, with the economy adding 60,000 more jobs. The bank has also published its latest update of its Household Spending Intentions index. Combining spending and lending activity on 12 consumer categories and Google search data, the index is intended to be a forward-looking gauge of sentiment. The index in December rose 2.5% from November to 115.0, the highest since the series began in July 2017. Retail, Travel and Transport rose strongly, while home buying fell again, the bank said. More broadly, there’s a bit of tug of war going on in the economy. On the one hand, you have the ongoing urge to spend; on the other, intense strains on the healthcare and supply chains, as I looked at here: My big regret, though, is not having my colleague Ben Butler’s smarts. Lowering the age for forklift driving would have made it high on my parody list. Journalism too has its ups and downs. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews has been asked about the forklift situation, but says he isn’t aware of the prime minister’s proposal. With no disrespect to the PM or anybody else, I’m always up for new ideas and being creative, but I’ve had two meetings these last two Mondays with supermarket CEOs and they haven’t suggested that. Skerritt has stressed that the new oral treatments will not constitute an effective replacement for a Covid-19 vaccine: We do not want people to feel that if they can pop a pill they do not need to be vaccinated, because for all infectious diseases for decades, prevention has been better than cure, put it that way. However, we realise that even some individuals, maybe because of their weaker immune response or age or whatever, they may still become ill with Covid if they are vaccinated. The same way with some other diseases. So in this case having a treatment is also beneficial. Even if you are vaccinated. Skerritt says hundreds of people have contacted him to ask for a protein-based Covid-19 vaccine (this is an older, more traditional vaccine technology), and he hopes it will be those groups who choose to take up Novavax that it is now approved. The technology on which it is made is an older technology, it uses a protein, so I would have had several hundred emails from individuals groups who have said for whatever reason we would like to have a particular vaccine, so I don’t know whether it is 50,000 or 100,000 or a million or whatever individuals, I don’t think anybody knows but there are some individuals, and this just gives them further choice. Federal health minister Greg Hunt has flatly denied that the government had redirected or requisitioned rapid antigen tests from businesses inside Australia, although several warehouses and suppliers have continued to tell media that this is the case. We have not done that, we are not doing that, and I have asked my department overnight to refer any of these cases to me to see. It is simply false, misleading and untrue. There are some supplies, they have been over promise to federal, state and to community or private purchases. But where those claims have been made, that we are requisitioning them at my request, they are simply plain false. That is not something we are doing something we’re going to do. Skerritt: The critical trial data led to two trial showing 90% efficacy. No strong signals of adverse events, but as we do for every Covid vaccine, we have a large team of people focusing on the potential adverse events, and whether the advice needs to be changed and we will be working closely with those European countries that have plans to roll out Novavax. Finally, I want to remind people that our laboratory plays a critical role in all vaccines. Retest two test every batch and every vaccine, including the Covid vaccine that comes into Australia, and no vaccine goes out to Australians unless it passes our very strict, rigorous laboratory testing, so Australians can have confidence. It’s time for Skerritt to talk about Novavax and why the government is hopeful that it will help boost vaccination rates. While we still have very high vaccination rates, the commonwealth has not mandated vaccination, notwithstanding the massive take-up of vaccination in the country. [We’ve] been waiting for Novovax, and it is great it has finally been approved. It is approved as a ready to ... make use vaccine and approved in two doses, 21 days apart, so that will also enable rapid completion of vaccination and our dream is we maintain our 95% up to 98.99% in this country. Skerritt says Novavax will not currently be used as a booster vaccine: The approval is for a primary course, in other words, the first two doses of vaccination. I know there is interest in the potential for Novovax being used as a booster or even an adolescence paediatric dose, but we are talking to them and we have been given an undertaking as we have with all vaccines, as soon as we get the data, we will review it is an absolute top priority. Skerritt: The final thing that doctors will have to be aware of with both medicines is that they are not recommended in pregnancy or breastfeeding, fortunately not a common consideration in aged care. But more to the point, one of the medicines, for example some of them do interact with a number of drugs so as is the case for all prescription of new medicines it is important to look at what [medicines] the individual is on. And that will also influence the decision about whether or not they are an appropriate candidate for which one of these particular drugs, so interacting with drugs sounds academic but it can have quite significant impact. Skerritt: The second thing is it’s really important to realise that the medicine trials were run in different times, different countries with different amounts of Covid, so it’s a little bit like the Olympics, you don’t know who is the best athlete until they come up head-to-head. So because these drugs were tested at different times with different amounts of Covid around, we can’t really say this one is so much better, though both are important and decisions will be made as to whether one of these treatments is the right things to use, or another drug which we have procured a significant amount of and has proven extremely valuable. That is also used, but as the minister said it requires intravenous application and therefore it doesn’t have the advantage of being applied orally within residential aged care. Therapeutic Goods Administration deputy secretary, Prof John Skerritt, is giving some more details on these two new oral drugs in the Covid treatment arsenal. Some of the questions we have had even prior to making the final regulatory decision may be of interest to the media: the two oral treatments, whether one is better than the other and why have two and so on and so forth. Firstly I want to say that it’s common and an ideal situation in medicine, whether you are cancer or a virus or common things like diabetes, to have a selection of medicines, because it will be times when one is indicated for certain groups of patients and one for another. Both medicines in the clinical trials were very effective in reducing death. There were one or zero cases in the treatment in the group of people treated with either medicines compared with a known one case there was eight or nine. So that of course is a most important thing, especially as those medicines will be rolled out, including in aged care, and while we are seeing some younger deaths it is still largely the older people, the proportion of people who are dying from Covid. Finally! It looks like there may be light at the end of the Novavax tunnel, with the TGA giving provisional approval to the protein-based Covid-19 vaccine. Greg Hunt: We have 51m units available, and obviously we have a first dose national vaccination rate of 95.2%, [but] we know that some people have waited for this vaccine. Although we have encouraged everyone to proceed ... we recognise that as a fact. Hopefully, this will encourage those people in the less than last 5% to come forward. We want to have as many people come forward to be vaccinated, the next stage is the Australian advisory group on immunisation and subject to their approval it will be made available over the coming weeks to be distributed through states and territories, general practices and pharmacies that seek to order it. OK, we are jumping over the federal press conference now, where health minister Greg Hunt is discussing the TGA’s decision to approve two oral Covid-19 treatments this morning. [They will be used for people with] mild to moderate symptoms, but are at risk of severe disease, so in particular its elderly Australians, particularly those in aged care, and between the two there are 800,000 courses of treatment that are on order and we are expecting the first of these courses to arrive in the coming weeks and they will be made available through prescription. That is a really important addition in a very important sign of hope and protection for the Australian public. Victoria’s Covid commander Jeroen Weimar says 3,900 health staff were unable to work in Victoria yesterday due to Covid-19 and close contact isolation requirements. Andrews has moved on to discussing the Victorian government’s backflip on IVF this morning, with the announcement that these fertility treatments can resume from today after all elective hospital procedures were paused due to the Omicron outbreak. The premier apologised “for any stress or for any concern” that resulted from the pause. I made it very clear to you that no one is pleased to have to turn off or pause any services across our health system. The code brown and unique pressure our system is under is just, it is not because of money or a lack of machines we need or PPE or equipment, it is about people. When you have literally up to 6,000 people that ... would be working on a health system but aren’t because of Covid, that puts extraordinary pressure. The decision was made based on advice. It is now appropriate to have another look in the context of things as they unfold ... and then try and reinstate whatever you can. I am very pleased that the public health team, the chief health officer, has reviewed his advice, and the minister has accepted that and will make any decision [to] reinstate IVF services. That will take a couple of days. Those already in the system still receiving, mid-cycle, they were still receiving IVF services. It was about not having new patients come into the system. But they will be able to come into that system from early next week. And the orders will be effective immediately. It is a very good outcome. I apologise for any stress or for any concern. It is never easy. Never easy. In such challenging times. Everybody’s doing their very best to keep safe. That is what drives us ... I do apologise for any ... distress or pain out of this. Andrews says Victoria has now placed an order for a further 166m rapid antigen tests to distribute primarily to government employers to help ensure workplace safety. In terms of announcements, I am pleased to confirm that we have placed an order for a further 166m rapid antigen test. We had already ordered 44 million and have seen significant early deliveries arrive. Last week, we had another series of deliveries totalling 4.5m this week. That makes all things possible and I will have more to say on the way these will be deployed after national cabinet. It is very important that we keep adding to that stockpile. They are going to be relevant, they are going to be particularly important in the weeks and months to come. Daniel Andrews says the split between positive results coming in through PCR and rapid antigen test is now “about 50/50” for Victoria. Tasmania has recorded 927 new Covid-19 infections today, with 31 Covid positive people now hospitalised and three in the ICU. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews is speaking now, and once again has suggested the national cabinet will agree to formalise the three-dose requirement (for those eligible) to be considered “fully vaccinated” against Covid-19: This is a three-dose project. To be properly protected ... you need three doses. That is what the experts tell us and what I expected national cabinet to reflect today. I want to be really clear with everybody, this is not to plus an optional extra. It is free doses in order to be protected against severe illness, getting the virus or giving the virus to someone else. A woman has been arrested after a baby’s body was found at a home in southern NSW. Police searched the house in Corowa in the Murray River region on Wednesday night after hearing concerns about the child’s welfare, reports AAP. When they found the infant’s body, they arrested the 40-year-old woman. The body was located in a freezer, according to a report in the Sydney Morning Herald. The woman was taken to Albury Police Station where police say she is assisting with their inquiries. The home is now a crime scene and specialist forensic officers are examining it. Victoria’s number are finally in and sadly 15 more people with Covid-19 have died with 21,966 new infections recorded. There are now 1,206 hospitalisations, an increase from yesterday’s 1,152. Just to put that fall in NSW Covid hospitalisations into perspective: At this rate, we might get the Victorian press conference before we get Victorian Covid numbers! The premier is up at 10am. Australia’s high commissioner to Tonga has described the damage from a tsunami in the Pacific nation as catastrophic, as more disaster relief supplies arrive, reports AAP. Rachael Moore said the underwater volcanic eruption and following tsunami had led to large amounts of buildings being wiped out on small islands. “Through the region, these places are devastated, they’re described as a moonscape,” she told ABC Radio on Thursday. We’ve seen reporting of zero houses remaining on some of the small islands and along the western beaches. There’s a moonscape where there were once beautiful resorts and many, many homes. It comes as Australia is set to send two C-17 planes with humanitarian supplies to Tonga that will arrive later on Thursday afternoon. The HMAS Adelaide is also ready to be deployed from Brisbane either on Thursday or Friday, loaded with humanitarian and disaster relief supplies, along with critical equipment to help recovery efforts. It’s expected the voyage to Tonga will take five days, and the ship will serve as a base for relief work. Moore said freshwater contamination in the country following the tsunami had caused significant issues. Water is an extremely high priority here and it’s something the government is working on, and development partners here are working closely with them on ensuring that they have what they need. After several days of limited access, phone communications have been restored in Tonga, allowing residents to get in touch with family abroad. However, internet connections will still take longer to repair after an underwater cable was severed. It’s expected the repair of the cable will take several weeks. Volcanic ash, which has covered parts of the country, has hampered efforts. Crews have had to wait for ash to be removed from the country’s airport before supplies can land. Complicating matters was Tonga’s border measures due to the pandemic, which have kept the Pacific nation Covid-free. Disaster relief efforts are expected to be led by locals on the ground in order to avoid a spread of virus cases on top of the tsunami damage. Looks like we will be getting a press conference about these new TGA drug approvals at 10.15am Canberra time. Also, my Victorian readers, don’t worry I haven’t forgotten you! The health department has yet to put out the numbers for today. I’ll pop them in here as soon as I can. NSW has also recorded a slight reduction in the number of people hospitalised, with 2,781 patients now in Covid wards, compared with 2,850 yesterday. The NSW Covid numbers are in and sadly another 25 Covid positive people in the state have died, with 30,825 new infections recorded. It’s not easy to quantify the cost of the Omicron wave to Carolyn Campbell-McLean, but here’s a good starting point: $1,300. That is how much she says she has spent on rapid antigen tests since Australia’s PCR testing system began to falter. There have been other costs too: Campbell-McLean paid the price for the December PCR testing debacle when she couldn’t find a Covid-negative carer to help her get into bed on New Year’s Eve; and she has not left the home she shares with her husband, who also has a physical disability, since 15 December due to the spike in cases. But the cost to Campbell-McLean just to keep herself safe is perhaps neatly summed up in that figure of $1,300. You can read the full report below: Victoria will allow IVF treatments to resume despite a pause on elective procedures in the state. This comes after a significant public outcry. A spokesperson for deputy premier James Merlino said in a statement that the specialised nature of the IVF workforce and medical equipment means that its resumption will not affect the hospital system’s ability to combat Covid-19. Following advice from the Chief Health Officer, in vitro fertilisation (IVF) procedures suspended as part of the temporary changes to protect our hospitals will recommence, to help support Victorians who are wanting to startor grow their family. Some services will restart from today, with hospitals scaling up their operations to enable procedures to resume from 11.59pm on Tuesday, 25 January. The Chief Health Officer provided advice to the Acting Minister for Health that the restrictions on IVF procedures can be removed - as the specialist nature of the workforce and the facilities and equipment used are not imperative to support the pandemic response at this time... While the IVF restrictions were in place, services were still available to those who needed to complete a treatment cycle they had started prior to 6 January 2022 or those who required future IVF procedures due to health treatment that would render their eggs non-viable. Merlino also apologised for any “distress” caused by the pause to services. IVF is a challenging journey for anyone to go through, let alone in the midst of a global pandemic, and we’re deeply sorry for the distress caused by affected services in recent weeks. We thank Victorians for their patience as we’ve worked through critical workforce issues, and we’ll keep working to have other services restored as soon as we can. Federal health minister Greg Hunt has released a statement following the TGA’s provisional approval of two oral drugs used to treat Covid-19. The Australian Government welcomes the Therapeutic Goods Administration’s (TGA) provisional approval of the first oral treatments for COVID-19 in Australia, Lagevrio® (molnupiravir) and Paxlovid® (nirmatrelvir + ritonavir). Lagevrio and Paxlovid are oral anti-viral treatments that have been found to be effective in treating people with mild to moderate COVID-19 who have a high risk of progressing to severe disease, reducing admissions to hospital and ICU and potential death. The Government has secured access to 300,000 treatment courses of Merck Sharp &amp; Dohme’s (MSD) Lagevrio® and 500,000 courses of Pfizer’s Paxlovid® for supply throughout the course of 2022, with the first deliveries of both medicines anticipated over the coming weeks. These oral antiviral treatments need a prescription and are taken every 12 hours for five days. They are designed to interfere with the virus’ ability to multiply. Scott Morrison will ask the states to allow children to drive forklifts at today’s national cabinet meeting as part of measures to ease the staff shortages crippling supply chains, Guardian Australia has learned. As anyone who’s ever worked in a factory or warehouse knows, forklifts are a very dangerous piece of machinery – a person was killed in a forklift accident in Victoria on Tuesday. In Victoria, NSW and Queensland you currently need to be 18 to get the high-risk work licence needed to drive a forklift but Morrison will ask for this to be lowered. Morrison is likely to tell state premiers he is passing on a suggestion from industry. It’s part of a bundle of measures Morrison wants brought in to try to ease a supply chain squeeze that has stripped supermarket shelves of goods, including pork and some fresh veggies. Yesterday, the PM said some changes had been made but more were required “at a state level, and I’m continuing to pursue those with the states”. There are changes that we need to make around the age of forklift drivers, to get quite specific. He also wants the states to get rid of rules requiring rapid antigen tests daily for workers, except in high-risk industries. Another proposal, to recognise New Zealand truck licences, seems somewhat less controversial. Big news from the Therapeutic Goods Administration this morning, they has now granted provisional approval to two oral Covid-19 treatments, Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir + ritonavir) and Lagevrio (molnupiravir). Rather than vaccines, these are drugs used to treat the actual Covid-19 disease and are the first oral treatments to be approved for Covid in Australia. They will be used to treat adults who are not yet at the point of requiring supplemental oxygen but who are at “increased risk of progression to hospitalisation or death”. Here is what the TGA says about their usage: Either medicine should be administered as soon as possible after diagnosis of Covid-19 and within 5 days of the start of symptoms. Lagevrio is available as capsules, while Paxlovid comprise separate tablets of nirmatrelvir and ritonavir. In both cases, the medicines are taken twice a day for 5 days. The interval for a booster shot will be reduced to three months in Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia and the ACT amid unprecedented strain on hospitals as Omicron cases surge. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, announced on Wednesday morning the move would take effect on Wednesday while NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said the change would be implemented from Friday in that state. The interval reduction in South Australia and the ACT came into effect immediately. Perrottet said he had “seen very clearly” through ICU numbers that vaccination was key to reducing symptoms and fatalities. You can read the full reporter from Tamsin Rose, Caitlin Cassidy and Peter Hannam below: Alexander Zverev reckons some more players at the Australian Open may have Covid-19 but they may have gone undetected because they weren’t tested, AAP reports. “I think quite a few players had it when they arrived. Quite a few players, I think, have it now,” the German No 3 seed said on Wednesday following his win over Australian John Millman at Melbourne Park. We’re not getting tested, so I think if we would get tested there would be probably more positives than there are now, in a way. Frenchman Ugo Humbert revealed earlier on Wednesday he’d tested positive for Covid, a day after his first round defeat by compatriot Richard Gasquet, which had forced him to isolate for a week in Australia. “We are allowed to go outside to eat, allowed to do whatever we want, so I think it’s natural that more people get Covid,” Zverev said, adding that he’d taken his own extra precautions to avoid infection by being in a “bubble for myself”. Australian player Bernard Tomic had criticised the Covid-19 testing protocols during the qualifiers last week, saying: “I can’t believe nobody is getting tested. They’re allowing players to come onto the court with rapid tests in their room ... No official PCR testing. Tomic himself then tested positive two days later. Zverev is taking no chances, saying: I understand that there is a lot of cases in Melbourne, in Australia all around. So I don’t do much outside, I haven’t been to any restaurants yet, I haven’t been out. I haven’t been anywhere but the hotel room and the courts, so I’m kind of doing a bubble for myself, simply because I don’t want to take any risks and I want to give myself the best chance possible to do well here.” When asked about how Covid protocols were affecting her, Australian women’s world No 1 Ash Barty added: My routine? I’m a hermit. It doesn’t affect me too much. For us, it’s pretty low-key. We come and practice and do what we need to do. Otherwise, a good book and a coffee and I’m set. As the number of Covid cases in Australia has become impossible to accurately determine using test and case numbers alone, epidemiologists say it is crucial to undertake population-wide surveys to understand both current levels of infection and cumulative past infections. John Kaldor, a professor of epidemiology at UNSW’s Kirby Institute, and his colleagues at other organisations conducted seroprevalence surveys in 2020 and 2021. They are hoping to conduct repeat surveys this year to better understand the spread of the Omicron outbreak. “Antibodies can fade, but people probably have some detectable antibodies at least six months after infection,” he said. “We are hoping to conduct some repeat surveys during the course of this year, but there are a range of approvals we need first.” You can read the full report below: The federal finance minister, Simon Birmingham, has also appeared on the show, and was asked if Australia realistically has enough rapid antigen tests coming into the country to allow all students to be tested, potentially multiple times a week. Birmingham: So we are getting millions of additional tests coming into Australia and together between the commonwealth and the states and territories, there are a couple of hundred million that are being procured. We have been in a position to be able to supply millions of kids through crucial sectors like aged care and to supply millions of kids in the states and territories to make sure they are freely available for free for people who are close contacts to support the continued free testing of individuals who have Covid or Covid-like symptoms and need that testing as close contacts, and we are confident we can work with the states and territories around the return-to-school plans to make sure that they can occur safely, securely, including the use of rapid antigen tests where necessary. While speaking to ABC News Breakfast, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet was asked about reports circulating this morning that corporate staff in the education department have been contacted by the government stating that if they have a background in teaching they may be required to re-enter the classroom to fill in for those who are sick. Perrottet confirmed that the state government has been reaching out to a number of groups. Well, what we’ve done in terms of reaching out to teaching staff across the state, we know that many teachers have retired recently. We know we’ve got many younger students in their final year. In order to provide a buffer as we move through this period, the education department here in New South Wales has done a call out to those teachers. We want to make sure as we move through, that the plans that we have in place in relation to cohorting students and things like that will ensure that as operationally as possible we have the most seamless transition as we move through. There’s no doubt there will be issues that come through. It’s not going to be perfect. It will look a bit different to how schooling has been in normal times, but ultimately I think with the plan we put in and taking to national cabinet today, I have confidence we’ll be able to have schooling commence as seamlessly as possible. Good morning all, it’s Matilda Boseley here with you this morning. It’s Thursday, which means all the state and territory leaders are ramping up to meet with the prime minister this afternoon for national cabinet. The main thing on the agenda today: children’s return to school. At the moment Scott Morrison says the case for frequent rapid tests for school teachers is strong, but the jury is still out on the need to test students. The predominant way I’m advised the virus comes into a community like that is through the teachers, not the students. But with Omicron, anything is possible. But it seems that New South Wales and Victoria will push hard for student testing, expected to present a united schooling plan to national cabinet on Thursday. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has just told ABC News Breakfast that RATs will likely play a large role in their educational reopening plan. We do see at least in the short-term surveillance testing providing some role as we get kids back in the classroom. New South Wales as of this week has ordered 150m rapid antigen tests. We see those tests playing a role in all our frontline work and giving comfort to people as we move through this difficult period of time. That’s for schools, health workers, providing support, social housing as well. Plans under consideration include calling upon retirees and final-year university students to substitute for isolating teachers, and requiring each student to do twice-weekly rapid tests. But the prime minister says there is no guarantee all states and territories would agree to a consistent plan. State and territory leaders will also be updated on the vaccine rollout, the capacity of the health system and epidemiology of the outbreak. The distribution of free rapid antigen tests will also be a topic of discussion as the government prepares to roll out its free tests for concession card holders. With all that ahead, why don’t we jump right into the day.Would you like your groceries delivered without a side order of traffic congestion? Boilers, books and beauty products dropped off without a roar of diesel? Or even take a taxi ride without the carbon emissions? Since the first lockdown, increasing numbers of companies have started delivering their products – and passengers – on electric cargo bikes. According to a new directory, there are now almost 450 independent businesses and tradespeople across the UK transforming the sight, sound and smell of our cities and towns by delivering goods to customers using nothing but electricity and pedal-power. “Over the course of the pandemic, the rise of businesses using e-cargo bikes for deliveries has been breathtaking,” said Helena Downey, the founder of the Bought by Bike directory. “The rise is so dramatic that this could become mainstream.” Like many other cargo bike delivery services, The Grace Network’s The Bike Drop in Stroud was set up in the early days of the pandemic to help businesses struggling to reach customers. “There was immediate interest as soon as we opened from both companies and customers: companies wanted to choose the greener option for deliveries while customers loved having their shopping delivered by bike – and we all love having cleaner, quieter, safer streets,” said Harry McKeown, the managing director of The Bike Drop. During the first month of lockdown, the grocery sector alone saw a 91% increase in home deliveries more generally. And McKeown said demand for their bike delivery services started high and had continued to climb. “Business grew quickly: we soon had 13 employees delivering items for 36 local businesses,” said McKeown. “We now have a fleet of electric bikes that have, in total, made over 6,500 individual pickups and deliveries for local businesses, cycled over 10,000 kilometres and saved over 2,300kg of CO2. “During the pandemic, we delivered takeaway beer bladders for pubs, as well as deliveries for restaurants and pizzerias, local food co-ops, bakeries, florists, independent cosmetics producers and music shops, bookshops, other social enterprises and local publications. We’re now expanding in all directions: we even offer an eco-post service and have delivered over 2,500 letters for Stroud district council.” E-cargo bikes have a host of advantages over vehicles: they can move more quickly through the city streets, meaning they are able to deliver packages 60% faster than their van equivalents. They’re cleaner – saving about 90% in carbon emissions – quieter, and cut congestion, as a cargo bike uses a fraction of the road space of a typical delivery van. Pedal Me, which transports not just packages but people around central London, has seen business double since the pandemic began. Velocious, a Bristol-based bike courier business, has also found demand for the delivery of everything from sensitive documents to groceries increase dramatically since lockdown. Zedify, another cargo bike delivery service, had so much business during lockdown that it set up 10 mini-hubs on brownfield sites outside cities to make thousands of zero-emission deliveries into each city every day. “Everyone’s a winner,” said Zedify’s Rob King. “Our hubs mean that instead of loads of vans driving into the city each day, you’ve got a handful of bikes zipping around.” There’s also a growing number of electric cargo bikes covering remote areas: Cargodale started delivering orders during lockdown from local businesses to customers in the dales of West Yorkshire and has seen business boom. Cargodale’s co-founder Beate Kubitz said: “I live in a rural area and when lockdown happened and home deliveries increased, I saw cavalcades of vans coming down my little lane, destroying the delicate countryside roads and polluting our air. I couldn’t believe there wasn’t an alternative.” Kubitz and some of her mountain-biker friends hired a cargo bike for a month and experimented with making local deliveries. “The interest from businesses and customers was immediate and strong,” she said. Cargodale now has a team of 15 riders covering 30 square miles and delivering for up to 100 local businesses. “We’ve had requests for advice from across the UK,” said Kubitz. “This really could be the start of something wonderful.”At the 12-month mark, the obituaries for the Biden administration are being written. The polls are terrible. Biden’s marquee legislation is stalled. In recent weeks, even appeals by the president to the hallowed legacy of civil rights have failed to move the Democratic party’s holdouts in the Senate – Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema – thus blocking the passage of voting rights legislation. While the president invoked Abraham Lincoln and Martin Luther King, Manchin countered with the need to preserve the 232-year tradition of conservative stability in the Senate. Not for nothing, 2022 starts with talk about civil war. It is a depressing picture. It is, however, worth reminding ourselves of where the nation was 12 months ago. As 2021 began, it was an open question whether the United States still had a functioning government. There was no orderly transition. The Trump administration simply gave up on Covid. As we now know, America’s senior soldiers were deeply concerned about the nuclear command chain. Then on 6 January there was the riot in the Capitol – now a morbid obsession of the Democrats – and the news from Georgia of the double Democrat win in the Senate runoff. It is on that thin basis that the Biden administration has since attempted to govern. The restoration of normality that followed in the spring of 2021 was undeniably a relief, affirmed by the rapid rollout of vaccines. In foreign policy, Biden announced that the US was back. America rejoined the Paris climate treaty. Biden reasserted presidential control of the military command chain, insisting on his policy of withdrawal from Afghanistan, whatever the price. There were to be no distractions. All America’s resources were to be concerted around the competition with China. He was even open to a deal with Russia. In March 2021, the passage of the $1.9tn American rescue plan was a big win. On top of the two other stimulus packages carried by the Democratic majority in 2020, the rescue plan has catapulted the US to the most rapid economic recovery on record. So large is the rebound that it has stretched global supply chains and engendered fears of a wage-price spiral. The inflation talk is now so deafening that it is worth reminding oneself that achieving a tight labour market was the point. As Biden remarked when employers complained about not being able to find workers: “Pay them more.” The problem for Biden, if there is one, is not that wages are increasing, but that they are not increasing rapidly enough. It is the erosion of real household purchasing power that makes inflation unpopular and means that Biden is not getting the credit you might expect given the surprisingly healthy state of the economy. Nor, despite the triumph of vaccine rollout, has Biden earned much kudos on Covid. Over the summer, mortality surged among the unvaccinated in the American south and west. Now Omicron has exposed the fact that his administration did not establish an adequate system for mass testing fast enough. Rapid tests that are taken for granted in Europe have been desperately scarce. Across the country, school openings and healthcare systems are a mess. Among the discouraged and stressed are doctors, nurses and teachers, core members of the Democratic party constituency. To tackle the problem, the administration has done an about-face on at-home rapid testing. To tackle the pandemic at source would require a global vaccination programme. On global vaccines, the Biden administration has upped donations and talked about liberalising vaccine patents. What it has not delivered is a well-funded, high-pressure global campaign. When it comes to global policy, the Biden administration would clearly like to be seen as a serious climate leader – its climate envoy John Kerry played a suave part at Cop26. But what can the US actually deliver? The carefully calibrated Build Back Better legislation, valued at $1.75tn, which was supposed to drive America’s energy transition, is stuck on Joe Manchin’s opposition. Nor is this merely a matter of one senator’s obdurate personality. The fact is that America is profoundly divided. There is a liberal majority, but the US constitution demands a winning strategy across states including the likes of West Virginia, represented by Manchin. He represents an electorate barely larger than that of the New York borough of Brooklyn. West Virginians voted for Trump by a margin of two to one and they have two Senators to represent them on Capitol Hill, just like California or New York. Manchin, meanwhile, has not articulated anything remotely like an alternative policy vision; he cannot even claim to represent West Virginia’s coalminers who like the look of Biden’s energy transition policy. He sees his ticket to survival in speaking not for miners but for mine-owners. The result is to expose the contradictions in the coalition that makes up the Democratic party. Hillary Clinton’s defeat in 2016 and Trump’s unhinging of convention opened the door to the left in the Democratic party. The Green New Deal had its breakthrough moment. When Biden defeated Sanders in the primaries he assimilated a large part of the left agenda and the energy that went with it. But whereas Biden won the presidency, the congressional Democrats did poorly. It was down to the runoff elections in Georgia in January 2021 to decide whether the Democrats would have even the slimmest of majorities. The result is the deadlock in Washington that has crippled the Biden administration. There is an ambitious agenda, with backing from the left, but to legislate they depend on the votes of the entire party, including its centrists. The right wing eagerly seizes on the radical agenda to mount scare campaigns, leaving Manchin to pose as the guardian of real American values against the radicals from both sides. It is early to make predictions, but with the polls showing a huge slide in Democratic support, the president’s prospects in the midterm elections don’t look good. Like Clinton and Obama before him, he faces the prospect of governing with a hostile Congress. Both of those predecessors went on to win reelection to the White House, and Biden might stand a chance, but talk of 2024 brings up the awkward issue of his age. Were he to win reelection, he would start his second term of office at 82: that is old even by the geriatric standards of modern American politics. What is the alternative? Originally, the idea may have been that Biden would hand off to his vice-president, Kamala Harris. But nothing in the last year suggests that she would make a strong candidate. If this feels like an impasse haunted by the spectre of Trump’s return, that should be no surprise. Biden-Harris was a ticket chosen in an emergency. In November 2020, for all Trump’s outrages, the electorate delivered a profoundly divided verdict. We are living with the consequences of that. • Adam Tooze is a professor of history at Columbia UniversityIt has been 10 years since Owen Farrell played his first Test for England, against Scotland at Murrayfield back at the start of the 2012 Six Nations. By the dog years in which rugby players measure their Test careers, that’s a lifetime or so ago. Ben Youngs is the only other player from that match who is still playing international rugby. Most of the rest moved on a long time ago, into second careers in or outside the sport. Farrell, 20, fresh faced and whippet thin, played at inside-centre that day. The Scottish fans booed him all game. It didn’t make any difference, he kicked eight points, and England won by seven. If Eddie Jones’s plan works out, Farrell will be back there at Murrayfield in a fortnight’s time. It is, even by Jones’s standards, a particularly mulish bit of thinking. Farrell, who spent most of last year struggling to find his best form, hasn’t played a single minute of competitive rugby since he injured his ankle playing against Australia last autumn. There are other regular players – Sam Underhill, Elliott Daly, Manu Tuilagi – who have been left out of the 36-man squad because they are still working their way back to match fitness after more recent injuries. But for Farrell, it doesn’t matter, he’s pencilled in, as captain, for the first game of the tournament. Meanwhile another of Jones’s old favourites, George Ford, can’t get in the squad even though he was picked as Premiership player of the month once in October and then again in December. The inconsistency is all the more conspicuous because England got on just fine without Farrell when they beat South Africa last autumn, with another survivor, Courtney Lawes, as captain, and a rearranged midfield of Marcus Smith, Tuilagi, (who was replaced by Joe Marchant after he went off injured), and Henry Slade, who played his best Test yet. After that match, everyone was asking exactly how Farrell was going to slot into the team when he was fit again. A couple of months later, Jones’s answer suggests it was never a question at all. He wants Farrell outside Smith, a combination that looked a little hit and miss in the one Test they played against Australia. “Every brilliant 10 in the history of the game has been accompanied by a stable 12, and that’s the combination I think we need to have,” Jones told the BBC, “and Owen brings that at 12, his reading of the game, his ability to take pressure off of Marcus is going to be so important, Dan Carter was always at his best when he had Aaron Mauger at 12, Stephen Larkham was at his best when he had Rod Kafer at 12, he couldn’t run out of sight on a dark night, but he read the game, and did all the organisation for him, and freed the 10 up to play the game.” But with Farrell, it’s never just about what he does on the pitch. So much of what makes him a great player, so many of his best qualities, are hidden from public view. It’s one reason why those who have played with him are often so much quicker to talk him up than some of England’s fans, who sometimes seem, even now, oddly indifferent to him after all these years. It’s in the way he carries himself around the squad, the rigorous and punishing dedication to the job, and the exacting standards he sets for himself and expects of everyone else. In all that, he sounds a lot like Jones himself. Neither of them loses a lot of time worrying about what anyone else thinks. But you get the sense there has been more debate about Farrell’s role, and in particular his captaincy, in these last few months than Jones has ever let on in public. Given that Jones has been rebuilding the team and has put particular emphasis on redeveloping their leadership group, it would be odd if he and the other coaches hadn’t been talking about it behind the scenes. In his recent book, Leadership, Jones describes Farrell as a “developing” captain, even though he has already led England in 34 Tests and, if he carries on with the job this year, will have done it more often than anyone except for Will Carling. In the book, Jones talks about how Farrell’s “aggressive and belligerent” style of play gets in the way when he’s “trying to forge a positive relationship with a tricky referee”. He backed away from that when I asked him about it in an interview last December: “I don’t think there’s a captain that doesn’t need to improve, John Eales, Sean Fitzpatrick, they were heavily criticised in their first years.” But it’s clear he wants him to work on his man management. Jones has had to do that too. He has said that he identifies with Farrell. “I like the guys that have come up the tougher way, who maybe don’t fit the stereotype, who have got to keep battling, have got to keep proving themselves, because they’re the loyal players, they’re doing it because they want to be good, not for someone else,” he told me. And of course they also remind him of himself. And as he says, he has had to learn “that when you grow up in a tough environment those softer skills aren’t so appreciated, so you don’t tend to develop them, it’s something that only comes later in your life, when you realise you have got to do that.” Jones clearly has an affinity with Farrell. But by picking him as captain again now, you wonder if he has pushed it a little too far.Australia’s chief medical officer has conceded that children returning to school could create an increased risk of Covid transmission to their families, saying there would be “trade-offs” to getting students back in classrooms. It comes as the commonwealth agreed to split costs for surveillance testing in schools 50-50 with state governments, despite the prime minister, Scott Morrison, saying there was no medical advice recommending such testing was necessary. “We do expect that transmission potential, as we call it, will increase as schools go back. But that is something we need to deal with,” chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, said. “All my colleagues in the states and territories agree that the most important thing is to get schools back.” The national cabinet met on Thursday, with the return of primary and high schools high on the agenda for the regular meeting of state and territory leaders. At a press conference following the meeting, Morrison said individual jurisdictions would announce their own plans in coming days, but reiterated earlier warnings that delaying reopening of classrooms could see further furloughing of workers due to parents needing to stay home. “We need the schools open. We need them to stay open,” the prime minister said. Morrison said the latest figures showed 21% of children aged five to 11 had received their first dose of a Covid vaccine. He later added that children not being double-vaccinated before returning to school should not be an “impediment” to classes resuming, but strongly encouraged parents to get their children vaccinated. State governments in New South Wales and Victoria had flagged plans for surveillance testing among students, which could include providing twice-weekly rapid antigen tests to parents. Morrison said the commonwealth would split the costs for states that chose such an approach, but claimed it was “not the medical advice” that surveillance testing was needed. Issues around the potential for increased spread of the Omicron variant in classrooms has been a controversial issue in the US, with many schools closing and returning to remote learning as teachers’ unions raised safety concerns. Kelly conceded that children returning to school “will increase the movement around cities” in Australia, but said it was important for students to get back to the classroom. “It’s important for all sorts of reasons; for health, physical, mental, social, developmental for children.” Kelly said he couldn’t provide a figure on what a return to school could mean for case numbers in Australia. He stressed that Omicron caused “very much a mild illness in children”, but conceded there would be an impact on virus spread, including students potentially bringing the infection home to their families. “There is that chance, but again it’s the balance of keeping the fundamental principle in place,” Kelly said. “There are trade-offs today in terms of transmission.” The meeting came as state and territory health authorities reported another 60 deaths across Australia. Leaders held talks just hours after the Therapeutic Goods Administration announced it had given provisional approval to Novavax – the first protein Covid-19 vaccine to receive regulatory backing in Australia. The TGA also approved two oral treatments for Covid-19. Prof John Skerritt, the head of the TGA, said some people had reported they were waiting for Novavax rather than getting the previously approved vaccines. “The technology on which Novavax is made is an older technology, it uses a protein,” Skerritt told reporters. “I would have had literally several hundred emails from individuals and groups who have said, for whatever reason, ‘we’d like to have a protein vaccine.’” The provisional approval is for use in individuals 18 years of age and older, with a recommendation that it be given in two doses three weeks apart. It is not yet recommended for booster shots or for children. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said the Novavax vaccine would now go to the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation for consideration over the course of next week, but it was “a very promising development”. He described the preliminary approval as “the first of two green lights”. The federal government has an advance purchase agreement for 51m doses of Novavax, with the first shipment to Australia expected to arrive in the coming month. “We have a first dose national vaccination rate of 95.2%,” Hunt said. “And we know that some people have waited for Novavax, and although we’ve encouraged everyone to proceed, we recognise that that’s a fact. “So hopefully this will encourage those people in that last less than 5% to come forward.” Hunt also hit back at persistent claims in some quarters that the federal government was requisitioning supplies of rapid antigen tests. He acknowledged there was “a global spike in demand” but argued some suppliers had “overcommitted and not been able to deliver”. “They’re lying – and that’s why I am reporting them to the ACCC,” he said. Morrison also referred to the reports as “false claims” and “categorically untrue” in his press conference. The health department said in a statement: “Supplies of RAT kits are not being redirected to the commonwealth and at no time has the department sought to place itself ahead of other commercial and retail entities.” The opposition accused the federal government of failing to plan on multiple fronts. Labor’s health spokesperson, Mark Butler, said there was “enormous confusion” about the “gross shortage of rapid tests that Scott Morrison has caused”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The opposition’s deputy leader, Richard Marles, said for many small businesses, the labour shortages they were currently experiencing represented an “existential crisis”. “For the first time in living memory, people are going to supermarkets and seeing shelves empty,” Marles said. “They cannot get the food they want or the food they need.”Melbourne Park in the afternoon is generally a tough gig. The sun is at its most intense, raising the on-court temperature even higher than the mercury measures and sapping players’ energy like a sieve. On Wednesday, 20 January, this particular time slot on Rod Laver Arena comes with the added insult of being the curtain-raiser to Nick Kyrgios and Daniil Medvedev. For Alex de Minaur, though, these are mint conditions. The Australian favours quiet efficiency, of getting the job done as quickly as possible. That is probably why he runs so fast – the 32nd seed is one of the quickest on the men’s circuit. Against Polish world No 107 Kamil Majchrzak he was a whippet under the searing sun, securing his third-round progression 6-4, 6-4, 6-2 in one hour and 39 minutes. “Very happy,” De Minaur said afterwards. “Especially to get my first win ever on Rod Laver Arena. I just knew that as soon as Davis Cup was done for me [in December] it was time to get back on the grind. I had a down year last year so I wanted to make up for it. Made sure to work hard in the off-season to be in the best shape I have ever been in my career, and hard work pays off.” De Minaur’s physical health suffered in the latter stages of last year following a bout of Covid-19, but has opened his 2022 season with self-assuredness, including an upset win over world No 7 Italian Matteo Berrettini at the ATP Cup. The 22-year-old broke Majchrzak early in each set and dropped only two points in the third and sent down 35 winners to his opponent’s 25. He finished him off with his 11th ace, setting up a third-round encounter with Pablo Andújar – who beat de Minaur in their only previous meeting – in a bid to make the round of 16 for the first time in his career. “I know Pablo very well,” he said. “I’ve hit a lot with him. You know, he’s a terrific competitor. He’s had some amazing wins.” De Minaur is blessed with blinding speed and a physical and mental strength often likened to countrymen Lleyton Hewitt, and drops serves up to the region of 230kph. “I think I’m just … quick on the court,” he said. “That’s all I’m going to say. You got amazing athletes out there, I’m going to try and chase every single ball and hopefully make it as tough as can I for my opponents. That’s just my mindset.” Kyrgios, of course, is the main attraction of the tournament’s fourth day. Did he plan to watch? “Of course I’m tuning in,” he said. “I’m pretty sure all of Australia is tuning in. It is going to be a hell of a match. Expect showtime from Nick. Expect one of the most solid guys on tour with Daniil. It will be a popcorn match. I’m definitely not going to miss it.”*Fahima was the most senior policewoman in her province. Since the Taliban took over, women who worked in the police force have been targeted for assassination and beatings. She believes Taliban officials are particularly focused on tracking her down because of both her seniority and her role recruiting other women. I fled to another city just two days after the country fell to the Taliban, because I knew they were looking for me in my home province. They found my address, and have been to my house and asked my family about me. I was getting threats over the phone, too – the very first night I got calls. They rang me up, and I told them I had left our province but they said: “You’re lying, come and hand yourself over, give us your cars and guns. We know you have corrupted so many women in Afghanistan.” It took a long time to travel here. I was in minibuses, wearing a burqa to cover my face so they wouldn’t recognise me. There were several dozen women in the police – nobody is working now, they have all been told to just stay in their homes. Many went to Iran, some came to other cities like me, some are still living in our province. But I was a a senior police officer in the province, that’s why there are so many threats directed at me. They are looking for me because I was senior, and responsible for recruiting women, I worked in the police for 10 years and there were no women more senior than me in the province. They hate us and say we are not Muslim, because we got a salary from foreigners [western funds supported the security forces including for salaries] and we worked alongside men. They hate us more than other women. I don’t even tell my neighbours here that I was a policewoman before. When the Taliban talk about an amnesty they are lying, they didn’t fulfil those promises. Just a few minutes ago, some neighbours called to warn me they are coming every day to the house [where I used to live] and ask where I am. Even here I am moving from one place to another, changing where I stay every couple of nights. If they get me the only way I will be able to get out of their prison is death. We had a WhatsApp group with other senior women. We were in touch regularly but some left the group and I have had no news about them now for several months. I sent several requests to countries including the US and UK but I got no response, so I am living in limbo. I am married with no children and my economic situation is also extremely bad – I haven’t been paid for three months’ work I did under the old government, and now under the Taliban. Thank you for being my voice, please share my story to anyone who will listen. I am living in such a difficult situation. *The name has been changed for this article.As a therapist, Nick Blackburn is attuned to the use of story as decoy; when what we want to talk about is too painful, or obscured from our view, misdirection and displacement edge in to fill the gaps and silences. He is aware of the danger of being seduced by those compensatory stand-in stories, of being, in the words of psychoanalyst Jacques-Alain Miller, captured by your patient’s delusion. “Your work as a clinician,” Blackburn quotes Miller as saying, “is not to understand what he says. It’s not to participate in his delusion. Your work as a clinician is to understand the particular way, the peculiar way he makes sense of things.” But The Reactor is not a book about Blackburn’s attempts to understand what underlies his patients’ stories, rather a fragmentary unrolling of his own particular, peculiar way of making sense of the death of his father. Here is a man whom we meet only in glimpses, the details of whose biography and identity are less significant than his absence and the manner in which he is unavailable to both his son and the reader. This is not a memoir that attempts to piece together a mass of wayward strands and details of a life in order to provide a vaguely comforting sense of the person who once inhabited it. Instead, it is a reckoning with the reality that loss can be just as cataclysmic even when its terrain and contours are indistinct and may never come into perfect focus. That reckoning is itself variously and sometimes luridly disguised. Blackburn’s most closely tended alternative narrative is that of the explosion of the fourth reactor at the nuclear power plant at Chernobyl in 1986, a disaster that the author initially acquaints himself with via YouTube films, becoming mesmerised by visual details that seem as though they might come from a dream or a fairytale: golden corridors of corrugated yellow metal, polished marble, “the red forest and the crumbling dachas”, “catfish fattening in still waters”. But it is scientific process that really appears to compel him, and the way it can be made to function as a metaphor for the violent experience of bereavement: “Radioactive atoms want to become stable again,” he writes, “so they release energy until they get back to a balanced state.” Throughout, Blackburn ponders the half-life of grief, its power to contaminate the lives around it, its insidious unpredictability. As anyone who has endured loss might understand, it also alters time, the reality that preceded it coming to seem both implausibly far away and crushingly, inescapably, present. There is both a becalming and a turbulence that also characterises Blackburn’s attempts to write about it: “I get anxious because in a way creative activity always has a manic quality, dancing and dancing like the red shoes, like a nuclear meltdown.” His response to the mania of creation is to seek ever more connections: alongside Chernobyl, he takes us into the life, and death, of fashion designer Alexander McQueen; the music of Joni Mitchell, Joan Baez and Bob Dylan (“Bob says: Life isn’t about finding yourself, or finding anything, life is about creating yourself, and creating things”); the 2018 documentary about a “free love” commune, Wild Wild Country, and Ingmar Bergman’s The Seventh Seal; Derek Jarman and Billy Elliot, Sister Wendy and Ian Curtis. Thinking of Fleetwood Mac makes him think of the Manhattan project, which makes him think of the poet Thomas Wyatt, after which he reflects: “Connecting things (in hindsight) can be really exhausting sometimes, don’t you think?” And sometimes, that feeling of exhaustion extends to the reader, who may reasonably think that another’s tenuously linked thoughts and preoccupations are not unlike other people’s dreams: fascinating to them, and possibly to their therapist, but not as utterly captivating to the outsider as they would wish. A page on which the word “Nuclear” is followed by a line break and then the word “Unclear” and nothing else is not, let us be truthful, especially illuminating. But The Reactor does have considerable power. It movingly evokes the psychic mayhem of parental loss, that point at which, whatever one’s relationship, the idea of origins and foundations comes under scrutiny, if not outright assault. And while it confirms the isolated, individual nature of grief and can hardly be thought of as a work of consolation, it also suggests that the attempt to tell one’s story, and the attempt to listen, is not to be underrated. • The Reactor: A Book about Grief and Repair is published by Faber (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Every once in a while a player comes along who redefines their position. We’ve seen positionless defensive players, hybrid safety-linebacker types. We’ve seen corners who can play in the slot or happily kick out to the boundary. Over the past decade, we’ve seen the rise of the polar bears, tight ends as adept at mauling fools in the run-game as they are running down the field as their team’s finest receiver. And yet, as a football collective, we’ve waited for the unicorn: The running back-wide receiver. There have been flashes. The spread revolution gave rise to tweener players, those who could align in the backfield as a running back or wriggle out to the slot (or wider) to catch passes. Getting the ball to your best athletes in space became the doctrine of offensive football. In the college ranks, the likes of Tavon Austin and Percy Harvin embraced football’s move from a tough, between-the-tackles, thumping sport to one based on the principles of pace and space. But in the NFL, coaches have always favored specialists over the hybrids. They didn’t need a receiver to line up at running back – they had a world-class running back to do that. They didn’t need a running back to flex out as the outermost receiver, they had all the elite receivers they could handle. These were professionals, masters of their craft; there was no time for split duty. In Deebo Samuel, the unicorn has finally arrived. Samuel is the San Francisco 49ers’ best running back and the team’s best receiver. He may be the finest running back and the finest receiver in the league, at least in terms of efficiency and explosiveness. If he’s not, he’s as near as makes no difference. There is a childlike glee to Samuel’s brilliance. To watch him is to see an athlete who is stronger and faster than the 21 other human beings on the field – and those 21 humans are among the strongest and fastest athletes on the planet. Samuel brings intricacy for the nerds and loud highlights for when you just want to see cool athletes doing the coolest things. With the ball in his hands, he’s a leaning, bobbing, weaving, stop-on-a-dime phantom. The Niners offense now revolves around finding an ever-increasing number of ways to get the ball to Samuel, or leveraging his threat into easy yards for everyone else. Smart teams have always sought crossover skillsets. During the heyday of the Bill Belichick-Tom Brady Patriots, the team would bring in a back whose receiving chops outdid their running skills. They would move that player around to identify mismatches. But that was the player’s value – as a moving chess piece that helped Brady identify coverages more than as an individual runner or receiver. Their flexibility was a big percentage of their overall value. It was about what they did without the ball as much as what they did with it. With Samuel, it’s about how he damages defenses when the ball winds up in his hands, no matter his starting position. So far this season, he has played 555 snaps split out as the outermost wide receiver, 222 in the slot, eight as an in-line ‘tight end’, and 93 as a running back. The trend of moving him around on a snap-to-snap basis is relatively new, though. As recently as Week 9, Samuel had played only seven snaps lined up in the backfield all season. Since then, he’s averaged nine snaps in the backfield per game (21% of his snaps). The past two games – the do or die game against the Rams in Week 18 and the playoff matchup with the Cowboys – represent the only times this season he’s taken more snaps as a running back than as a slot receiver, the position from which Kyle Shanahan typically initiates all the fun and games in his offense. Of course, lining up in a bunch of spots in and of itself is no great skill. It doesn’t matter where you align, or in how many spots, if you stink at most or all of them. And that’s where Samuel breaks the convention: He’s the best at everything he does. His output is jarring: 1,770 total yards, at an average of 13 yards per touch, with 14 touchdowns tacked on for good measure. He’s a walking first down; a human touchdown. If you’re into the fancier metrics you’ll know Samuel holds something of a monopoly over all of the league’s key categories, be it as a back or receiver. He led the NFL in the regular season in yards per reception. He’s averaging more than 10 yards after the catch per reception. To put that in context, no other receiver broke the seven-yard barrier during the regular season. If that’s not enough, Samuel leads the league in yards per route run on targets of 20-yards or more down the field. That’s comfortably ahead of Ja’Marr Chase. It’s streaks ahead of Davante Adams, Stefon Diggs, and Tyreek Hill. The numbers keep coming. Samuel finished second in the league in yards after contact per attempt. He finished second in the league in ‘breakaway’, which measures the percentage of a player’s rushing yards that come on runs of 15-yards or more. You have to go all the way down to [rubs fake glasses, squints a little] 60th on the list to find the next non-running back. There is not another wide receiver in the top 200. He also happens to lead the league in the Guardian’s own Holy Bleep Is That Possible Should That Be Allowed Is That Even Fair™ metric. Players of Samuel’s ilk used to be interesting footnotes and quirks. There are players now sprinkled around the league who take snaps in the backfield and outside as a receiver on a semi-consistent basis. Cordarrelle Patterson had a late-career resurgence in Atlanta this season. Curtis Samuel has filled a similar role in Carolina and Washington. Rondale Moore moves all over the shop in Arizona. In Buffalo, the Bills’ Isaiah McKenzie is able to nudge close to Samuel’s output. Yet Samuel is the only multi-positional weapon assuming the creative pulse of a playoff offense. He is the only one piloting a championship contender, helping to elevate a flawed quarterback – by way of an outstanding offensive line. He is the only one who runs the ball with a battering-ram style then breaks out in ballet when asked to run routes. It is tempting to paint Samuel as the first of a new kind of positionless player. But to do so would be to understate the absurdity of his season and talent. Samuel hasn’t pushed up against the idea of positional designations but fractured them altogether. There are running backs, there are receivers, there are hybrids, and then there is Deebo Samuel.Guillermo del Toro hits us with a spectacular noir melodrama boasting gruesomely enjoyable performances and freaky twists. He shows us that in spite of the old song, there are in fact a couple of businesses like showbusiness: psychoanalysis and crime. Del Toro conducts us into a fairground of fear with his usual love of the fantastical and the hallucinatory, the same adoration of classic golden age Americana and some spasms of body-horror violence. Thankfully though, it’s without the supernatural whimsy that sometimes threatens to drown his movies in twee. Nightmare Alley is adapted from the 1946 novel by pulp author William Lindsay Gresham, who had a great fascination for the US’s sleazy carnies, circuses, travelling shows and magicians with their weird shimmer of the occult. (It’s something to ponder that, after their divorce, Gresham’s ex-wife Joy Davidman moved to England and famously married CS Lewis.) Nightmare Alley was first filmed in 1947 with Tyrone Power in the lead role, and now it’s Bradley Cooper taking on the haunted, saturnine part of Stan Carlisle, a guy with no money and a violent past who needs to disappear for a while. Stan wanders into a travelling carnival where the most stomach-turning attraction is a haunted-house show that plunges punters into a nightmare inferno of the Last Judgment, a hideous honeycomb of bulging eyes. Stan finds that the hatchet-faced guys running things can always use people like him to help with hard, dirty work, paying a few bucks and asking no questions. But Stan is a cut above the usual hobos and losers; he’s a likely fellow with a personable manner and an inquiring mind and he’s intrigued by the cheesy mind-reading act run by Zeena (Toni Collette) and her boozy husband Pete (David Strathairn). Instantly, Stan grasps the art of the mind-reader: to learn the secret verbal codewords fed to him by his partner, but also to use his natural observant powers to see what sort of a person is in front of him and pick up on clues. After a sinister act of violence – of which he is all too capable – Stan marries fellow carnival huckster Molly (Rooney Mara) and moves with her to Chicago where their high-class act in hotel showrooms becomes the toast of the town. And then he comes across someone else in the mind-reading game: Lilith Ritter, gorgeously played by Cate Blanchett, a fashionable psychoanalyst with peroxide hair, a slash of lipstick, a gigantic art deco consulting room and a brace of wealthy clients. She makes him a terrible offer. This film has a horribly ingenious premise and there is something chilling in the central concept: Stan’s mind-reading spiritualist routine, though deeply dishonest, is in fact founded on a set of truths about human nature which are revealed to the seedy huckster but not to the educated person who might affect to despise the showman’s preposterous act. Every person thinks their background is their own unique secret, and everyone is indeed haunted by a certain someone, someone who is always near them (the bogus spiritualist will solemnly declare that this person has a ghostly hand on their shoulder), someone whom they love and hate at the same time. That person is a parent. And Stan’s mind-reading is, in its way, entirely genuine. There is a brilliant setpiece when Lilith is in the audience for Stan’s classy show, smirkingly sceptical and demanding to ask the questions herself, not letting Molly use her codewords, and challenging Stan to tell her what is in her handbag. Will Stan be exposed in front of all his tuxed fans? Stan removes his absurd blindfold, fearlessly returns Lilith’s gaze and gives a magnificent reply, with intuition to rival Sherlock Holmes. Del Toro’s film shows us that Stan, and tricksters like him, are a kind of priesthood, a brotherhood of ruined and corrupt knowledge, imprisoned in a hell that only they can see. • Nightmare Alley is released on 21 January in cinemas.Some of the government’s most prized new animal welfare policies are being put on pause in what supporters see as a sneaky attempt to ditch the “woke” measures altogether. Senior sources in the Conservative party have confirmed to the Guardian that a series of policies including a ban on trophy hunting imports, stricter sentences for puppy thieves and a ban on live exports of livestock have been put on pause after a campaign led by Mark Spencer, the chief whip. The minister responsible for the policies, Zac Goldsmith, is understood to have heard the news just before taking off on a flight to Ecuador. Spencer, who is a farmer, is understood to be less than keen on the animal-friendly policies touted by Boris Johnson and his influential friends including his wife, Carrie, and Lord Goldsmith. Others within the party, in rural constituencies, have privately complained that the animal welfare policies have been campaigned for by people who live in cities, and that it has made them unpopular with landowning, shooting donors and voters. Many backbenchers hope the next Tory leader is unlikely to continue with the legislation as it is unpopular with influential figures in the party. Allies of Johnson have told the Guardian that the policies are “as good as dead” if the prime minister faces and loses a vote of no confidence. Goldsmith said: “It’s not just that the future of government is uncertain. So too is continued leadership on climate and nature. The measurable truth is that we are now world leaders and have moved things massively on nature – abroad and here (with much more to come) If this PM goes, that very likely ends.” A senior MP who has called for Johnson to resign but supports the animal welfare legislation took a more balanced view. The MP said: “This could be a sort of attempt to coerce the parliamentary party into thinking ‘we have to keep Johnson because otherwise we won’t get the animal welfare legislation’. “We are keeping an eye on it, and certainly will not be supporting any leadership challenger who does not plan to quickly move this legislation through parliament. The thought has crossed all of our minds that another leader might try and dilute the legislation. We have to fight hard against that.” The influential Conservative Animal Welfare Foundation, which includes Carrie Johnson, Dominic Raab and Lord Goldsmith among its patrons, plans to throw its weight behind any challenger who backs the welfare legislation. Sir Roger Gale, the MP for North Thanet and a spokesperson for the group, said: “We’d be looking for undertakings from any future leader that they would support this legislation. We would be looking for support for the excellent programme of animal welfare legislation the public voted for in the 2019 manifesto.” Friends of Spencer said he was grumbling about the animal sentience bill, which passed in the Commons on Tuesday night, as many farmers believe it could make their lives more difficult and cause welfare standards to be raised on farms. The bill has come under fire from backbenchers as it enshrines in law the feelings of animals including lobsters and fish. There are beliefs that this could harm the fishing industry and that it could turn off traditional Tory voters who see such policies as “woke”. A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: “Animal welfare is an absolute priority for this department. We are getting on with the job, and just last night the sentience bill passed in the House of Commons.” Animal welfare campaigners previously criticised the government for delaying a law that will clamp down on trophy hunting and prevent people from buying harmful animal experiences such as elephant tours. The start of its passage through parliament has been postponed, with ministers accused of “dithering”. The bill was first hoped to be published before the summer recess in July, but has since been pushed back repeatedly. Lorraine Platt, a campaigner who runs the CAWF, told the Guardian: “We support our prime minister Boris Johnson’s commitment to advancing animal welfare and the world-leading legislation currently passing through parliament to end live animal exports and much more. “It is paramount that this excellent programme of legislation continues its passage for the sake of millions of animals who are set to benefit from this government’s reforms. Any pause in the passage of the current animal welfare bills will be detrimental and deeply unpopular with the British public. We shall be looking to ensure that this powerful suite of legislation continues forwards.” Spencer could not be reached for comment.When I started working in fashion in 2016, one thing was clear: this was a white, female and thin industry. André Leon Talley, who died on Tuesday, at 73, was defiantly, unapologetically and fabulously none of these things. Talley’s passing isn’t just the tragic end to the life of a figure who revolutionised perspectives towards clothes. It’s also the silencing of a voice who represented what fashion could be: the triumph of the outsider in a world of cookie-cutter conformity. People of colour, like myself, are constantly being told to make ourselves smaller and to hide our true selves if we are to survive unscathed in an overwhelmingly white world. Talley was heroic because he never followed these rules. He never apologised for his booming voice, which pronounced in sing-songy staccato sentences, his unconventional body shape or his blackness, despite knowing that racism is “part of the fabric of our existence”, as he wrote in his memoir, The Chiffon Trenches. Like many creative aesthetes, Talley survived the cruelties of his childhood (including sexual abuse) by escaping into a world of culture. He grew up in North Carolina, living with his grandmother, as was the norm for many in those days in the black community (he called her “Mama”). He craved to live in the world painted for him by Diana Ross, Nina Simone and Laura Nyro. While he yearned for the elegant luxuries depicted in a book about the Titanic, which he found at his aunt’s house, copies of Vogue provided him with an aspirational safe space, where, he said, “bad things never happened”. At Brown University, Talley’s mind was expanded by Rimbaud and Baudelaire, while he found a new aesthetic freedom to express himself through his style. Inspired by Naomi Sims, the first black model he saw in Vogue, Talley took to wearing makeup from the Japanese kabuki theatrical tradition, and a floor-length admiral’s coat. When he returned home to North Carolina for a holiday, Talley’s mother refused to attend church with him and scorned, or “shaded”, his “Phantom of the Opera look”. Ouch. But, no matter – the bird was out of its cage, and he moved to New York and found work as an unpaid assistant to Diana Vreeland at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Through Vreeland’s patronage, Talley found reception work at Andy Warhol’s Interview magazine, before becoming the publication’s resident fashion expert. Deep friendships with Karl Lagerfeld and Halston intertwined with jobs at WWD, W, Ebony and, later, Vogue, where he became creative director under Anna Wintour, having started as a fashion news director in 1983. It was a momentous first for fashion: “As an African American born in the ugly and racist Jim Crow south, I understood how monumental this was,” Talley wrote. “I was the first.” His presence and perspective at Vogue prefigured today’s reality, in which there are more people of colour in fashion editorial, and inclusivity has become a growing norm on the catwalk (if not in fashion magazines), while, at the very least, conversations about diversity are not laughed out of the boardroom. But for many of the years between 1983 and 2018, when Beyoncé appeared on the cover of Vogue’s September issue, shot by Tyler Mitchell, the first black photographer to shoot a cover in the magazine’s 130-year history, Talley was the only person of colour on the front row at fashion shows. As he wrote in The Chiffon Diaries: “none of my contemporaries have seen the world through black eyes”. Through fashion writing, Talley transcended this racism. “My blackness was not important,” he said, reflecting on writing up a particularly electrifying Yves Saint Laurent show report. “What mattered was that I was smart.” Talley was always a larger than life figure, whose theatrical presence thrummed with a joie de vivre: he would sashay in the face of the glacial, mannered world in which he worked, and described the racism and homophobia he experienced in fashion as “subtle” and “casual” (he was nicknamed “Queen Kong” in Paris fashion circles). And yes, Talley never compromised on what he felt was important: a fierce advocacy for the vision of the fashion designer. His death is the extinguishing of a unique, inspirational light. Priya Elan is the Guardian’s deputy fashion editorPrimark is to axe 400 jobs in its UK stores as the fast fashion retailer responds to rising cost pressures, despite a significant bounceback in trading in recent months. The retailer, which operates 191 stores in the UK and more than 400 internationally, said it was phasing out some store roles, including supervisors, and creating a new entry-level management role as part of the reorganisation. Overall the retailer expects the changes to leave it with about 400 fewer retail managers in the UK. The company added that although supply chain pressures had now eased it still expected that longer shipping times would “continue for some time”. John Bason, the finance director of Primark’s parent group, Associated British Foods, said the retailer was seeing cost increases on shipping, energy and commodities, but was not planning to put up clothing prices up. In contrast, rivals including Next and Marks &amp; Spencer have warned of price rises. Primark said while sales at its UK stores in the 16 weeks to 8 January had been “well ahead” of last year, despite an impact from the spread of Omicron, they remained 10% below pre-pandemic levels. “The changes we are proposing will deliver a simplified and more consistent management structure across all of our stores,” said Kari Rodgers, the UK retail director at Primark. “[It will] provide more opportunities for career progression and offer greater flexibility, all of which are designed to help us provide the best possible experience for both our customers and colleagues. We are now focused on supporting our colleagues who are affected by these proposed changes and will be going through the consultation process.” The cuts come as Primark reported a Christmas boom, with sales at £2.6bn in the 16 weeks to 8 January, a 36% increase over the previous year when the retailer saw widespread closures of stores in the UK and Europe because of the pandemic. The company said while sales at stores in retail parks had surpassed pre-pandemic levels, sites in city centres continued to show a lag in the rate of recovery. Overall, Primark said sales were down 5% compared with the same period in 2019, pre-Covid, helped by the opening of 25 stores since the start of the pandemic, and 11% on a like-for-like basis stripping out the impact of the expansion. Looking ahead, Primark expects sales up to April to be “significantly better” than last year. From March, the company, which does not sell online, is also taking a step towards digital selling in the UK by enabling shoppers to check online if their local store has a particular item in stock. The system is set to be rolled out worldwide in the coming months. Primark’s business in the US, where it plans to open 100 stores, continues to be a “standout” performer with sales up 4% on pre-Covid levels on a like-for-like basis and 37% compared with total levels two years ago. “If the shackles continue to loosen on the vital Primark arm, the group should be poised for stronger prospects and the market consensus of the shares as a strong buy echoes this possibility,” said Richard Hunter, the head of markets at Interactive Investor. Associated British Foods (ABF), which owns brands including the hot drinks firms Ovaltine and Twinings as well as a sugar business, said margins had been squeezed at its other businesses as inflation pushed costs higher, with price rises on its products taking time to feed through to the bottom line. Bason said some of price rises, mainly driven by a ten-fold increase in energy costs and rises in the price of packaging and commodities such as wheat, had now been implemented and others would be over the coming months. Overall, ABF reported a 16% rise in total group revenues to £5.5bn.One hundred years ago, in February 1922, Sylvia Beach, owner of the Paris bookshop Shakespeare and Company, published James Joyce’s Ulysses, in full, for the first time. Now to mark the centenary of the seminal novel’s publication, the publisher and bookseller she ran is set to release an ensemble recording of its complete text, featuring major names ranging from Eddie Izzard to Margaret Atwood. More than 100 writers, artists, comedians and musicians are coming together to read a section from Ulysses for Shakespeare and Company, including Will Self, Jeanette Winterson, Ben Okri and Meena Kandasamy. The recordings will be released as a free podcast, starting on 2 February and ending on 16 June, the date also known as Bloomsday in honour of the day in 1904 when Leopold Bloom wanders the streets in Ulysses. “We thought we have to do something to mark the occasion,” said Shakespeare and Company literary director Adam Biles. “Normally our instinct for something like this would be to do a big party on the day itself, but because of Covid restrictions, and the difficulties the bookshop has been through in the last few years, we came up with the idea to get people to record readings. It just kind of spiralled from there, to putting out an entire unabridged version of Ulysses – it’s never going to reach Joyce’s level of ambition with the book, but it’s something wildly ambitious for us to do.” Authors and artists were keen to sign up for the project, said Biles. Self will be the first reader – “He’s a great performer, and also a great torch bearer for for modernism,” said Biles – followed by Winterson. Izzard is taking on the famous first section of Calypso: “Mr Leopold Bloom ate with relish the inner organs of beasts and fowls. He liked thick giblet soup, nutty gizzards, a stuffed roast heart, liverslices fried with crustcrumbs, fried hencods’ roes. Most of all he liked grilled mutton kidneys which gave to his palate a fine tang of faintly scented urine.” Molly Bloom’s soliloquy will be read by multiple voices, including Atwood and Deborah Levy, said Biles. “It’s going to be very polyphonic.” The readings will be accompanied by a “Bloomcast” of 10 episodes, hosted by Biles and intended to be a primer for those new to Ulysses. “So many people have started and abandoned Ulysses, and it is a very tough book in many ways. But it’s also a book which really returns on the investment you make into it. It is hard work. But it’s also an incredibly powerful book emotionally speaking, it’s certainly one of the most intense literary experiences out there,” said Biles. “And having this diverse cast of differently accented people, with different ways of reading, has meant that each section is going to take on its own character, and hopefully keep people interested and keep their attention between February and June.” The readers will be using the text of a new edition of Ulysses, published by Penguin Classics to mark the centenary. The novel will also be celebrated at the Hay festival with a series of live discussions and performances between 26 May and 5 June. And Shakespeare and Company is not the only organisation to mark the centenary with a recording: Thornwillow Press has signed up readers including Stephen Fry and Salman Rushdie for a video and audio podcast reading of Ulysses. Weekly episodes will culminate on Bloomsday, when readers will be able to watch or listen to 300 readers, over 30 episodes, reading Ulysses.The Tennis Australia chief executive, Craig Tiley, has declared he will not resign over the Novak Djokovic visa saga and rejected suggestions his governing body paid for the deported world No 1’s legal fees. It comes as TA faces increasing scrutiny from players concerned the Australian Open’s voluntary Covid-19 testing protocol is exposing them to needless risk. Tiley, who has remained largely out of the public eye throughout the Djokovic affair, was booed on Wednesday during a rare appearance at Kia Arena to mark Samantha Stosur’s final singles match. A few hours later he broke his silence in a tense interview with the tournament’s host broadcaster, the Nine Network, during which he sidestepped questions about the ill-fated bid to bring the unvaccinated Djokovic to Melbourne Park. With the fallout has come calls for Tiley to stand down from his role, which also includes tournament director, forcing the TA board to issue a statement on Monday night supporting Tiley and acknowledging “lessons to learn”. Tiley has found himself in the firing line over TA’s role in allowing Djokovic to fly to Melbourne under the belief that a medical exemption approved by TA and a Victorian government independent expert panel would be sufficient to enter Australia. Tiley defended TA’s handling of the matter shortly after Djokovic was first detained saying “we were talking to all parts of government to ensure that one, we were doing the right thing, and the right process with these exemptions”. Asked by Nine on Thursday whether he has or will consider resigning from his role, the 60-year-old said: “No. We put a statement out recently. I am very focused today on delivering a great event. I am proud of being able to stand up here and you can see what is behind us [at Melbourne Park]. “I am proud of what we have delivered so far. We have had four days of unbelievable tennis and we will have that for the next 10 days.” Tiley also denied claims by the former mayor of Melbourne suburb Brighton, John Locco, that TA had footed the bill for Djokovic’s federal court battle to remain in the country, reported to be in vicinity of $500,000. “I have seen those reports and we don’t really go into the detail of financial arrangements we have with players but those reports are simply untrue,” Tiley said. The live issue at Melbourne Park right now is that of the lack of rigour around testing, which operates on an honesty basis and is compulsory only if players have symptoms. Dual grand slam champion Garbiñe Muguruza, world No 3 Alexander Zverev and British No 2 Heather Watson are among those to have questioned the procedures. Accredited players, staff and media are provided with daily rapid antigen tests but Muguruza, who lost her round-two match to Frenchwoman Alize Cornet on Thursday, described them as an “optional thing”. “Me, I test every two days by myself in my room,” Cornet said. “It’s not mandatory, I still do it.” Zverev speculated there were additional players competing with Covid-19 than Frenchman Ugo Humbert, who said on Wednesday he had tested positive, and said he was “kind of doing a bubble for myself, simply because I don’t want to take any risks”. “We are not getting tested, so I think if we would get tested there would be probably more positives than there are now,” the German said on Wednesday night after his second-round defeat of John Millman. “I’m somebody, I’m here to play the tournament, and I understand that there is a lot of cases in Melbourne, there is a lot of cases in Australia all around.” Watson said she had not been tested since the Adelaide International earlier this month and had not been asked to since. “No,” she said. “I think once you’ve done your day five, that’s the rules.” All international players had a mandatory PCR test upon arrival in Australia and were required to have a second one between five and seven days later. “There has been a fair bit written about that,” Tiley said. “Throughout the year the players have been travelling around the world. There have been protocols they have had to follow to do that. We are working closely with the men’s and the women’s and came up with a set of protocols that are more rigorous than their week in, week out travels. “Coming into Australia every player had to test … on days five and seven they had to test. There is also mandatory symptomatic testing and every player is provided each day with a rapid antigen kit they can pick up either at the hotel or here onsite. That is really the program we have had going. So far it has worked well and been successful.”Mia Mottley, who shot to international fame during the Cop26 climate talks and oversaw Barbados’s break with the Queen last year, has won a second term as the Caribbean nation’s prime minister. The 56-year-old’s Barbados Labour party (BLP) won all 30 seats, repeating her clean sweep of 2018, in an election marred by complaints that thousands of Covid-positive Bajans were denied a vote. Mottley came to international attention last year when she castigated global leaders at Cop26 and her government jettisoned the Queen as head of state, installing the singer Rihanna as an official national hero at the same time. She also has star power at home, where she is known by her first name only. Her clean-sweep victory suggests voters did not blame her for the island’s tourism revenues falling by 90% during her truncated first term due to the Covid pandemic. An 11th hour attempt to stop the poll failed on Tuesday night when the country’s high court ruled it had no jurisdiction to postpone the election, which took place amid rising Omicron cases. Philip Catlyn, the opposition candidate who brought the case, had argued that 5,600 people in isolation were disfranchised after they were banned from going to polling stations to cast their vote. Anyone who tests positive on the island of 287,000 people has to wear a tracking bracelet to deter them from breaking quarantine. As voting got under way on Wednesday, the Portuguese government announced measures to ensure that those infected with Covid could vote in that country’s snap general election later this month, fuelling accusations of unfairness. Huge crowds celebrated into the early hours of Thursday outside BLP’s headquarters in the capital, Bridgetown, after Barbados’s midnight curfew was lifted for the night. In her victory speech, Mottley said the landslide victory would allow her government to “lead the country first to safety and then to prosperity” and to prepare Barbados for the challenges “of the next 10 to 15 years”. These include climate change and antimicrobial resistance, she said. Global heating poses an existential threat to Barbados. Last year the island suffered its first hurricane in 65 years and a storm with almost 500 lightning strikes in the space a minute, plus volcanic ash-falls from neighbouring St Vincent. Though Barbados is reliant on long-haul flights and polluting cruise ships for much of its economy, Mottley was the breakout star of Cop26, taking global leaders to task for their inaction on climate change. At the BLP’s final rally on Tuesday, Liz Thomas, Barbados’s ambassador for climate change, reminded the crowd of the US president, Joe Biden, walking hand in hand with Mottley: “White people from all over the globe say to me: how do I get a Barbados passport? Caribbean people say to us: ‘How do I get a Mia Mottley?’, ‘I wish we had a Mia, give us Mia, lend us Mia’, but Barbados got Auntie Mia,” she said. Basking in her second straight landslide, Mottley promised to uphold the values of Errol Barrow, the first post-independence prime minister of Barbados, who said the country would be “a friend of all and a satellite of none”. Despite the BLP’s thumping victory, Cynthia Barrow-Giles, professor of constitutional governance and politics at the University of the West Indies, believed Mottley’s imposition of republicanism without a referendum had turned some voters away from the BLP. “People are so angry they were not consulted by the prime minister. They see it as an authoritarian tendency and autocratic,” she said. Barrow-Giles and a colleague polled Bajans and found while only a minority wanted to retain the British monarch as head of state, most objected to the lack of consultation. Though the BLP’s lengthy manifesto made numerous eye-catching promises, such as building 10,000 homes and investment in the medicinal cannabis industry, Mottley’s second term is likely to be dominated by recovering and diversifying the Bajan economy, post-Covid. As part of a loan deal with the International Monetary Fund, the Barbados government needs to achieve a 6% surplus of GDP, which may lead to austerity measures, said Barrow-Giles. One of Mottley’s preoccupations is also addressing Barbados’s ageing population via immigration. She wants to attract more “digital nomads” to the island and lure back the Bajan diaspora, repeatedly saying on the campaign trail that the island “hasn’t replaced its population since 1980”. The main opposition, the Democratic Labour party, which ruled Barbados between 2008 and 2018, campaigned against the BLP “one-party state”. Voters were not convinced and Barbados will have no official opposition for the next five years. • This article was amended on 21 January 2022. Due to an editing error an earlier version said the BLP won 29 seats in the 2018 election. The party won all 30 seats, but one MP decided a week later to serve in opposition.A cross-party group of MEPs has called for a large-scale election observation mission to Hungary, citing fears about democratic standards. Hungarians go to the polls on 3 April in parliamentary elections that will decide the fate of the incumbent prime minister, Viktor Orbán, whose last 12 years in office have seen tighter executive control over courts, a withering of independent media and widespread concerns about corruption and cronyism. In a letter to the head of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, which checks electoral probity in 57 mostly European and central Asian states, the MEPs called for a full-scale election observation mission to Hungary. “We come from five political groups and from 19 different countries. But we all share the concern that the elections might not be held to the highest democratic standards,” the letter to the ODIHR director, Matteo Mecacci, states. The ODIHR, part of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, has begun a needs assessment of the mission it should send to Hungary. During Hungary’s 2018 elections it sent a limited mission, meaning it did not undertake systematic observation of voting, counting and tabulation of results. The Warsaw-based body, however, can choose to send a larger mission to carry out wider checks if it deems there is “limited confidence among election stakeholders in the election administration”. After the 2018 vote, where Orbán’s Fidesz party won a two-thirds majority, the OSCE observers criticised “hostile and xenophobic” rhetoric, a campaign that “limited space for substantive debate” and where public television “clearly favoured the ruling coalition”, and the government’s use of public funds to tilt the election in its favour. MEPs cited these issues and also raised the alarm about new voter registration rules, which they say make it easier for people to use fictitious addresses. “It is widely feared that [these rules] will be instrumentalised by the ruling party to increase its voter base in particularly contested regions,” the letter says. One prominent election analyst, Daniel Hegedüs of the German Marshall fund, said earlier this month that the integrity of the 2022 contest would be worse than 2018 and 2014, elections he characterised as “free but not fair”. In April, Orbán will face a challenge from Péter Márki-Zay, a Conservative church-going father of seven, who has united six opposition parties behind his candidacy. The letter has been signed mostly by MEPs from the Green, Social Democrat, centrist and radical left groups. A few signatories come from the centre-right European People’s party, which used to be Orbán’s political home. One notable EPP signatory is Danuta Hübner, a former EU commissioner for Poland. Several signatories are prominent in the Hungarian opposition, but support came from across the EU, including France, Germany, Sweden, the Czech Republic, Romania and Greece. Orbán’s spokesperson, Zoltán Kovács, has dismissed warnings of a rigged election as cynical and absurd. “Voters will reelect [Orbán], I predict, because he has taken the country forward and delivered real results for Hungarians,” he wrote in a recent article on Euronews.Badri Ibrahim is a Sudanese comic artist and the founder of the Abbas Comics empire. His strips are quirky and irreverent, poking fun at the Sudanese military and encouraging civic activism. One recurrent character is a hapless but wise cat called Ghadanfar, a sort of Garfield meets Snoopy protagonist, who finds himself on the wrong end of misunderstandings with neighbourhood felines and humans. It is all rendered in colloquial dialect and is dry, funny and often poignant. So popular has the comic become that Ibrahim is regularly commissioned to do private work, rendering Ghadanfar in different guises – as a bashful groom on a wedding invitation card, for example. The majority of this work comes through Facebook, where his comics have about 19,000 followers. “I ran the page for about a year,” Ibrahim says. By then, it had become its own community, and now he does not need to spend much time maintaining it. During the launch period, Ibrahim spent a lot of time “posting regularly and engaging with comments” and also “sending the page to everyone I know”. Freelance work came through those comments. “People and businesses would send me a message through the page, looking for an artist. Sometimes they ask for one of my comic characters to use for a product.” He can’t imagine how he would have launched his artistic career without Facebook. The social network has two benefits for businesses – not only in Africa, but for all emerging markets. The first is ease of access. “Everybody has Facebook,” Ibrahim tells me from his studio in Khartoum, where he is still working late at night. “Everybody knows how to use it. Most of my audience is in Sudan and they can share my content easily.” The second benefit is its analytics function. Ibrahim can see who shares his content and how it spreads, and make decisions about how to increase his business. But, for many people, Facebook is not only indispensable but unavoidable. Across Africa, Facebook is the internet. Businesses and consumers depend heavily on it because access to the app and site are free on many African telecoms networks, meaning you don’t need any phone credit to use it. In 2015, Facebook launched Free Basics, an internet service that gives users credit-free access to the platform. Designed to work on low-cost mobile phones, which make up the vast majority of devices on the continent, it offers a limited format, with no audio, photo and video content. Over the past five years, Free Basics has been rolled out in 32 African countries. Facebook’s ambition does not end there. Where there are no telecoms providers to partner with, or where infrastructure is poor, the company has been developing satellites that can beam internet access to remote areas. This plan, however, was set back in 2016, when a rocket powered by Elon Musk’s SpaceX exploded, destroying an AMOS-6 satellite on board that Facebook had intended to launch and, through it, lease internet connectivity in partnership with the Eutelsat, a French satellite company. Internet access in Africa is overwhelmingly via mobile phones; only about 8% of African households have a computer, whereas phone ownership hovers at around 50%. Half of mobiles are online, but not via billed plans. The majority of data users are pay as you go, and sometimes own multiple sims to switch between cost-effective plans. When the data they have purchased runs out, Facebook is still there. Western users are deleting their accounts for a variety of reasons, among them the platform’s record on privacy, its contribution to political volatility by designing algorithms that prioritise disagreement and friction, and its staleness as a user experience. Younger users prefer shorter, more transient content, as on TikTok, Instagram and Snapchat. According to whistleblower Frances Haugen’s testimony to the US Senate, the company is aware of its stagnating growth in certain places and demographics. “Facebook understands that if they want the company to grow, they have to find new users,” she told senators. An internal Facebook document refers to a decline in younger users in “more developed economies”. In much the same way that tobacco companies migrated their efforts to emerging markets once the potential elsewhere was diminished by landmark lawsuits, regulation and awareness raising, so is Facebook focusing on new pastures. *** In 2020, as the pandemic began, I found my movements on the African continent limited for months at a time – for instance, in Egypt during an airport shutdown and a strict sunset curfew. My Facebook account – a relic of younger days and old online habits – became essential if I wanted to contact businesses, find phone numbers, order food and even hunt down tips for securing vaccines. The links I followed inevitably ended up in variations of a “Join Facebook to comment/message/contact” page. In the end I reluctantly reactivated my account. The timeline I returned to was a virtual Marie Celeste, a tumbleweed of posts from friends and relatives who had also long left the site, but never bothered to delete their accounts, which had become prey to viruses and phishing. Yet, Facebook was soon my most used social media app. Mona Amin had the same experience. When she moved from the US to Kenya in 2017, Facebook was inescapable. Settling down in a new country that didn’t have the infrastructure she was accustomed to meant that everything from finding places to rent to sourcing furniture happened via Facebook. For someone whose last interactions on Facebook had been to like people’s photos from a night out, the new interface was overwhelming and unwieldy. “I didn’t even know how to use it any more,” she says. “But it is useful, and there are a lot of people still on there. Or they’ve rejoined.” To users in volatile economies with disrupted supply chains, Facebook isn’t just useful, it is vital. Balqees Awad lives in a remote part of the Sudanese capital Khartoum, a city that has witnessed political instability and food and fuel shortages over the past three years. One closed Facebook group in particular has been a lifeline – helping her to secure bread and petrol. “When a bakery receives a bread delivery, or a petrol station replenishes its fuel, someone always posts in the group. They even tell us when there is heightened police presence in certain areas. Security patrols sometimes pick up people for no reason and extort or detain them.” Members are vetted before they are allowed entry into the group to ensure they are trustworthy sources of information, and not gathering intelligence to report to jittery security and police forces. Awad buys her data, as she buys almost everything else, including her food, electricity and gas, in small, pre-paid quantities. She doesn’t pay a single bill at the end of the month apart from rent. “The ‘small small economy’,” is what we call it,” says Nanjala Nyabola, a Kenyan writer and advocate. This describes the “kadogo economy” in Kenya, where commodities are sold in the smallest possible unit – one banana, one piece of bread, one ounce of flour, one megabyte at a time. Small is the way it has to be for much of sub-Saharan Africa – not just for ease of budgeting, but because a large section of the population is unbanked, so the direct debits required for contracted phone services are not an option. But, even when markets are more sophisticated, Facebook still maintains a strong grasp on business owners and users. Amina Rashad runs Glow, a Cairo-based business that provides healthy meals, nutrition programmes and juices. She started the company from her home in 2017 and simultaneously set up a Facebook and Instagram page. “It’s what made my business,” she says. “It was my virtual store for such a long time.” She took orders via Facebook messenger and a WhatsApp widget embedded in the Facebook and Instagram page. Once the business took off, she was able to diversify the way she received orders, building a website and an app, both of which take orders and payments. An affluent clientele base means that her customers are more likely to use a bank. Egypt’s e-commerce infrastructure has developed rapidly over the past decade, particularly in the food and grocery delivery sector, which helps the capital’s growing middle class save time and hassle in a sprawling, densely populated and traffic-congested city. But there are still limitations that send Rashad back to social media, where orders are taken manually and paid for on delivery. The company’s website and app payments system is hosted on a shared platform, rather than a proprietary one, a common arrangement that is cost-effective for a growing business. But, despite the volume of orders that now comes from the website, and the relatively low cost of automating payments, shared platforms come with less control when things go wrong – such as provider servers going down, or when there is a need for urgent site maintenance. “There is a highly personalised element to the product,” says Rashad, so she is happy to remain in an orders ecosystem that is less anonymous, “so we can go back and check details, answer questions, check allergies.” Facebook presents its free internet initiatives in Africa as philanthropy, but they are also likely to be a way for the company to reposition itself, as users log off in the west and log on elsewhere. There is growing awareness in the global south that Facebook’s overtures may have sinister implications. Free Basics was effectively banned in India in 2016, after an outcry that the initiative violates the rules of net neutrality, the principle that all content and applications should be enabled by internet service providers. According to research by Global Voices, Facebook’s actions constitute “digital colonialism”, where it “is building this little web that turns the user into a mostly passive consumer of mostly western corporate content”. These consumers aren’t always passive. The concentration of users on Facebook in some African countries has had some positive outcomes in terms of facilitating free speech and civic activism in nations where oppressive regimes have a tight grip on the public space. ‘There’s no doubt in my mind,” says Nyabola, “that social networks have been useful for political discourse and for organising in countries where there is no free speech.” After a military coup in Sudan last October, the army cut off internet services, but some users still managed to find ways to livestream protests on Facebook. While reporting on the coup and its aftermath, I found myself, again, familiarising myself with Facebook’s functionalities. The platform’s neglect of moderation means that armed militias and authoritarian regimes also abuse the platform for their own propaganda ends, not to mention the trolling and personal attacks that take place, just like anywhere else. CNN reported, in October last year, that Facebook knew it was being used to incite violence in Ethiopia and did not act. There has also been a “failure to invest in language, in understanding local context”, Nyabola says. “Facebook’s Africa office opened in 2015. The first Amharic-speaking content moderators were hired in 2019. It’s not a small thing that less than 100 people are working on content moderation in Ethiopia.” And Amharic is only one of more than 80 languages spoken in Ethiopia. While Facebook in Africa remains broadly unpoliced, the platform’s benefit to the voiceless will be drowned out by those who are louder and more powerful. In the meantime, for small businesses and users alike, Facebook is unavoidable. The company may be in a fight for its life in the west, as calls for regulation grow louder and cloud its prospects. But in Africa and other regions in the global south, Facebook’s economic, political and social influence almost guarantees it a second life. Some names have been changed.This is a far greater scandal than the parties in Downing Street. In a just world, it would prove the downfall of our prime minister. This week, airstrikes by the Saudis and their allies killed more than a dozen people in Yemen, civilians among them. Last month an estimated 32 civilians died as a result of the ongoing conflict. The country has been convulsed by civil war since 2014. For seven years, a Saudi-led coalition has been pummelling the impoverished country with bombs, many of them supplied by Britain. Through our staunch military alliance with the Saudi dictatorship, our government is directly complicit with these atrocities. You can be forgiven for knowing nothing about any of this: Yemen does not matter, you see. Its people have been relegated to the bottom of the hierarchy of death, and most of our media show little interest in scrutinising our government for slaughter that it is directly complicit in. The Saudi violence has only increased in Yemen since October, after the UN human rights council voted to end its war crimes investigation following intensive lobbying by the dictatorship in Riyadh. If Yemen is no longer the world’s worst humanitarian crisis, that is not because its plight has improved, but because the western blockade of Afghanistan has taken centre stage. Last September, the UN warned that millions of Yemenis were “a step away from starvation” as the “country’s economy has reached new depths of collapse”, while over Christmas rations for 8 million Yemenis blighted by hunger were cut. Yet our government retains its tight alliance with the Saudi regime, which decapitates gay people and dissidents, brutalises women and provides, in words purportedly of Hillary Clinton, “clandestine financial and logistical support” to terrorists. This is the regime that chopped a journalist into pieces in a foreign embassy, and incinerated Yemeni children travelling on a school bus on their way back from a picnic – an “apparent war crime”, in the words of Human Rights Watch. That isn’t to say the Saudi-led forces are responsible for criminal acts alone. The courageous Mwatana for Human Rights organisation based in Yemen’s capital Sana’a scrutinises violations committed by all sides, including the Iranian-backed Houthis who control much of the country. What matters is that our government is directly arming and supporting one side, and therefore bears direct responsibility for their actions. If it wasn’t for the stubborn and diligent work of the UK campaign group, Campaign Against Arms Trade (CAAT), there would be practically no consistent scrutiny of our government’s role at all. According to its research, BAE systems has sold £17.6bn worth of arms and military services to the Saudi dictatorship since 2015, while the company has 6,700 members of staff posted in Saudi Arabia. Thanks to a judicial review brought by CAAT in 2019, the court of appeal found that the British government’s decision to keep licensing military equipment to Saudi Arabia was unlawful, but the government resumed arms sales after arguing only “isolated incidents” of airstrikes violated humanitarian law. CAAT’s court battle goes on. “There have been no efforts to ease or lift the blockade,” its research coordinator Sam Perlo-Freeman told me. “The Saudis are maintaining it without suffering any consequences or diplomatic efforts. The attention given by the world’s powers to end the war or at the least the humanitarian crisis in Yemen is woefully inadequate to nonexistent.” While it continues to arm and back the Saudi war effort, Britain slashed its humanitarian aid to Yemen by half in 2021, while the World Food Programme warns it cannot feed Yemenis properly because of funding shortfalls. CAAT and other human rights organisations should not be carrying this burden alone. Yemeni lives do matter, despite the silence that suggests otherwise, and our government must be held to account for its complicity in this horror. So yes, we should all be furious at our rulers partying and boozing while ordinary citizens couldn’t hold the hands of dying relatives. But our government’s direct involvement in the massacre of civilians by one of the world’s most repulsive dictatorships is an even graver crime. It is our failure to speak up that allows the killing to go on. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistCarhartt, the Michigan-based workwear company, is facing a wave of conservative backlash after its CEO announced that it will keep its vaccination mandate, despite a recent supreme court decision to block a federal mandate that would require businesses with over 100 employees to get vaccinated or take weekly Covid-19 tests. In an email sent to employees last Friday, Mark Valade said that Covid-19 vaccinations remain mandatory. “We put workplace safety at the very top of our priority list and the supreme court’s recent ruling doesn’t impact that core value,” Valade wrote. “We, and the medical community, continue to believe vaccines are necessary to ensure a safe working environment for every associate and even perhaps their households. While we appreciate that there may be differing views, workplace safety is an area where we and the union that represents our associates cannot compromise,” Valade added. “An unvaccinated workforce is both a people and a business risk that our company is unwilling to take.” Since Valade’s email, conservative pundits and social media users have criticized Carhartt, prompting the #BoycottCarhartt hashtag to trend nationally on Twitter. Matthew Kolken, an immigration lawyer tweeted, “Ironic that Carhartt is mandating vaccination for their employees considering that the company outsources production to China. #BoycottCarhartt.” Elijah Schaffer, a host on the right-wing outlet the Blaze, tweeted, “Wow @Carhartt is subjecting their employees to medical abuse. Very bad look. Definitely should stop buying their products if you do.” “Never ever buy @Carhartt products again,” wrote Sebastian Gorka, a conservative and controversial former aide to president Donald Trump’s deputy assistant. Others came to the company’s defense, with one user tweeting, “Wow @Carhartt I’m impressed and I will be purchasing from a company that cares about protecting all of its workers. Thank you for not making this issue political &amp; for believing in science. We need more companies like yours!” Another user tweeted, “I’m a commercial and heavy and highway carpenter and have been buying Carhartt overalls and carpenter pants for over 30 years. Way to go Carhartt. Real men wear Carhartt and get vaccinated.” Last December, the company implemented a requirement for all its US employees to be fully vaccinated by 4 January or face termination. Carhartt said it will accept medical and religious exemptions for review and has interviewed employees to gather information regarding their situation or beliefs. The decision was met with protests from a handful of employees. “All of us, you know associated, have worked completely through the Covid, you know through the pandemic. We’ve been loyal, we’ve been faithful and then now all of a sudden it’s like you’ve got to comply,” Angela Faulk, a Carhartt employee in Madisonville, Kentucky, told WEVV last December. “We love, we love Carhartt, working for Carhartt but we just feel like this decision is wrong,” she added. In response to the protests, Valade wrote last week that workers in two Carhartt locations, including its Madisonville branch, were given extensions and now have until 15 February to get vaccinated.In 2022 the world’s population will pass 8 billion. It has increased by a third in just two decades. By 2050, there will be about 9.5 billion of us on the planet, according to respected demographers. This makes recent comments by Elon Musk baffling. According to him, “the low birthrate and the rapidly declining birthrate” is “one of the biggest risks to civilisation”. Fertility rates in Europe, North America and east Asia are generally below 2.1 births per woman, the level at which populations remain stable at constant mortality rates. The trajectory in some countries is particularly arresting. The birthrate in Italy is the lowest it has ever been in the country’s history. South Korea’s fertility rate has been stuck below one birth per woman for decades despite an estimated $120bn (£90bn) being spent on initiatives aimed at raising it. Japan started the century with 128 million citizens but is on course to have only 106 million by 2050. China’s population will peak at 1.45 billion in 2030, but if it proves unable to raise its fertility rate, the world’s most populous country could end the century with fewer than 600 million inhabitants. This is the “big risk” alluded to by Musk. The trouble is, his statement seems to imply that “civilisation” does not include Africa. The populations of more than half of Africa’s 54 nations will double – or more – by 2050, the product of sustained high fertility and improving mortality rates. The continent will then be home to at least 25% of the world’s population, compared with less than 10% in 1950. Expansion on this scale is unprecedented: whereas the population of Asia will have multiplied by a factor of four in this timeframe, Africa’s will have risen tenfold. “Chronic youthfulness”, as demographer Richard Cincotta has termed it, is the result: 40% of all Africans are children under the age of 14 and in most African countries the median age is below 20. African mothers will have about 450 million children in the 2020s. This is projected to rise to more than 550 million in the 2040s, about 40% of all children born worldwide in that decade. Overall, low or rapidly declining birthrates remain the exception rather than the rule in most of Africa. Globally, the number of births are at their highest level ever – 140 million a year – and are unlikely to fall by much in the course of the next two to three decades. That is some bow wave underpinning future population growth, for good or ill (or both). With continuing high fertility in east, west and central Africa, the continent will contribute 1.3 billion of the 2 billion increase in the global population between 2019 and 2050. By then, the populations of east and west Africa will each exceed that of Europe. Thereafter, Africa’s varied demography will be one of the principal determinants of whether the global population will peak in the second half of the 21st century or continue growing, a vexed and contested issue with added significance in the age of the climate crisis. Elon Musk’s population implosion narrative is not original. It echoes that of Dr HB McKlveen, warning of the “depopulation of civilised nations” in the Journal of the American Medical Association in 1895; and that of many western economists in the 1930s, John Maynard Keynes among them. More than 50 years after the publication of Paul Ehrlich’s bestselling The Population Bomb, explosion narratives also burst forth at regular intervals. To date, human adaptability and resilience have overcome demographic crises (such as the Black Death in the 14th century), and periodic alarmism. This is not intended to sound complacent or Panglossian, merely to caution that alarmist narratives are invariably touted for ideological or some other specific reasons. Beyond two or three decades, demographic futurology is fraught with pitfalls, although not nearly as hazardous as medium- and long-term economic or weather forecasting. The omission of African demography from Musk’s pronouncement is symptomatic of colossal shortcomings in the understanding of Africa and its constituent countries in the west. African delegations are bit-part players at global gatherings like Cop26, despite the ramifications of the climate crisis for the continent (and its potential for countering deleterious effects). Western governments have been slow to cooperate with African counterparts in the battle to contain Covid-19, and have done woefully little by way of assistance. Africa remains fundamentally marginalised, including in stereotypical depictions in most western media and the imaginations of most western citizens. This lamentable state of affairs cannot – will not – endure. Sheer weight of numbers must bring about a reimagining of African countries and their populations. This alone will impact geopolitics, global trade, technological development, the future of the world’s dominant religions, patterns of migration – almost every aspect of life. More widespread familiarity with the continent’s diverse demographic characteristics and trajectories is a good entry point to this reimagining. Oh, and it might also help to be ever-cognisant of the fact that the landmasses of China, the US, Europe, India and Japan can all fit inside this continent that will loom ever-larger in the lives of its neighbours and the world. Edward Paice is the author of Youthquake – Why African Demography Should Matter to the World and director of Africa Research Institute Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Sajid Javid has admitted that a senior Tory publicly urging Boris Johnson to quit has been “damaging”, as critics of the prime minister sought to maintain pressure on him after the embarrassing defection of a Conservative MP. The health secretary said he wished the former Brexit secretary David Davis had not told Johnson at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday: “In the name of God, go.” The words echoed a plea made to the former wartime leader Neville Chamberlain in the Commons. Javid said he had known Davis for many years and had huge respect for him. “We don’t always agree on everything and that is one thing I don’t agree with him on,” he told Sky News. “It is damaging, of course it is. If you said to me would I rather he didn’t get up and say something like that then, of course, I wouldn’t want to see that but that’s the decision he made. “The prime minister has come to the House of Commons last week, he has set out and apologised, set out what has happened but most importantly I think he has asked for this investigation to be done, for the time and space to be given for it to be completed and the facts to be established. “And once they are, the PM will come very quickly back to parliament and submit himself so David Davis, or anyone else, can ask … whatever question they want.” Javid said he liked Christian Wakeford, the MP for Bury South who dramatically crossed the floor of the Commons chamber on Wednesday to sit with Labour having defected from the Conservatives, citing Johnson’s “disgraceful” conduct. Many Tory MPs have been critical of Johnson’s handling of a slew of allegations about parties held in Downing Street and other parts of government during lockdown. However, they are seeking to trigger a no-confidence vote in Johnson by submitting the required number of 54 letters calling for such a ballot. The latest estimate by Tory rebels is that about 30 letters have been submitted. Even if Johnson were to survive such a vote, the Guardian understands that the 1922 Committee, which administers the ballot, is considering changing the rules to shorten the length of time a prime minister is immune from another no-confidence vote from 12 months to six. Javid told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the rule-breaking parties – such as ones held in No 10 the night before Prince Philip’s funeral – “damage our democracy”. He called the gatherings “wrong in every single way”. Reflecting on Wakeford’s defection, Javid said: “I feel sorry for the people of Bury South, they voted Tory. I think a byelection would be welcome, I think Christian would be happy with a byelection. “Given the people of Bury South rightly voted Conservative in 2019 – they wanted to get Brexit done, they wanted to see a strong economy – and now they’ve got an MP that has changed his affiliation without their permission, why not give them a say?” Javid, who ran for the leadership in 2019, did not rule out doing so again. “There’s a good lineup of talent, I would say, in the party there and so there is no leadership election. We have got a PM, he is getting on with the job and that is what matters,” he told Sky News. “There is no leadership election.”Greg Rutherford’s dream of becoming the first British athlete to win a medal at a summer and winter Olympics has ended after he and his four-man team missed out on selection for GB’s bobsleigh squad having failed to hit the qualifying standard for the Winter Games in Beijing. The London 2012 Olympic champion came out of retirement last year in an attempt to qualify in driver Lamin Deen’s sled, and then battled back from injury to make his bobsleigh debut this month. However Deen and co failed to achieve the qualifying standard of three top-12 World Cup finishes this season, which ended Rutherford’s chances of making the flight to Beijing. Brad Hall and Mica McNeill will pilot British crews in the two-man, four-man and women’s bobsleigh, with both having also represented Team GB at the last Games in Pyeongchang four years ago. Hall and his crew of Taylor Lawrence, Nick Gleeson and Greg Cackett believe they are genuine medal contenders, having won six medals on the World Cup circuit as well as another at the Olympic test event in China in October. That achievement is particularly impressive given they are not funded by UK Sport due to historical problems in the sport and a poor performance in Pyeongchang. Speaking after the squad was announced, Cackett admitted his teammates had been frustrated by UK Sport’s claim they had given them £120,000 to help them qualify, when the money had only come in after they started doing well. “I was very irate about that, that was frustrating because whether they were misquoted or it was deliberately misleading, we felt that it was an unnecessary 11th-hour attempt to say ‘we’ve given this’, whereas actually the money came way after we could have done anything with it,” said Cackett. “So for us it was: ‘Please congratulate us for what we’ve done on our own, and look forward to working with us again.’ That was what the frustration was. “We don’t have to give the money back but we may be in a position where we do because the money can’t be spent,” he added. “We could be given £5m right now and it wouldn’t make the sled go faster – that’s ultimately where we’re at. The money basically just arrived too late and that’s where the frustration was because it could have been used to help us. I think UK Sport needs to go back and look at it and see what can be handled differently next time.” That message was echoed by Hall, who added: “Since our funding was cut back in 2019, it’s been a hard journey to get here but the hard work and sacrifice is starting to pay off with World Cup medals and obviously Olympic qualification. Obviously all our hard work has already been done so no amount of money can help boost our performance at this late stage.” Montell Douglas, who competed for Team GB at the Beijing 2008 Olympic Games in athletics, will team up with McNeill in the women’s bobsleigh. McNeill, who made the World Cup podium when she and Nicoll won a maiden World Cup silver in Sigulda this month, added: “It’s been a very different journey to the Games this time round but I’ve loved every moment of making it happen. I can’t wait to get back on the ice out there and represent Team GB.” The team’s leader Bruce Tasker, who won bronze in Sochi in 2014, also predicted a strong showing. “It’s really exciting heading into an Olympic Games with teams producing their best results ever,” he said. “You cannot ask more of an athlete than to be the best they have ever been and both teams have achieved record performances this year.”The Chinese military has said it tracked a US warship that sailed through disputed waters in the South China Sea, accusing it of “provocative actions” and warning of “serious consequences”. The US Navy said its mission was in accordance with international law and in line with its commitment to defend “every nation’s right to fly, sail, and operate wherever international law allows”. On Thursday afternoon a spokesperson for the People’s Liberation Army’s southern theatre command said the USS Benfold, a guided-missile destroyer, “illegally entered China’s Xisha territorial waters without the approval of the Chinese government”. The spokesperson, Col Tian Junli, said China’s navy and air forces were engaged to track and monitor the ship and give an “eviction” warning. “We solemnly demand that the US side immediately stop such provocative actions, otherwise it will bear the serious consequences of unforeseen events,” a statement from theatre command said. In a responding statement, the US Navy said China’s statement was “false”. The Xisha Islands, also known as the Paracels, are disputed islands in the South China Sea. China, Vietnam and Taiwan all claim sovereignty, but China holds practical control. China has established military infrastructure on the island chain, which “plays a key role in China’s goal of establishing surveillance and power projection capabilities throughout the South China Sea,” according to the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative. The South China Sea, which is crossed by vital shipping lanes and also contain gas fields and rich fishing grounds, is a significant flashpoint in tensions between China and its regional neighbours, and with the US. The US frequently carries out what it calls “freedom of navigation” missions in the South China Sea to challenge Chinese territorial claims. It said the USS Benfold on Thursday asserted “navigational rights and freedoms in the vicinity of the Paracel Islands, consistent with international law”. “At the conclusion of the operation, USS Benfold exited the excessive claim and continued operations in the South China Sea,” it said, in apparent reference to China’s claim of a straight maritime boundary around the islands, which the US has accused China of declaring in an attempt to claim more waters and territory than it is entitled to under international law. “The United States is defending every nation’s right to fly, sail and operate wherever international law allows, as USS Benfold did this week. Nothing PRC [People’s Republic of China] says otherwise will deter us,” it said. “The PLA southern theatre’s statement is the latest in a long string of PRC actions to misrepresent lawful US maritime operations and assert its excessive and illegitimate maritime claims at the expense of its south-east Asian neighbours in the South China Sea.” Bill Hayton, the author of South China Sea: The Struggle for Power in Asia, said the US mission was part of a pattern of freedom of navigation operations. “The Americans aren’t doing anything that they haven’t done before, but of course China will call it provocative given everything else that is going on their relationship,” Hayton said. “Ironically, the more that China maintains these ‘baselines’, the more they attract American and even British warships to challenge them.”Boris Johnson has announced the end of all Plan B Covid restrictions in England, including working from home, from 26 January. Does this rule change mean you’ll no longer be working from home? We would like to hear from people returning to the office or other workplaces. How do you feel about the transition and how your company or employer is handling it? What’s it like returning to communiting? Will your workplace adopt a hybrid of working from home and the office, or will you be back full-time? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.As the prime minister has pledged to abolish almost every existing Covid restriction over the coming weeks in England and “get life completely back to normal”, we’re interested to hear whether people are planning to have parties that had to be cancelled at the end of last year. Whether you’re doing a full blown family Christmas with all the trimmings in late January or February or recycling plans for a festive office do, we’d like to hear about it. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.As Aryna Sabalenka stepped up to the baseline for her Australian Open second-round match against Wang Xinyu of China, it did not take her long to realise this would be yet another day without her serve. The double faults came immediately and with great variety: slightly long, barely wide, back fence, photo pit. She served six in her opening service game and she had nine after her second. So predictable were her troubles, the stats keepers were ready: at one point in the first set Sabalenka had attempted 117 second serves in 2022; 57 had ended in a double fault. In the first weeks of the new season, Sabalenka’s serving woes have been one of the most curious storylines. Her high-risk game has always naturally yielded a high number of errors, but in the final weeks of last season, she completely lost control. She ended her 2021 campaign with a miserable series of serving performances – and losses – at the WTA Finals. In her first two matches of this season, both losses, she served a combined 38 double faults. And yet, on a day of upsets in the women’s draw, and in front of an ambitious young player in search of a career best win, Sabalenka defeated Wang 1-6, 6-4, 6-2 to reach the third round. Last year, Sabalenka’s success was one of the defining aspects of the season. She won two titles, made numerous deep runs and then reached her first two grand slam semi-finals at Wimbledon and the US Open. Although she has learned to harness her power and register consistent results, demolishing the ball remains her modus operandi. It was effective enough for her to finish the season with a career high ranking of No 2 in the world. In recent matches, Sabalenka had allowed her service issues to consume her. She spent her first-round loss in Adelaide resorting to anguished underarm serves and gesturing to her team. But here, she simply focused on executing all of the other aspects of her game that continue to thrive. “I already had a lot of experience playing without a serve,” she said. “I just kept telling myself: ‘You have enough shots to still win the match even if you cannot serve.’ So I think this kind of mentality helped me to stay in the game and actually find my serve.” As she pushed on, Sabalenka did slowly find rhythm. By the end of the third set she was obliterating her second serve, its average speed rising from 91mph to an enormous 103mph in the third set and winning points by itself. Of her 19 double faults in the match, 12 came in the blowout first set. She landed a 101mph second-serve ace in the final game for good measure. In the third round, Sabalenka will face Marketa Vondrousova, the 31st seed. She had the resilience to push on and maintain her spot in the draw and on Saturday she will have another opportunity to rediscover her best tennis. While Sabalenka survived, Thursday saw the bottom half of the women’s draw ransacked in five short minutes after two tournament favourites were scuppered. Clara Tauson, a 19-year-old former Australian Open girls’ champion, rose to produce the best match of her young career against one of the in-form players in the women’s game, defeating the sixth seed Anett Kontaveit 6-2, 6-4. Tauson stands at 6ft, she already has one of the heaviest forehands in the game and she spent the match dictating from the baseline. As Kontaveit tried to avoid Tauson’s forehand, the Dane showed her attacking potential on both wings by simply dismantling the Estonian with her searing, flat backhand. “Today we had a plan that I didn’t really follow because I felt really good out there, so I went for everything in my shots,” she said, smiling. As Kontaveit departed the court in defeat, Garbiñe Muguruza was also on the brink. Rather than a fearless young upstart, she fell 6-3, 6-3 to Alizé Cornet, a French veteran who has been a fixture at the top of the sport over the past decade and half. Cornet has now played 60 consecutive grand slam tournaments since January 2007, two appearances shy of the women’s record held by Ai Sugiyama, and on her 32nd birthday against Muguruza she pulled off one of the best victories of her career. Afterwards, she revealed she was not sure if she would continue after this year. “Sometimes you lose, for example, with match point,” she said. “You go back to your hotel room and you go: ‘What’s the point of doing all that?’ This is not an easy job. “You’re on the road basically 10 months out of 12 so you never see your family, it’s really hard to have a love life. “All these things around tennis make it complicated. But the love of the game has always been stronger.” For Cornet, her lack of certainty about her future formed part of her motivation as she entered Rod Laver Arena on Thursday morning and defeated a top five player at a grand slam tournament for just the second time in her life. “I think today the key was that I’m telling myself that I’m playing probably my last year. I’m not sure yet. When I stepped on the court, I was like: ‘You know what? Just enjoy the moment because you don’t know if you’re going to come back.’ I think that’s what made the difference.”Nothing in politics is as dangerous as a populist in trouble – unless it is two populists in trouble. Today we have Britain’s Boris Johnson and Russia’s Vladimir Putin, both with plunging popularity ratings and both desperately in need of a distraction. There is no distraction as enticing as war. War across Ukraine’s conflict-ridden Donbas region is now said by western strategists to be just round the corner, imminent and possibly inevitable. President Biden clearly expects Russia to “move in” on Ukraine. The UK’s chief of defence staff, Tony Radakin, said that a Russian invasion could trigger conflict on a scale “not seen in Europe since world war two”. The textbook triggers are in place: a toxic border, thousands of troops entrenched, alliances uncertain and everywhere reckless and confusing talk of “consequences”. There is bluff on all sides, and boys’ toys galore. But what on earth does it have to do with Britain? I recall visiting Moscow in 1992 after the fall of the Soviet Union, when every Russian expert said the same thing: the west may have won the cold war, but above all don’t humiliate Russia. Don’t do what was done to Germany in 1919 and devastate morale. Moscow’s Boris Yeltsin begged the west not to push Nato to Russia’s borders. It would risk, he said, “the flames of war bursting out across the whole of Europe”. The west blatantly derided the advice. Nato leaders feasted on victory, recruiting members eastwards through Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary and the Baltic states. Pleas from Russian moderates were ignored, while London opened its doors to Russia’s stolen wealth. The result was predictable. In 1999, Vladimir Putin took power on a populist, patriotic ticket. To Britain’s former Moscow ambassador, Rodric Braithwaite, Putin was a master of articulating “the sense of humiliation Russians felt after the collapse of the Soviet Union”. He exploited Nato’s aggressive expansionism for all it was worth. When in 2008 America’s George W Bush backed extending Nato membership to Georgia and Ukraine (a move that was vetoed by Germany and France) Putin seized land in both. Ukraine is an independent state but one that, like Belarus, Georgia and Kazakhstan, has usually maintained peaceful relations within Moscow’s sphere of interest. When Putin was in dispute with Ukraine and seized its province of Crimea in 2014, the west imposed economic sanctions on Russia that were pointless. Like most sanctions, they made the imposers feel briefly good, while harming the poor, rewarding crooks and entrenching the offending regime in power. Witness Iran, North Korea and now Afghanistan. Putin has never indicated the slightest wish to invade, damage or interrupt trade with Britain or the US. He behaves outrageously towards his critics, at home and abroad, and offends western standards of decency and liberalism. The result is an ageing, emigrating and demoralised Russian population. But that is his country and his choice. We may choose to exert soft power over Moscow, through cultural, educational and economic forces but we cannot police Putin’s borders or stop him mistreating his neighbours. That is not our business. Every European crisis becomes drenched in history. Lord Steel writes in a letter to the Times that the situation reminds him of Czechoslovakia in 1938 – or perhaps Poland. Or is this Serbia in 1914? Is Donbas another Cuba, or perhaps Kosovo or Bosnia? Does Putin want another iron curtain? Hitler makes an almost daily appearance. Yes, we can learn from history, but the greatest lesson is that history can be a trap. In his 2021 essay on the “historical unity of Russia and Ukraine”, Putin left no room for doubt about his vision of a Russian domestic empire, a family of Slav nations – albeit without mentioning Stalin’s Ukrainian atrocities. With Belarus, Ukraine has for centuries formed Moscow’s outer bailey against the ever-turbulent politics of western Europe. But Putin also reiterated his commitment to the Minsk II settlement aimed at ending the fighting in Donbas, brokered with Kyiv in 2015 by France and Germany but never implemented. Analysis of this deal by Anatol Lieven of Washington’s Quincy Institute frames it as a perfectly equitable way out of the Donbas conflict. It involves Kyiv granting extensive domestic autonomy to the Russian-speaking regions of eastern Ukraine, the west backing down on Bush’s proposed eastwards expansion of Nato, and Russia pulling its troops back from a border restored to Ukraine. In practice, the biggest hurdle to the Minsk II settlement was Kyiv’s reluctance to grant autonomy to Donbas. Across Europe, the biggest threat to national peace and stability lies in the inability of central governments, of any colour, to tolerate regional decentralisation and diversity. Ask them in Belgrade, Madrid, even London. A problem, too, was the west’s refusal to acknowledge any justice in Moscow’s sense of border insecurity. As is drearily familiar, Europe’s politicians take belligerent stances and then, as Lieven points out, “leaders who do not intend to go to war may stumble into a situation in which they are unable to stop or turn back”. Putin emerges from a deluge of recent biographers as a primeval Russian nationalist, steeped in the politics of oligarchy, kleptomania and violence. But his strategic outlook is not complicated. It is rooted in traditional Russian pride and paranoia. He has no desire to conquer Europe, much as the west’s defence lobby, bruised by Iraq and Afghanistan, may long to believe otherwise. Reports from the frontline indicate that many Ukrainians expect Britain (and the US) to come to their aid, including militarily, should Russia move further into Donbas. Britain’s foreign secretary Liz Truss absurdly sits on a tank and warns Putin not to make a “strategic mistake”. The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, taunts Putin with destroyers careering up and down the Crimean coast. Johnson sends Ukraine a few anti-tank missiles. The invitation to Moscow to call Britain’s bluff is glaring. No one is going to stop Putin’s tanks from rumbling into Donbas if he is determined to do so. The west can raise the cost to him with economic sanctions, but they will make no difference, except to the price of gas. For Britain to seek brownie points for Nato by threatening war over this would be beyond madness. Yet in view of the equivocal language of Truss, Wallace, Radakin and others, this reality should be stated in the clearest terms – not least to the Ukrainians. Russia’s border disputes with its neighbours have nothing whatsoever to do with Britain. And they certainly have nothing to do with saving Boris Johnson’s skin. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistThis documentary sets out on a noble but foolhardy mission: to examine the history of Brian Wilson with the man himself. Wilson turns 80 this summer, and he is showing his age. His recent singing on stage can be faltering, almost conversational at times, and the mental health problems he has weathered during his life make interviews difficult: he is often nervous to the point of monosyllables. And yet director Brent Wilson (no relation), working with Rolling Stone journalist Jason Fine, creates an evocative piece under the circumstances: kindly film-making that puts Wilson at ease, and allows for some rare, unusual portraiture of the Beach Boys mastermind. It centres on a May-September bromance between Fine and Wilson. The former, who has interviewed Wilson a number of times and befriended him, drives him around the various houses he’s lived in across the Los Angeles area. “When you get scared, what do you do, take a deep breath?”, Wilson asks Fine early on. “When I’m scared, I listen to you talk.” Wilson seems deep in a second childhood, with Fine his patient and loving father. Supported by archive footage, Fine drives him through the chronology of the Beach Boys and Wilson’s life: surfing-mad early hits building the ambition of Pet Sounds and Smile, before drug misuse, overeating, mental breakdowns, and exploitation at the hands of psychologist Eugene Landy. Despite Fine’s conversational interviewing, Wilson is still not enormously articulate or forthcoming, though it’s nice to see him reminisce, however simply, and there are plenty of powerful, telling moments. Filmed in the passenger seat, emotion passes across Wilson’s face like weather, and he frequently asks Fine to play the Beach Boys song It’s OK on the car stereo (“Good or bad, glad or sad / It’s all gonna pass, so it’s OK”). The analysis instead comes from some starry talking heads. Half the time, these tend towards the broad statements of awe that populate documentaries of this sort; a more radical film would have avoided this very standard framework altogether. But Elton John is typically articulate, My Morning Jacket’s Jim James (who contributes a new song with Wilson to the soundtrack, Right Where I Belong) is interesting on the architecture of Wilson’s songcraft, Nick Jonas is evocative on the cruelty of expectation, and Don Was movingly boggles at the isolated vocal parts of God Only Knows, hammering home the heavenly, near-aggressive beauty of Wilson’s arrangement. Bruce Springsteen is a pithy and clever interrogator of Wilson’s work throughout, for instance when he discusses Caroline No and Pet Sounds: “Reckoning with the adult world and the terrible heartache that comes along with it … joyfulness even in the pain of living; joyfulness of an emotional life.” But there’s a grave misstep when the voice of Wilson’s abusive father is laid over Wilson looking silently panicked as he’s filmed in a new studio session. Wilson has auditory hallucinations as a symptom of his schizoaffective disorder, and so to suggest what those voices in his head are, in order to advance the documentary narrative, is crass and deeply unethical. However this is offset by the sensitivity elsewhere, including the time spent exploring his relationships with Wilson’s late beloved brothers and bandmates Dennis and Carl. This results in an unmissable moment: it turns out Wilson has never heard Dennis’s solo album masterpiece Pacific Ocean Blue, so Fine plays it to him, and once again, it’s enough to just watch the waves of feelings swell and break across Wilson’s face as he listens. • Brian Wilson: Long Promised Road is released on 21 January in cinemas.Each night, more than a thousand crows descend on Sunnyvale, California. In recent years a growing contingency of corvids have been roosting in the Silicon Valley town’s downtown district, filling the night air with a chorus of caws and painting the roads, Pollock-esque, with droppings. The spectacle has failed to charm residents and local business owners. Vice-Mayor Alysa Cisneros said constituents had been complaining about the crows since she began campaigning for office in 2019. “In terms of the kinds of complaints I get on a consistent basis, crows are a top concern, right after speeding drivers,” she said. Now the city has resolved to use laser pointers and boomboxes to chase them away from the downtown area, where residents want to enjoy al fresco dinners and meandering strolls without having to talk over the birds’ calls or dodge their poop. As in many cities that have seen urban roosts expand in recent years, town officials have been desperately seeking strategies to quickly dispel or relocate the birds. Sunnyvale’s mayor, Larry Klein, was inspired to deploy lasers and speakers by neighboring Palo Alto, where lasers had been used, with some success, to disperse the crows congregating there. “The idea is to use these green laser pointers, plus the recorded sounds of crows in distress, to kind of harass the crows over the next few weeks,” said Klein. “And see if they leave.” While bird counts by the Santa Clara Valley Audubon Society have not shown any marked increase in the region encompassing Sunnyvale over the past five years, researchers say it’s plausible that increasing numbers of crows have relocated to downtown, drawn – as many locals are – to the plentiful dining options and cozy atmosphere. The district also has many trees and other landscaping features where crows can roost. During the colder months, when they’re not nesting, crows like to congregate in larger numbers – and the warmth radiating off city roads and trapped by tall buildings provide a cozy winter home. Street lights in cities help them better surveil for predators. “It’s an ideal habitat for them,” said Kaeli Swift, a post-doctoral researcher at the University of Washington. Sunnyvale had previously tried using a falcon to frighten the crows, with little success, Klein said. And the city is not ready to use more aggressive measures, such as pyrotechnics, against the highly intelligent birds. “You know, I have no issue with the crows, there are just too many roosting downtown,” he said. The city has had to dedicate more time and resources to spray-cleaning the sidewalks splattered with crow feces, and restaurant owners worry that birds will drive away patrons. “If we could just reason with crows, and tell them to spread out a bit more, that would be fantastic,” Klein said. Sunnyvale’s woes are not unique. In Auburn, New York, where crows now outnumber human residents two to one, officials have tried, and failed, to disperse the birds using lasers. Lasers have also been used unsuccessfully against crows in Rochester, Minnesota. In Indianapolis, lasers and recordings of bird warning calls did drive crows away from the business district, only to send them into a nearby, poorer neighborhood, “turning this into an environmental justice issue”, said John Marzluff, a professor of wildlife science at the University of Washington who studies corvids. Even if Sunnyvale manages to drive its flock away from downtown temporarily, they’re likely to return unless they find another habitat where they can comfortably and safely roost. “For a long-term solution, cities need to redirect funding towards research that would help us figure out how we can create green spaces designed to house these roosts,” Swift said. There is another option: “If you can’t beat them, join them,” Swift said. Swift notes that crows have few negative effects on other bird populations, and can even form bonds with humans. Put a couple of peanuts out for them on your porch occasionally, and they’ll remember you and come by again and again. “They’ll bring their mates by, and their offspring,” she said. “There’s a real bond that can happen.” Shani Kleinhaus of the Santa Clara Valley Audubon Society encourages residents to appreciate their beauty. “In the evening, when they get moving, they create these rivers of flight across the sunset. It’s beautiful. It’s exciting,” she said. “While they are here, why not celebrate them?”Does January feel like it has already lasted 1,057 days? Indeed it does. But at least this day is a Thursday, and you know what that means – 15 topical and general knowledge questions once again await you, as do Ron from Sparks, Kate Bush, and this week’s rather obvious nod to the children’s science fiction extravaganza Doctor Who. It is just for fun and there are no prizes, but let us know how you get on in the comments. The Thursday quiz, No 38 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and he’ll bring the anagrams back if you displease him.It’s hard to talk about meat, dairy or egg farming without talking about poop. Manure plays a big role on American factory farms, and if not properly managed it can quickly turn into a big problem. Each year in the US livestock animals produce between 1.27 and 1.37bn tons of waste – or somewhere between three and 20 times more manure than people produce in the US. That’s partly why devices that take manure and turn it into an energy source are catching on – as a way to manage waste and reduce methane emissions on farms. All that waste has to go somewhere, and many of the existing options aren’t great for us or for the environment. Manure from animal agriculture is a primary source of nitrogen and phosphorus pollution in US waterways, making water undrinkable and causing algae blooms that kill wildlife. Manure is also a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions on livestock farms – and much of its impact depends, specifically, on how it’s managed and stored. Twelve per cent of all greenhouse gas emissions from the US agricultural sector come from what the EPA calls “manure management”. So why not turn all that pollution into something that can power vehicles and other farming equipment – or into something that can be sold and used off-farm? This is the supposed promise of anaerobic digestion. In the past five years, there has been a surge of partnerships between animal farms and natural gas companies promoting the use of anaerobic digesters, which turn manure into a form of energy called biogas. The EPA has identified more than 8,000 dairy and hog operations as prime candidates for future on-farm digesters. Amid talks at Cop26, the Biden administration pointed to an expanding biogas industry as crucial to its methane emissions action plan. Smithfield, Perdue and Chevron all announced digester partnerships in the last two years. The waste-derived biogas industry appears to be booming; globally, the industry is predicted to reach $126.2bn by the year 2030, more than doubling over the next decade. But digesters come with their own set of problems. Some critics worry that the rise in this technology will only make it harder to curb the carbon footprint of animal farming and transition to greener energy sources – two things we must do in order to slow the effects of the climate crisis. Tyler Lobdell, an attorney with Food and Water Watch, says his group is particularly concerned that the rise in digesters only serves to further entrench both natural gas and factory farm production – two industries that are already notoriously difficult to regulate. “We’re marrying these two industries in such a way that it will become very difficult to advocate for change,” he says. Depending on how they’re used, anaerobic digesters may also not be as effective at curbing air and water pollution as they are on paper. “We already don’t enforce regulations on the books for air and water in CAFOs,” says David Cwiertny, a professor of engineering and environmental policy at the University of Iowa, referring to concentrated animal feeding operations. “I’m hard pressed to believe we’ll do it for digesters.” If properly managed, digesters could help polluting CAFOs get their manure under control. And good manure management – that is, following the best practices for collecting, storing and applying manure as a fertilizer – is critical for curbing pollution. But every type of animal farming operation is different, and brings different logistical hurdles for digesters. Plus, getting good at producing natural gas also means farms are now tasked with finding something to do with it. How it works Anaerobic digesters use bacteria to break down organic matter in an oxygen-free environment, like a sealed reactor or lagoon. Gases such as carbon dioxide, water vapor and methane are then separated from the liquid and solid digested waste, and the system can then process the biomethane so it can be used as natural gas. That natural gas can be used as an on-farm power source or sold to a gas treatment system or local utility. What’s left over – the solid and liquid digested waste – is then stored until it can be applied to cropland, or sold to other farms or garden stores as livestock bedding or potting mix. This storage solution could help on industrial pig farms, where manure is typically stored in pits or “lagoons”. Lagoons especially can become ticking ecological timebombs when a storm comes through. Heavy rainfall can lead to manure overflowing into nearby lakes and even well water. “Sometimes things happen where these pits fill up faster than what they expect,” says Chris Jones, a research engineer at the University of Iowa who studies water pollution. Normally, when preparing for a storm, CAFO operators have to get the manure out right away to avoid overflow. But when used properly, digesters are a sturdier solution that keeps the manure away from the rain, which can help curb runoff and overflow, as well as odor pollution. It can also reduce methane emissions in an industry that sorely needs it. Methane emissions from hog manure storage are higher than in any other livestock operation, except for dairy cattle. Why it might be less effective than it looks Critics warn that manure digesters shouldn’t be used to justify the expansion of factory farming, which is already a huge contributor of greenhouse gas emissions globally, as well as local air and water pollution. In Nebraska, one hog farming operation installed digesters after expressing concerns about how their expansion to 8,000 hogs would affect the surrounding community. And in California, public investment in digesters has gone overwhelmingly to larger operations, which incentivizes further consolidation in the industry in pursuit of profits from selling natural gas. But digesters can’t help reduce methane emissions everywhere on a farm – and that’s especially a problem on dairy farms. Cattle are the highest methane-emitting livestock animal because of the way cows digest food. Unlike most other farmed animals, most of cattle’s methane emissions come from belches, not manure. And those methane emissions, known as enteric methane emissions, are responsible for a large chunk of overall greenhouse gas emissions from the food sector in the US – 25% by EPA figures. But digesters do nothing to address enteric methane. Research also suggests that dairy farms can reduce their methane emissions by using solid manure storage. However, virtually all the digester projects in California that launched in the last year rely on covered lagoon systems, not solid storage. Is this renewable energy, or greenwashing? Anaerobic digesters may be able to extract energy from manure, but critics like the Food and Water Watch say that isn’t worth the risks associated with producing natural gas on farms. Transporting biomethane (as well as selling the manure that’s left over from the process) is expensive and complicated for livestock farmers, and while rare, accidents can happen. Digesters that aren’t carefully maintained can also leak, explode or break down, requiring professional divers to carry out risky repairs. Last July, a diver hired by an Iowa farmer drowned in the manure tank trying to fix a cable. Ultimately, the biggest concern about the rise of these technologies is that they’ll be used to distract from the country’s need to move away from energy sources like natural gas. “This allows [farms] to talk about their existing natural gas infrastructure as though it’s changing and becoming sustainable,” says Food and Water Watch’s Lobdell, “when in reality, there’s really no difference. “If we reach a point where municipalities and states are dependent on factory farms to source their energy […] the argument [becomes] ‘well, you’re not going to have electricity tomorrow if we close down a factory farm.’”Winning tip: on the level in Ghent, Belgium I love running in Ghent. It is completely flat, so encouraging for beginners and people aiming for personal bests. There is a rowing lake with a 5km track around the outside called Watersportsbaan. This connects with a nature reserve called Blaarmeersen on an 8km loop (with an artificial sandy beach to play volleyball, or swim in afterwards). To extend your route, there are gorgeous paths following the Leie River out into the countryside or through the historic city centre. If that isn’t enough, there is another nature reserve, full of wader birds and canals, called Bourgoyen-Ossemeersen, surrounded by a 10k loop. I will be running my first marathon in Ghent in March 2022. Beer, waffles and chocolate after, anyone? Jennifer Coleman Nice place to jog, France In Nice, Provence, I really enjoyed joining the local joggers running along what is one of the most beautiful streets in the world – the Promenade des Anglais. You have the fresh salty sea breezes filling your lungs, the sun bouncing off the white-kissed waves of the Med, and the beautiful belle epoque buildings flanking the running route. The road stretches from the airport to the castle, so some stretches are quieter than others, but the best part is from the Hotel Negresco to the old port – feel free to grab some fresh mussels and a glass of wine on the beach at the Plage Beau Rivage as a reward. Yasmin Running the Ridgeway, Berkshire My Berkshire village of East Ilsley on the A34 offers direct access to Britain’s oldest “road”, the Ridgeway, with a huge variety of runs. My favourite, a 5km roughly circular route, rewards effort with 360-degree views of the surrounding countryside. It is best tackled clockwise, with a steepish start and gentler return to the village duck pond. Part of the route runs in parallel with the Gallops, where I’m sometimes lucky enough to run alongside training racehorses. More constant companions are the red kites soaring above. Every season brings delights: autumnal mist inversions, winter frosts, spring wheat ripening to summer fields of gold. F Chaillier Wending through Wendover, Chilterns Wendover offers more than 30 miles of public paths and bridleways, and some of the best are to be found in Wendover Woods. My favourite route up to the woods is via Hogtrough Lane followed by an undulating route through the woods to the highest point. Wendover Woods is a stunning place to run in all weathers, and the muddy season is particularly fun. That said, you shouldn’t miss it when it snows or when the bluebells are in bloom. There are Saturday-morning parkruns, a 10k, half marathons, marathons, ultras and my favourite – an evening run with a headtorch lighting the way. Lisa Low hills in lockdown, Offa’s Dyke Having undertaken a “lockdown move” in 2020 from Cheshire to the low hills of north-east Wales, it has been wonderful to finally begin to explore the many trails that are now accessible to us. The Offa’s Dyke path, which runs from Prestatyn to Chepstow, provides stunning scenery, sometimes brutal ascents and is just perfect to focus on the run. The sections of trail I like the most include the ascents of Moel Famau and the section from Llangollen to Bodfari, where there is an excellent pub (The Dinorben Arms) to refuel and rehydrate in comfort. Perfect. Richard Brown Beach run, Cyprus My favourite route is in Protaras, Cyprus. There is a path that runs from Fig Tree bay to Polyxenia beach and you have wonderful views of the bays and beaches while running. The gorgeous clear seas and sandy beaches make it very pleasant. The best time to go is early morning when the sun isn’t blazing and the paths aren’t too busy with holidaymakers. Anna Craig On the skyline, south of Edinburgh The Pentland hills near Edinburgh are a wonderful running resource. Just 20 minutes south of the city, they offer varied terrain, from flat, reservoir-side runs to more challenging hilly routes. Year round, they impress, offering snowy trails in winter and wonderful sunsets in the summer. Start from Flotterstone and take yourself uphill via Turnhouse and Carnethy, or opt for a more leisurely route to Glencorse reservoir. If you’re feeling very adventurous, sign up to the Pentland skyline race, which takes place every October. Gráinne Neary Into the woods near Cardiff Wenallt Woods (Coed y Wenallt), Cardiff, is a truly amazing place to run. Hills and mud, streams to cross, fallen trees to hurdle, rocks to navigate – it is never dull. The huge array of paths means there is plenty of choice when it comes to length of route. You’ll feel connected to nature running here, too – this is ancient woodland with good biodiversity and a range of plants. The light and colours are magical, and the views over the Bristol Channel as the sun is rising are exquisite. And, if you’re lucky, you won’t see a single other person. Total exhilaration! Arbennig iawn! Richard Munn A Haven for runners, Lincolnshire The positive, or negative, aspect of living in Boston is the lack of hills, but within minutes of putting on trail shoes and leaving the house I am on the sea bank of the River Haven. It’s a superb run with the river on one side and marshes on the other, with a soundtrack of the thousands of brent geese who spend winter here. If the tide is in, you can enjoy the ships making their way up the river to the port. The halfway point is reached where the Haven exits into the Wash, a remote, ever-changing landscape of mudflats and marsh. Head down and back along the river. The best head-clearing 10 miles, whatever the weather. Paul Wilson City oasis, Sheffield Sheffield delights with a run through Ecclesall Woods. Between the busy streets of Ecclesall and Abbeydale Road the woodland is an oasis in the city, bringing the opportunity to breathe as you run through the wonderful greenery. Here you will find 142 hectares (350 acres) of mature, semi-natural deciduous woodland and more than 15km of routes through a beautiful landscape. There is something for everyone. Some of the longer routes can take you west all the way into the Peak District, past brooks and swaying trees. Anna GunnThe trees are not exactly imposing. Slim and spiny, with limbs that grip small poms of sharp leaves, they look like something a child might dream up. Or maybe Salvador Dalí. Even the name, Joshua tree, sounds kind of awkward. On a wet and chilly December morning, I stood at a makeshift encampment in the Mojave national preserve in San Bernardino county, California, listening as a group of strangers fretted over the trees’ precarious future. Within the preserve is Cima Dome, a broad-sloping mound that, until recently, contained the densest Joshua tree forest in the world. That changed in August 2020, when a lightning storm ignited the Dome fire, which ripped through over 43,000 acres of Cima Dome and burned about 1.3m Joshua trees. Given that Joshua trees – which technically are not trees but a species of desert succulent – are native only to the south-western US, the Dome fire represented an outright disaster to their survival. Looking out that morning, I saw seemingly endless fields of the trees’ scorched and tortured carcasses. This was a terrible harbinger of things to come: a 2019 Ecosphere journal study determined that, if carbon emissions stay at current levels, just 0.02% of the species would survive. The August 2020 Dome Fire in the Mojave national preserve burned more than 1m Joshua trees to varying degrees. Now, a year and a half later, a wide-ranging group of volunteers are working alongside the National Park Service, which manages the preserve, to replant Joshua trees. When I visited in early December, the plan was to plant 1,500 seedlings over the next several weeks. The 18 people spending their day (or days, in some cases) with the trees included civilians from all walks of life, members of the Arizona and Nevada Conservation Corps, and a group of women who brought along two pack camels to help carry baby Joshua trees through some of the more treacherous terrain. Joshua trees typically have a lifespan of 150 years; if all goes according to plan, these saplings will become a fixture of the preserve for a long, long time. Among those assembled was Brendan Cummings, the conservation director with the Center for Biological Diversity, a national non-profit focused on saving imperiled plants and animals. Tall and wiry with a thick head of salt and pepper hair and a pensive demeanor, Cummings is spearheading an attempt to list the tree under the state-level Endangered Species Act. “What they’re doing could be the model for what climate restoration will look like,” he told me on the phone a few weeks prior. In December 2021, a group of volunteers traveled to the Mojave national preserve to plant 1,500 eastern Joshua tree seedlings. Pictured: Volunteers Brendan Cummings, Avery Arp, Anthony Chesney and Nancy Fite. The threat isn’t just wildfires. The climate crisis, invasive grasses and poor migration patterns for the trees’ seeds all contribute to the species’ imperilment. Human development – the trees have been cleared out to build anything from new neighborhoods to solar farms – isn’t helping matters. Because the threats are so varied, it can be difficult to calculate exactly how many trees are in danger (something land developers love to point out). But Cummings believes that fact is beside the point. “You don’t need to know whether there were 500 passengers or 2,000 passengers on the Titanic to know that the entire population was threatened when they hit an iceberg,” he said as we stood near the basecamp on that frigid winter day. A western Joshua tree in the Mojave Desert. About 40% of the western varietal is on private land that will probably be developed. After about an hour’s wait – the camels were ultimately unwilling to saddle the load of supplies, “living up to the stereotype of being recalcitrant”, as Cummings put it – the volunteers were split into small groups and directed to designated sites. There they would plant the spiky green seedlings that, if all went according to plan, would over the course of a few decades replace the blackened husks of trees that now line the landscape. ••• Though they look pretty similar, there are in fact two different species of Joshua trees: western and eastern. The majority of easterns are located on federal land and are not under threat by developers. Cummings’ work as a conservationist focuses on the western variety. “Most of the range of the eastern species is on federal land, which is never going to get bulldozed,” he said. “About 40% of western Joshua tree habitat is on private land, and most of that will ultimately get developed.” A solar panel at the Antelope Valley solar ranch in the western Mojave Desert. Solar farms such as this one can contribute to the endangerment of Joshua trees because building them can require forests to be cleared out. Cummings’ fight to save the western species picked up steam in September 2020, when the California fish and game commission accepted a petition he authored to offer endangered protections to Joshua trees for one year (since extended to May of 2022), during which the agency is conducting research into the plants’ long-term viability. Those protections made it illegal to damage or remove Joshua trees without special permits. (That ban didn’t apply to everyone: the commission approved an exemption allowing solar projects in Kern and San Bernardino counties to continue removing Joshua trees during construction.) “After the commission receives the report, it can complete the process to make a final determination whether or not to list the Joshua tree as threatened or endangered under the California Endangered Species Act,” said Rachel Ballanti, deputy executive director of California fish and game commission. Though temporary, the decision was still precedent-setting: it marked the first time a plant species was given protection as a result of a climate crisis threat. “Climate change is creating a much hotter and much drier desert environment, and that is restricting species’ ability to reproduce,” said Cameron Barrows, one of the Ecosphere study’s authors and an ecologist with the University of California, Riverside. In the case of Joshua trees, drought has left the soil too dry to sustain saplings. As a result, we’re left with a species that skews quite old. It’s sort of akin, as Barrows explained, to a community with a senior center but no elementary school: “You would immediately realize the community has a very short lifespan.” ••• This isn’t Cummings’ first conservation rodeo. He was also part of the successful push to get the polar bear listed as endangered under the Bush administration. Yet, all these years later, the bear is still on thin ice, with recent estimates warning the species could be wiped out by the end of the century. I asked Cummings if, given this fact, all the conversation around government protections really matter in the first place. He nodded his head in amusement; clearly he was expecting the question. Volunteers Brendan Cummings and Chris Clarke plant eastern Joshua tree saplings in the Mojave national preserve. “If you look at the modeling for say, polar bears in Alaska, if we halt global warming in the next 20 years, even in that optimistic scenario, polar bears have about an 80% chance of extinction,” he said. “However, if you reduce other threats that kill polar bears – oil development in their habitat in the Arctic Refuge, trophy hunting – the extinction risk drops from 80% down to about 50%. You have a significantly greater chance of a species surviving, if you can reduce those other threats.” The same thing, he explained, applies to Joshua trees. It’s not exactly a sunny outlook, but coming from a man who’s dedicated his life to the preservation of the natural world, it’s probably the most clear-eyed view we’ve got. Map of Joshua tree planting sites at a basecamp in the Mojave national preserve. In the meantime, all he can do is dig. Crouching over a sapling, Cummings and the other volunteers were given a quick run-down on planting the dozen eastern babies they had been assigned: why, for example, it’s important to build a berm around the sapling (it helps to retain water), or why only half of the saplings are encased by small chicken-wire cages (a maze of regulations prohibit the use of fencing, so they’re conducting a mini-field experiment to evaluate whether the barriers will improve life expectancy). “A lot of red tape to navigate,” explained Nic Anderson, the unofficial supervisor and a researcher with the Great Basin Institute, an environmental group working closely with the National Park Service. Soon enough the volunteers were packing their infant plants into the soil, all under the mournful gaze of the thousands of burned Joshua trees. It was a hopeful sight, but also an eerie one: like witnessing a birth in a morgue. Left: Chris Clarke and Brendan Cummings place a chicken-wire cage around recently planted saplings. Right: A western Joshua tree in the west Mojave. I got to talking with volunteer Chris Clarke, an associate director with the National Parks Conservation Association, another environmental group. Clarke explained how the Dome fire didn’t just impact the trees, but also the antelope squirrels that eat their seeds, and the ladder-backed woodpeckers that look for insects in their limbs. And the desert night lizards that seek shelter under their stumps. And tortoises. And jackrabbits. And cottontail rabbits. “There are lots of animals that depend on the Joshua tree forest for food,” he explained. “The Joshua tree is really the linchpin of the ecosystem.” After about two hours, the group had all 12 of their saplings firmly planted into the ground. By then the rain had picked up and temperatures had dipped into the 40s, and the caravans of tree-huggers decided to head back to base. It was a modest effort, and one that even in the best-case scenario, won’t come to approaching the scale of devastation wrought by the Dome fire. But the process was therapeutic for the humans involved as much as it was restorative for the ecosystem. Park ranger Sierra Willoughby caresses the burned bark of a Joshua tree. And maybe the dead trees aren’t so dead after all. Though the Mojave national preserve staff had initially believed every tree was dead, they’d suddenly noticed a handful of natural new growths sprouting from the husks of the charred trees (though it’s macabre, imagine a baby limb on a decaying corpse). As Cummings and I strolled through the forests near the basecamp, he couldn’t help but eagerly point out any unexpected saplings. Even after 16 years living among the trees in the town of Joshua Tree, he’s still amazed by them. “You walk through the burned Cima Dome and feel a little hopeless,” Cummings said. “But dig a hole and plant a new tree in the ground and suddenly it feels a little less hopeless.”Joe Biden confirmed at his press conference on Wednesday what has been apparent for weeks – Nato remains divided over how to respond to Russian aggression against Ukraine. His admission of a split was overshadowed by his passing remark that a minor incursion would be treated differently to a full-scale invasion. The White House afterwards clarified that a minor incursion meant cyber-attacks, as opposed to a movement of Russian troops into Ukraine sovereign territory. None of this is academic since Biden said he thought Vladimir Putin would risk an invasion, however much Nato tried to change the Russian president’s calculus with threats. The greatest tension over the correct response is between the US and Germany, hence the visit of the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, to Berlin on Thursday before a meeting with Russian officials in Geneva. Some of the differences are manageable. Neither of the two main sides of the German coalition are willing to sell arms to Ukraine, saying it is longstanding German policy, based on its war experience, not to send weapons into a conflict zone. The current vice-chancellor, Robert Habeck, caused a storm last year when he suggested, against that policy, that the Greens might provide defensive arms, but he beat a fast retreat. By contrast the US, the UK and Turkey do supply arms. Critics point out that the underlying morality guiding Germany’s approach to arms exports is opaque. According to government figures released on Monday, sales to Egypt boosted Germany’s arms exports to record levels in 2021. Preliminary figures from the Economic Affairs and Climate Action Ministry showed Germany exported arms worth €9.35bn (£7.79bn/$10.65bn) last year – 61% up on 2020. This leaves open the question of why it is acceptable to sell arms to a repressive regime, such as Egypt, but not to a country seeking to avoid repression, such as Ukraine. On the issue of energy dependency, the tensions are deeper. A compromise reached last summer between the US and Angela Merkel, reaffirmed this week by her successor as chancellor, Olaf Scholz, implies that the Nord Stream 2 pipeline built to carry gas from Russia to Germany will be affected if an invasion happens. In the absence of an invasion, the Greens and the Social Democrats (SPD) have for now parked their differences by waiting to see if the pipeline receives regulatory approval in Germany and the EU. The SPD want it to go ahead and the Greens do not, but the German approach – not just in the SDP, the home of detente – may be shifting. A letter from more than 73 eastern Europe security experts in Die Zeit urged Germany to end its three-decade policy of standing by in the face of Russian aggression. Solely in deference to Germany, Biden has worked hard with Democratic senators to prevent them backing sanctions now, but the issue is still live in US politics, and patience with Germany among Republicans is thin. Separately there has been a dispute about whether Russia can be detached from SWIFT, the international payments system. Some of this is a technical dispute about the legality and effectiveness of the action, and voices do not all go one way. Katarina Barley, a vice-president of the European parliament and member of Germany’s Social Democrats, for instance, is a supporter. But the fact that the EU does not want to meet formally to discuss sanctions in advance suggests it wants to avoid a row. The risks of fracture stretch beyond individual punishments to the wider principle of the extent to which the EU should be running an independent Russia policy. The Americans have undoubtedly made strenuous efforts to involve European capitals. But on Wednesday the French president, Emmanuel Macron, once again raised the principle of not just an independent EU security policy, but explicitly an independent European policy towards Russia – something he has proposed before, to little effect in Moscow. His proposal blindsided the European commission and led to frantic reassuring calls to the Americans. This is a familiar French refrain, but if the US finds it dispiriting, it should review the wisdom of going behind France’s back to sign the Aukus nuclear submarine deal to confront China in September, leaving France humiliated. In diplomacy, loyalty has to be earned, not just demanded.In a world that increasingly feels like it runs on nothing but shrill hysteria, BBC Three’s Zen Motoring feels a little like a gift from heaven. This new six-part comedy is relentlessly calm and thoughtful, almost to the point of being disorienting. Primarily comprised of dashcam footage and ambient music, Zen Motoring is a vehicle for the patient, mind-expanded thought processes of one man: a mysterious former battle rapper named Ogmios. Shot primarily in London, but reaching Milton Keynes and Herne Bay in Kent, Ogmios spends the series in an almost unbroken state of flow, aware of everything around him, and doing his best to increase the harmony of the road experience. When he’s blocked in by some binmen, where other drivers would twist themselves into waves of stress, Ogmios keeps his head. “I’m quite happy to chill and watch this mesmerising display,” he murmurs, like a north London beat-poet Attenborough. Not an awful lot happens in Zen Motoring – Ogmios rescues a stricken pigeon, visits new towns, raps a little – but that’s the point. The backbone of the show is the calming dashcam commentary. Imagine Police Camera Action! narrated by a snooker commentator and you’re halfway there. Ogmios is otherwise known as Ivan Battaliero-Owen, a 41-year-old former PE teacher from Hackney, east London. It’s always a little fraught speaking to a comedian for the first time, especially one with a persona as sharp as Ogmios, because you never know if you’re going to get the actual person, the character, or a mixture of the two. So it makes sense to just ask him upfront. I’m confused, I tell him. Are you Ivan or Ogmios? “I’m confused too,” he laughs down the phone, in a voice only a fraction less unflappable than that of his on-screen creation. “It’s a fine line. Ogmios is my rap name, and it has been for 15 years or more, so it’s a subtle distinction between the character and who I am. It’s me, essentially.” The premise of Zen Motoring is played for laughs, with Ogmios rolling out quasi-spiritual truisms for every traffic inconvenience he encounters. But the line between performer and character seems incredibly blurred. “It’s something I’m interested in,” insists Battaliero-Owen, who struck upon the idea for the show through his hobby of watching YouTube dashcam footage. “A lot of the dashcam stuff on YouTube is quite tense, with a lot of swearing, road rage and crashes,” he says. “I thought I’d try to make something only using dashcam footage of a really relaxing journey. Before that, I used to see things on the road and wished I had a dashcam. I’d think: ‘Oh this is dashcam gold.’” Last year a prototype appeared online as Ogmios School of Zen Motoring. Over three videos, Ogmios applied his calm philosophy to a number of real world situations. The videos are a blast – in one, he sets out during the Jewish festival Purim and gets caught in a street full of Hassidic Jews enjoying an ear-splitting rave – but the BBC show is more structured. There’s a narrative to it, allowing us to get a better sense of who Ogmios is. The results are beautiful. It’s the sort of show you can either just let wash over you, or you can lose yourself in the nuts and bolts of the Zen driving mindset. Key to achieving this, says Battaliero-Owen, is the ability to clear your mind and think of traffic as a huge organic system, rather than something to be aggressively conquered. “It’s thinking about the overall flow of pedestrians, bikes, cars and the overall movement,” he says. “Seeing yourself as one part of it, and thinking what move will help the flow of the situation. There’s something larger going on.” So he really is a Zen driver? “I am, yeah,” he says. “Certainly I’m trying to get more Zen. Over the years I have been trying to dig into that well of patience. Sometimes I fall short, which isn’t to say that I get out of my car and beat people up, but I have to cultivate that mindset. It’s the Zen practice of thinking: ‘This is fine, I can wait here,’ while the cab stops in the middle of the road and disembarks everyone.” This mindset is key to the success of Zen Motoring. For the most part, driving can be a fraught affair, full of furious people spoiling for a fight at the merest provocation. Ogmios’s refusal to engage with all the hurried stress around him isn’t just funny, it’s also a bit inspirational. That said, one relatively new addition to the roads seems to push both Ogmios and Battaliero-Owen to the furthest peripheries of his calm. Both Zen Motoring and the YouTube videos are preoccupied by e-scooters. The “scooterboys”, as Ogmios has termed them, are a blight on the roads; they’re entitled, oblivious and a danger to everybody around them. There’s one episode where Ogmios performs a rap battle with a scooterboy, and another where – in a nod to Taxi Driver – he starts to view them with uncharacteristic scorn. It all seems to come from a very real place, I say. “I guess originally I found it interesting, this phenomenon that quickly appeared in the streets,” he says of e-scooters. “The spaces they occupy – they can move quite quickly. They’re not cyclists. The whole vibe of moving through space while standing up. Having to adjust to scooterboys not being particularly experienced with the rules of the road.” That said, he can understand their popularity. “In general I’m in favour of electric travel, and hopefully we can move towards a sustainable travel network,” he says. “I rode an e-scooter for the show, and they’re more fun than I thought.” Plus, he notes, scooterboys look positively harmless in comparison with a new type of rider on the roads. “I’ve noticed ‘wheelboys’, he says darkly of those who ride around on electric unicycles. “They’re even more from another world, travelling through our dimension.” A huge part of Zen Motoring’s appeal is the music: a hazy, ambient, 3am blur that Battaliero-Owen plans to release as an album this year. It fits into a long line of comedies where the trippy soundtrack is just as vital as the words spoken. There’s a little Blue Jam in there, and strong echoes of Joe Pera Talks With You’s awestruck tenderness. “You’re the second person to mention him to me,” Battaliero-Owen says. He hasn’t seen any of Pera’s work, but plans to, which seems sensible, because, in their ability to make comedy that actively lowers your blood pressure, they’re clearly kindred spirits. “Honestly, if people just watch the show and find it relaxing, that for me is a win,” says Battaliero-Owen. “My humour can be a bit idiosyncratic and not for everyone, but there’s stuff on the show for dashcam purists, for ASMR devotees and for people who like music.” One good thing about getting big on YouTube first is that Battaliero-Owen already knows what sort of feedback he can anticipate. “One of the things I’ve enjoyed is getting messages and comments from people who have said I’ve given them driving tips,” he says. But they’re not always positive. “A friend sent me a Reddit thread where a cyclist had posted my video. He enjoyed it, but then was like: ‘Oh, this guy’s made seven minor faults.’” Is that frustrating, I ask, trying to pierce his unshakable demeanour. “No!” he replies. “I’d love to know what the faults are. I’m always looking to improve.” Battaliero-Owen gave up his job in education last April to focus on the show. He sounds uncertain when I ask about future plans, limiting himself to hoping that he will be able to concentrate on nebulous-sounding “creative things”. But he shouldn’t worry. Zen Motoring has all the hallmarks of a cult hit. Judging by the word-of-mouth recommendations he has already inspired, more episodes would seem a safe bet. If that is the case, he knows what the next episode will bring. Part of it will involve getting out of the car. “I’m hoping to do a couple of Zen cyclist videos. Just strap a GoPro on and get a journey from a cycling perspective.” Plus he would like to see the impact of his Zen driving on the world. He envisions “an army of Zen drivers”, all recording their own thoughtful, harmonious dashcam footage. If that won’t make the world a better place, nothing will. • Zen Motoring is on BBC iPlayer now.A disappointing result for England after setting out their stall beautifully with the bat, but a glorious record run chase for Australia that would have been hard to stem even without those extras. McGrath was magnificent, with bat and ball, and deservedly player of the match. Heather Knight, “I thought the batting was outstanding for Danni and Tammy to come out and play like that. We felt like we had a good score but a little bit rusty with the ball and... she’s speaking so quickly... but basically they’ll take the positives. That’s it from us, we’ll be back on Saturday for the second T20. Advantage Australia! Australia 2: England 0. Lanning can apologise to McGrath later for stranding her in the nineties. But what an astonishing innings from McGrath - all power and gorgeous placement - on top of her performance with the ball. “The Adelaide oval, my home state, I’m super happy,” she says. “Bring on some more games so I can get out of the hotel room. It was a really nice pitch out there.” 17 overs: Australia 170-1 (Lanning 64, McGrath 91) Knight brings herself on - at least she can share the blame. And she’ll have to: ping, pang, pong, four fours come from it. The last ball is a doughnut of a full toss which Lanning splats leg-side for four. The perfect run-chase! 16th over: Australia 153-1 (Lanning 56, McGrath 82) The last throw of the dice for England - it’s Ecclestone from her lofty vantage point, suncream war-painted diagonally across her cheeks. Lanning leans back and pin-points her square past the fielders for four and, impressively, these two are still sprinting the singles. 17 needed off 24 balls. 15th over: Australia 143-1 (Lanning 50, McGrath 80) Ok, so what can Davies do to recover from that rogue second over? Tight for the first half then Lanning goes up and over for four. Another wide - nerves this, or lack of practise. With a push to backward point, that’s the Lanning century - not bad after being promoted to open! Oh gosh, another wide. 25 needed off 30 balls. 14th over: Australia 134-1 (Lanning 44, McGrath 78) Off the pads and over the rope - McGrath bids a fond farewell to Sciver’s first ball. And with a scampered two, that’s the century stand - of which McGrath has made an incredible 76! A couple of wides but no boundaries. 36 needed off 36 balls. 13th over: Australia 121-1 (Lanning 43, McGrath 70) Knight has to pull her aces now and flourishes Brunt. She immediately puts a stop to the boundaries, but sends down a legside full toss which the umpires call wide. And even she isn’t safe as McGrath drives, purrs. the ball past a diving mid-off to the rope. We get a quick glimpse at Perry with a fixed grin on her face on the bench as the Aussie middle order flex their strike-rate. 12th over: Australia 112-1 (Lanning 41, McGrath 64) So.... Knight ponders with Glenn, but without breakthrough as McGrath dimisses Glenn for three fours in four balls - power drives and a well-balanced cut. Glenn puts her head in her hands and there are suddenly lots of England players marching about and pointing. She appeals for an lbw next ball, and England review in hope rather than expectation. Not a bad shout, but umpire’s call. 58 needed from 48 balls. 11th over: Australia 97-1 (Lanning 36, McGrath 54) Ecclestone it is, as McGrath leans back and drives her first ball for four, past a peculiarly lumbering Heather Knight dive, and which seems to pick up speed as it runs along. McGrath is nearly stumped next ball, but the DRS shows her just back in time - by a cat’s whisker. Snappy running between the wicket brings McGrath to fifty - her debut HAlf century in T20 internationals. Beautiful innings off just 28 balls. And she’s not finished: bang, another boundary down to third man! Beautifully done. 10th over: Australia 85-1 (Lanning 36, McGrath 42) The fifty partnership comes up in 33 balls, but Davies slows the pace - hang that thought - as McGrath frying pans her for SIX! The stewards are down on their knees in the stand searching for the ball - much as England need to search for a wicket, and quickly. Ecclestone? 9th over: Australia 73-1 (Lanning 33, McGrath 33) It’s Glenn again, one of England’s hearty compliment of pinpoint blond pony tails. Ping - Australia are on the attack. Four through cover from Lanning and through mid-off from McGrath. Then Maya Bouchier throws herself - fruitlessly - at the ball to try and prevent another boundary and lands on her knee. Yikes, she looks in trouble and the physio is sent out and does some painful looking manipulation as the players take a drink 8th over: Australia 51-1 (Lanning 28, McGrath 23) Sciver roars out an lbw shout but the ump isn’t interested and England don’t review - DRS in use in an Australian women’s series for the first time on home soil. REplays show it was umpire’s call. No boundaries but seven from the over. A most unusual state this winter! 7th over: Australia 51-1 (Lanning 25, McGrath 19) Smart running as Lanning feathers Glenn behind towards the rope, it is just picked up but Australia gather three. Lanning tries to cut her again and just - I think - feathers an edge which Jones can’t hold onto. The next ball is driven sumptuously through the covers. 6th over: Australia 42-1 (Lanning 21, McGrath 14) Brunt it is for the last over of the power play, and McGrath cuts her first ball down to the rope. Knight has a (quick) word. They squeeze a few more singles, then McGrath spatulates her for four. At the same stage, England were 51-0: a sizeable advantage. 5th over: Australia 32-1 (Lanning 21, McGrath 4) Australia consolidate. Freya Davies, short run which transitions from sluggish to quick in a few steps, gets the ball. McGrath can’t punish a last-ball full toss. 4th over: Australia 26-1 (Lanning 18, McGrath 0) A crucial breakthrough for England, as Ecclestone leaps into the air in delight. McGrath, fresh from her triumph with the ball, marches in at No.3. Healy flicks off her toes but it is gobbled up by Sciver just off the ground at short midwicket 3rd over: Australia 24-0 (Lanning 18, Healy 5) Tammy Beaumont is miked up - and confirms that both she and Sophie Ecclestone recently got engaged - huge congratulations all round! Australia rattle along while I’m somewhat distracted by the dog crunching something she found behind the sofa that she, with big eyes, refuses to drop. Anyway, Sciver was expensive. 2nd over: Australia 12-0 (Lanning 7, Healy 5) Oooh, Knight plumps for Ecclestone straight away - love it! Lanning snitches a boundary off an outside edge, but other than that it is all binary. 1st over: Australia 5-0 (Lanning 1, Healy 4) All relatively sedate, just the one four off Brunt, a leg glance racing behind Jones. Great stat from hypocaust: 169 the highest total Australia have conceded in T20s. Back so soon! The players are out, the skies starting to darken and Katherin Brunt ready on the charge. Time for a quick coffee, back shortly 20th over: England 169-4 (Knight 10, Dunkley 10) And they manage it, and more: 14 off the over, with Schutt not quite on song and Knight and Dunkley able to capitalise. Dunkley cover drives the last ball for four and she and Knight run off the field pleased with their work. 19th over: England 155-4 (Knight 5, Dunkley 1) McGrath has really done the business for Lanning and now England need to try and milk another ten or so if possible from the final over. Another one for McGrath as Jones feels for the rope and is nicely caught at long on by Harris on her return to the green and gold. 18th over: England 147-3 (Knight 4, Jones 2) Neat from King, and England pick up the five singles. She’ll be happy with 1-28 on debut, especially in a wicket-sparce match. 17th over: England 142-3 (Knight 1, Jones 0) A brilliant double strike from McGrath, as Sciver was just getting her eye in and Wyatt looked inked in for a century. Tables suddenly turned with two new batters at the crease. Wyatt misreads another swinging yorker. Stumps a-splattered! A fast full one that chops the bottom of middle stump! 16th over: England 136-1 (Sciver 28, Wyatt 69) Carey’s first ball is a sponge pudding on leg stump and Sciver hauls it away to the boundary. It doesn’t get much better for her as Sciver off-drives with silken gorgeousness for four and picks up another eight in twos.England notch up their second fifty partnership of the match and this does not look like a side with a rusty spine. 15th over: England 120-1 (Sciver 12, Wyatt 69) Jonassen leaks an obligatory boundary - this time to Sciver, who has taken her time getting her eye in. And England prowl onward. Five overs to go: 14th over: England 111-1 (Sciver 6, Wyatt 67) Sciver survives an lbw decision of OUT after reviewing, scraping a bottom edge onto the ball. Schutt is incisive though, and even Wyatt can’t get her away properly. 13th over: England 106-1 (Sciver 6, Wyatt 63) A run-out chance against Sciver that would have raised the finger of doom had throw been a bit tastier. The umpires then rule one short, almost despite the evidence. King then appeals a lbw that looks extremely unlikely, as the ball hits Sciver’s front pad sweeping - they go for the DRS nevertheless, which confirms the ball pitched outside off. And to end an eventful over, Wyatt ping-pongs King for six. “Is it the Ashes,” asks Ben Bernards, “if they’re playing a T20? Sliding scale of points allocated for victories in T20, ODI and Test matches?!” Ah yes, sorry, I meant to say. Two points each for the white ball win, with four for the Test win. Whether the players themselves put more value on a Test fifty, you’d have to ask. T20 is really the currency of the women’s game though, especially domestically. 12th over: England 93-1 (Sciver 5, Wyatt 51) The TV cameras pull away for a discussion with the proud as punch King family. Vlaeminick’s final over is spoilt by a couple of wides. She looks a real athlete. 11th over: England 85-1 (Sciver 2, Wyatt 50) King bubbles with that wicket and she and Lanning discuss tactics after nearly every ball. Wyatt scampers a single to go to her ninth T20 fifty for England - a superb innings after a quiet start. King springs to her left and captures a leading edge from Beaumont for her first international wicket. She grins hugely as she’s hugged by her teammates. 10th over: England 82-0 (Beaumont 30, Wyatt 49) No luck yet for any of the Aussie bowlers, as Wyatt pings McGrath for four more over the off-side. At the half way stage, England are flying. Don’t really want to compare the men’s and women’s games but this amused me: 9th over: England 74-0 (Beaumont 28, Wyatt 43) Lanning continues ringing the changes. Vlaeminick jitters at the top of the run before sprinting in. Just four singles from the over with a careful use of angled bat. 8th over: England 70-0 (Beaumont 26, Wyatt 41) Alana King it is now, her first over in international cricket, resplendent in iridescent blue sunglasses. She manages to stem the boundaries until the fifth ball which Wyatt sweeps delicately away. An illuminating thread on the crowd from those that know. It certainly isn’t filling the seats - though half the ground is closed because of Covid. A distinct lack of crowd shots from the TV cameras too. 7th over: England 62-0 (Beaumont 24, Wyatt 35) Carey, very blond hair tied back in a ponytail, shoes almost kicking her backside as she runs in, and the first ball is short and fat and Wyatt pulls it away to the rope. Another boundary follows - up and over and another four in the back pocket. 6th over: England 51-0 (Beaumont 24, Wyatt 24) Now Wyatt lofts Schutt back over her head, so light on her feet, this time it bounces just before the rope. And at the end of the power play, England have sauntered to fifty. 5th over: England 44-0 (Beaumont 24, Wyatt 18)Jess Jonassen is Lanning’s next card and Wyatt doesn’t even bother getting her eye in, just a quick shimmy and splat - high and handsome for the first six of the innings. Another follows next ball, as she reaches one a little wider! 4th over: England 29-0 (Beaumont 23, Wyatt 4) Vlaeminick runs in out of the light into the shadows and gets absolutely hammered by Tammy Beaumont, who hauls her for three fours, each pull an improvement on the last. England will be very pleased with this. The floodlights are powering away though the sun is still blazing. Hmmm - surely not necessary. 3rd over: England 15-0 (Beaumont 10, Wyatt 3) Meg Lanning loves to use one over spells, they say on the radio, and sure enough, here comes Tahlia McGrath. Beaumont scoops her with great disrespect and equal skill over the keeper’s head for the first bounary. Next ball she hammers back at McGrath who can’t hold onto a hard chance and they scamper the single. “Looking forward to this game,” writes Peter Salmon. “Even though it is T20, we’re expecting the highest score by an English team in Australia for weeks aren’t we?” Very droll! 2nd over: England 7-0 (Beaumont 4, Wyatt 2) Vlaeminck, Australia’s speed demon, opens up from the other end. Oof, Beaumont gets whalloped on the helmet by a rapid bouncer as she attempts to hook herself out of trouble. The physio comes on and gives her the once over as Beaumont smiles her trademark smile. Very next ball Beaumont taps the ball back and Vlaeminck launches into the air, fetches it, and dummies to throw the ball back to the stumps. What an athlete! Beaumont picks up three from a pull and that’s an eventful second over. The players are wired up and Alyssa Healy is the first poor sod who has to come up with interesting insights. 1st over: England 3-0 (Beaumont 1, Wyatt 2) A throaty lbw appeal from Megan Schutt turned down second ball, which nearly turns into a run-out chance against Beaumont. Schutt on target, her inswing working perfectly. The teams are out, Tammy Beaumont to take the first ball. There has been lots of great reading ahead of this Ashes series. I liked this on Sarah Glenn - showing there is a place for girls who love glamour and nails and high heels in the England team, just as much as there is the scruffy trainers and pony tail gang. Obvious, but visible role models are important. Ah, the teams are out, a fair wind ruffling their trousers and the flags being held behind them. The Welcome to Country is being performed/spoken by Isaac Hannam. Such a beautiful sound on the didgeridoo. Wow, and a very young man belts out Advance Australia Fair. Not even a skein of a cloud - glorious. If you haven’t got access to the television coverage, this is what they’re currently playing. A quick once over of the history of the Women’s Ashes. The sun is milky blue as the captains toss. Lanning “ It looks a belter of a wicket, probably won’t change too much throughout the night. Alan King makes her debut, we’ve got Grace Harris, too, we feel like we’ve got a different look but hopefully all bases covered.” Knight, “I think we’d have done the same. Both teams would say it has been a very strange warm-up but we feel like we’re ready to play in this match.” Australia: Alyssa Healy, Meg Lanning, Tahlia McGrath, Rachael Haynes, Ashleigh Gardner, Grace Harris, Nicola Carey, Jess Jonassen, Alana King, Tayla Vlaeminck, Megan Schutt England: Danni Wyatt, Tammy Beaumont, Nat Sciver, Heather Knight, Amy Jones, Sophia Dunkley, Maia Bouchier, Katherine Brunt, Sophie Ecclestone, Sarah Glenn, Freya Davies And so it came to pass: One of the big questions for Australia - will Ellyse Perry make the starting XI in Adelaide? It seems an incredible question from this side of the day, but here is the lowdown on how even the best can get jostled aside. While we’re waiting for the action to start - in half an hour or so - here is Raf Nicholson’s preview of the series. It includes the full details of that “chaotic” preparation. “First, the schedule was rejigged at the 11th hour due to Covid, with the T20s brought forward, rendering England’s focus on red-ball practice during their camp in Oman irrelevant to the first leg of the series and leaving them with 10 days to acclimatise after landing in Australia. “Then England’s first outdoor training session in Canberra was conducted in pouring rain. Finally, over the weekend, they played two warm-up T20 games against the England A side that has accompanied them. They lost both, despite Tammy Beaumont and Danni Wyatt being given two chances to bat in the second match.” Hello! And welcome to the first England v Australia Women’s T20 - the crust on the breakfast barm that is the 2022 Women’s Ashes. Two more T20s, a single Test and three ODIs follow, finishing on February 7, something of a rushed meal but a warmly-anticipated one. England, much as their male counterparts, arrived as underdogs. If anything, though, they are even more undercooked, after a preparation period that even the ever-diplomatic Heather Knight declared “ comical.” Covid restrictions over Christmas left players relying on their dogs to load the bowling machines and mums to pick up a bat, while the fixtures were brought forward a week to give both teams enough time to complete their quarantine period in New Zealand ahead of the World Cup. England haven’t won an Ashes series since Charlotte Edwards was in charge in 2014 and Australia, in the swing of their domestic season, and recent winners of the T20 World Cup, have home advantage as well as momentum. They have though been hit by lack of form (looking at you Meg Lanning, Ellyse Perry, Perry,Ashleigh Gardner and Alyssa Healy) and injuries to Beth Mooney, Georgia Wareham and Sophie Molineux. Fire up the kettle - uncork that bottle - it promises to be a cracker!Given that the music business has spent most of the last two years in a kind of suspended animation, there’s something quite startling about the rise of Leeds quartet Yard Act. They appeared to come out of nowhere – they released their first single, the attention-grabbing Fixer Upper, at the height of the first national lockdown – and swiftly rocket to the forefront of the strain of alt-rock that eschews singing for sprechstimme vocals. Eighteen months on, they find themselves on a major label, touting a debut album that some observers think is going to enter the charts at No 1 (admittedly, not a rarity for indie acts in an era of diminishing sales). Their default musical setting is skittery-but-muscular post-punk funk: punchy disco drums, stabbing guitar, the melodies driven by the bass. That it tends to resolve pleasingly into memorable choruses, during which frontman James Smith sometimes drops into a bruised, untutored croon, has clearly aided their speedy progress. So too, one suspects, has the fact that their lyrics bluntly confront post-Brexit Britain – “the age of the gentrified savage … the overload of discontent,” as the title track puts it. They specialise in waspish pen portraits: of ghastly alpha male businessmen (The Incident), defiant embezzlers (“I’m the victim here,” protests the protagonist of Quarantine the Sticks), middle-class foodies “growing your own lettuces in the potholes on the road”. It’s on-the-nose but it’s also incisive and funny – Dead Horse skewers the far-right’s notion of British culture as “knobheads Morris dancing to Sham 69”. For all the expectation that surrounds The Overload, it’s sometimes clear that it’s the work of a band that’s barely been together two years. Yard Act are sporadically consumed by their own influences, particularly on Rich which, with its hypnotic two-note bassline, percussive clatter and distinctly Mark E Smith-ish vocal intonation – “skilled lay-BUUH in the private sec-TUUH” – sounds so much like the Fall circa Perverted By Language you start wondering if it’s actually a knowing double bluff, a wry comment on the media’s eagerness to bring up the Fall whenever a band with a vocalist who speaks rather than sings appears. At other points, however, the sense of a band not yet fully developed feels oddly exciting. The Overload is a starting point for a number of routes, rather than a perfectly formed end in itself. Certainly, there are flashes of a smartness and depth to Smith’s writing that go beyond scabrous one-liners. Tall Poppies retells the saga of a provincial David Watts figure – confident, handsome, a skilled footballer – who decides to stay put in his home town, become an estate agent and settle down. Initially, it sounds perilously close to sneering at “little world” ambitions, as though there’s something unconscionable about wanting to own your own home and have kids. But the music slows, then collapses entirely, and Smith flips the script, in a way that recalls Arctic Monkeys’ A Certain Romance. The protagonist dies young, of cancer, and the narrator attends his funeral. “He wasn’t perfect but he was my friend / He wasn’t perfect but he was one of us,” offers Smith, before noting that the friend wouldn’t have liked the inscription on a commemorative bench, “because he wasn’t too bothered about long songs with loads of words”: Tall Poppies lasts nearly seven minutes and its lyrics cover two sides of A4 paper. It isn’t the most complicated message – we’re all different, we can all theoretically get along – but it feels genuinely affecting and powerful in the context of an album so obsessed with divisions and spitting bile at the other side. It’s a theme picked up – albeit with the winning caveat “it’s hippy bullshit, but it’s true” – on the closing 100% Endurance, both the album’s best moment and its most atypical. Decorated with gentle electric piano, it’s a song that seems to have its musical roots less in the post-punk era than an aspect of Pulp’s oeuvre, long buried in the popular imagination beneath the radio-friendly anthemics of Common People and Do You Remember the First Time?: the lengthy, conversational storytelling of Inside Susan and David’s Last Summer. Its narrator is hungover after a night digesting the news that sentient life had been discovered on other planets: rather than teaching humanity anything about the universe or the meaning of life, “not one of them had any clue what they’re doing here either”. This development doesn’t bring about an existential crisis, but a glorious, warm crescendo about the power of the human spirit: “Grab anybody that needs to hear it … scream in their face: / death is coming for us but not today … all that you ever needed to exist has always been within you.” It’s a sharp U-turn from the preceding track’s suggestion that everything is “so bleak that giving your two pence on anything isn’t worth a fucking thing”: a sudden, infectious blast of optimism, from a band who currently have a lot to be optimistic about. This week Alexis listened to Nilüfer Yanya – Midnight Sun Building stealthily from a hypnotic acoustic guitar riff to a fuzzed-out climax, another appetite-whetting taster for Yanya’s second album, Painless.I keep waiting and hoping for the story to land. Written with burning intent by Paul Anthony Morris (artistic director of Crying in the Wilderness, associate company of the Young Vic), Conundrum is about a man, Fidel, experiencing a full-blown existential crisis. There are references to the impact of systemic racism and one specific mention of lockdown but, otherwise, few concrete details. There is pain. Frustration. Sorrow. But despite a committed and multi-dimensional performance from Anthony Ofoegbu, this feels closer to a dramatic experiment than a fully alive dramatic experience. The action unfolds on a largely empty stage, which is full of scrawled words; snatches of memories, moments and dialogue from Fidel’s life. Around the stage is a white line that glows brightly when Fidel feels particularly upset. It’s a simple but effective set from Sean Cavanagh, which suggests a life full of restless reflection – but one that is somehow static and claustrophobic too. Key phrases, alluding to fighting against the system, bubble up frequently (“I must be 10 times smarter”). There are snippets of philosophising and atmospheric scenes set in a psychiatric ward, which seem to be alluding to a troubling accusation – which Fidel mentions briefly – that perceiving racism is merely a mental affliction rather than a real, lived experience. But we never move beyond the intriguing set-up and down into the enlightening details. Fidel repeats the anguished cry again and again: “I know who I am.” The trouble is that we, the audience, do not. What is his background? How has he reached this point of crisis? At the very least, what is he feeling beyond this frustratingly anonymous sense of anger and displacement? All these questions remain buried in the corners of Fidel’s mind. The most revealing moment is bound up in some lovely movement work from Shane Shambhu. Miked up to the max, Fidel breathes heavily and deeply. He practises what looks a lot like tai chi and, despite remaining still, finally begins to own the stage on which he stands. Fidel’s body stays rooted to the spot but his arms and legs seem to move independently, with beautiful and arresting freedom. At the Young Vic, London, until 4 FebruaryA huge coral reef has been discovered off the coast of Tahiti in the Pacific Ocean’s “twilight zone”, offering hope that more pristine ecosystems are waiting to be discovered at unexplored depths. Stretching along the ocean floor for nearly 2 miles, the reef, covered in rose-shaped corals, is one of the largest such discoveries at depths of more than 30 metres, where sunlight levels are much lower. Scientists for the Unesco-led mission in French Polynesia said the reef, discovered in November, did not appear to have suffered bleaching events that had damaged neighbouring reefs in shallower waters in 2019. During dives totalling 200 hours, researchers were able to witness the coral spawning, with some spanning 2 metres. “It was magical to witness giant, beautiful rose corals which stretch for as far as the eye can see,” said Alexis Rosenfeld, a French underwater photographer who was part of the team of international divers that made the discovery. “It was like a work of art.” Researchers said more reefs were likely waiting to be discovered at these depths following improvements in diving technology, which had previously inhibited exploration. “To date, we know the surface of the moon better than the deep ocean. Only 20% of the entire seabed has been mapped,” said Audrey Azoulay, Unesco’s director general. Most of the world’s known coral reefs are at depths of 25 metres and above, with many facing the risk of collapse as the world’s oceans continue to heat. In September, a study found coral reef coverage had fallen by half since the 1950s because of global heating, overfishing, pollution and habitat destruction. Speaking to the BBC Prof Murray Roberts, a marine scientist at the University of Edinburgh, said the discovery underscored the need to map similar reefs to make sure they can be protected in the future. “We still associate corals with the shallowest tropical seas but here we find a huge previously unknown coral reef system. “As shallow waters warm faster than the deeper waters we may find these deeper reef systems are refuges for corals in the future. We need to get out there to map these special places,” he said. Further dives are planned in the coming months off the coast of Tahiti to continue investigations around the reef. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresBoris Johnson has announced the end of all Plan B Covid restrictions in England from 26 January. We would like to know how people who are shielding feel about the rule change. How has your experience of shielding been? Do you have any concerns? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, will travel to Brussels on Monday with a target of agreeing a deal with the EU on the post-Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland by the end of February. The two sides have agreed that a window of opportunity for an agreement will close when campaigning starts for May’s elections to the Northern Ireland assembly. Maroš Šefčovič, the EU’s Brexit commissioner, who will host Truss in Brussels on Monday, told MEPs in a private briefing there had been a positive tone to his discussions with the foreign secretary at her official country residence last week. Truss took over responsibility for Brexit issues after David Frost’s resignation in January. But for all that Truss had expressed confidence she would be able to build momentum in favour of a deal, Šefčovič said there was as yet no sign of a change in the UK’s negotiating positions. Sources said the commissioner had been “surprised and concerned” that Truss had regurgitated Frost’s demands for a dispute system similar to that within the trade deal, the complete removal of checks on goods from Great Britain destined for Northern Ireland, and a rethink on the current system of EU approval of subsidies, known in Brussels as state aid. Šefčovič had reiterated that the thorough overhaul of the current protocol, which keeps Northern Ireland in the single market for goods and draws a customs border down the Irish sea, was not possible. He told MEPs the EU had also shown it could speed up its approval system for state-aid notifications. Despite these concerns, intensive talks have been continuing this week between the two sides, with concerns the protocol could become a political talking point in the Northern Ireland assembly elections. Šefčovič told MEPs it was unclear how the current scandal over lockdown-breaking parties in Downing Street and a potential leadership election could affect the negotiation. He said progress would depend on whether Truss wished to cause a breakdown for political purposes or build on her reputation as a “deal-maker” after her time as trade secretary. There was, Šefčovič said, growing support in Northern Ireland for the protocol. The EU has proposed reducing health and safety checks on meat, plant and dairy products by half and customs checks by 80% but Brussels is willing to go further by ensuring that other paperwork could be done via electronic communications to reduce red tape. A big complaint within the unionist community is that the protocol has hindered trade between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the leader of the Democratic Unionist party, has threatened to withdraw his party’s ministers from the Stormont executive if the UK government does not swiftly negotiate new arrangements with the EU. The latest numbers from Ireland’s Central Statistics Office show that the value of goods imported from Great Britain fell by almost £2.75bn from January to November last year. Šefčovič said the UK was yet to accept the logic of the EU proposals but that the level of access to British IT databases was improving. He told MEPs he did not expect the UK to trigger article 16, the clause that would see parts of the current arrangements in Northern Ireland suspended.UK inflation figures have risen to their highest in almost 30 years, and energy costs are expected to increase further this year. We’d like to hear from owners of small or medium sized UK businesses about how their enterprises are affected by skyrocketing costs. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra wasted no time in lining up a successor to Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla. Last autumn it revealed that Kazuki Yamada would take over as chief conductor from April 2023, and in his first appearance at Symphony Hall since the announcement, the warmth of the reception from both the orchestra and the rather meagre audience suggested that he is already set to be a favourite there. From the alert playing that Yamada drew from the players it was clear, too, that they respond well to his ideas. The performances of Strauss’s symphonic poem Don Juan and Mahler’s Fourth Symphony were unfailingly spirited, even brash at times – the Strauss especially – but there was real panache about both of them. Yamada certainly doesn’t hold back at the big moments; some of the fortissimos tested even Symphony Hall’s exceptional acoustic, though at the other extreme, there was an absence of genuinely quiet playing. There was a touch of schmaltz about the Mahler, which was accentuated by Yamada’s fondness for signalling transitions with diminuendos and sometimes rather exaggerated rubato, while the undercurrent of darkness that runs through the symphony was mostly unexplored. It was left to the soprano soloist in the finale, Fatma Said, to undercut the innocence of the Wunderhorn text with something more menacing. Between the Strauss and the Mahler, it was Said who provided the evening’s most memorable moments in two late Mozart arias. Vado, ma Dove?, K583, written as an addition to an opera by Martín y Soler, showed off the Egyptian singer’s fabulously light, easy coloratura, while the central section of Non Più di Fiori, one of Vitellia’s numbers from La Clemenza di Tito, revealed a thrilling smoky darkness to her chest register, with the CBSO’s principal clarinet, Oliver Janes, providing the supple clarinet obligato. • Available on BBC Sounds until 18 FebruaryOne of the most successful British pop stars of the past three decades is putting up for auction works by one of the world’s most celebrated contemporary artists. Robbie Williams, who has built a huge fortune from record sales and concerts, is selling three works by Banksy, the anonymous street artist whose partially shredded painting Love is in the Bin fetched a record £18.5m last year. The pieces from Williams’s art collection – Kissing Coppers, Girl with Balloon and Vandalised Oils (Choppers) – are expected to sell for a total of between £7m and £10m. “These works unite the cultural legacies of two of Britain’s biggest stars: Robbie Williams and Banksy,” said Hugo Cobb of Sotheby’s. “Like their creator and like their owner, they are acerbic, iconic, irreverent and unique.” Kissing Coppers, which depicts two male British police officers in a passionate embrace, first appeared on the outside wall of the Prince Albert pub in Brighton in 2004. The original mural was removed in 2014 after being repeatedly vandalised. It has been interpreted as showing Banksy’s support for public acceptance of homosexuality, according to Sotheby’s. Williams’s version of the artwork is a painting on canvas from 2005, estimated to be worth £2.5m to £3.5m. Girl with Balloon made its debut under Waterloo Bridge in London in 2002. In 2018, a canvas version of the image passed through a shredder inserted into its frame moments after it sold for just over £1m. The work’s “self-destruction” was a global sensation. Williams’s version from 2006 is depicted on metal, and is the first of its kind to appear at auction. It has a price estimate of £2m to £3m. Vandalised Oils (Choppers), from 2005, features two military helicopters disrupting a serene pastoral landscape. It is part of a Banksy series that superimposes graffiti on classical oil paintings, and has an estimate of £2.5m to £3.5m. Williams said he believed his three Banksys were “some of his best paintings and I love how closely linked they are to the street pieces”. He added: “As a collector of Banksy’s work, you become part of a broader cultural movement.” The three works will go on display at Sotheby’s New York on Saturday for six days. They will then be available to view in Hong Kong and London before being sold on 2 March. A work by Banksy, whose real name has never been confirmed, that appeared on the wall of an electrical shop in Lowestoft, Suffolk, in August has been privately sold, it was reported this week. The image of a child with a crowbar was removed in November.20. Tom &amp; Viv (1994) Dafoe wasn’t natural casting as the clerkly TS Eliot in this literary biopic, which chronicled the poet’s troubled first marriage – and it showed, despite his customary actorly intelligence. If nothing else, it proved that, his highbrow credentials notwithstanding, Dafoe wasn’t really cut out for the anglophile heritage pics that littered the 1990s. 19. Mississippi Burning (1988) A technically precise but essentially unrewarding role in the Alan Parker civil rights pic. Dafoe plays a straight-arrow fed investigating the disappearing of vote-drive volunteers in the Klan-haunted 60s deep south alongside co-star Gene Hackman, who has much the showier role. Leading with razor-sharp side parting and horn-rimmed specs, it’s one of a long succession of cops and authority figures that has paid Dafoe’s rent over the years. 18. Finding Nemo (2003) An inspired bit of voice casting that gave Dafoe his biggest box office result to date. He played Gill, the “tank gang” leader who teaches Nemo self-reliance and – crucially – comes up with the schemes to get the fish out of the dentist’s waiting room. Surreal in itself to hear Dafoe’s gravelly tones in a Disney picture. 17. Spider-Man (2002) Dafoe was an early-ish adopter of the new wave of comic-book pics; he wasn’t the first choice for the Green Goblin supervillain role, but it turned out a smart move on director Sam Raimi’s part, with Dafoe’s ability to project both complete sincerity and terrifying menace brought to bear – especially in the now celebrated mirror scene, where the two halves of his personality argue with each other. 16. The Loveless (1981) Dafoe’s first lead role was for a fresh-from-film-school Kathryn Bigelow, co-directing with future Wild at Heart producer Monty Montgomery. A slice of early-80s 50s-revival chic, Dafoe is the super-hunky leader of a Wild Angels-ish outlaw biker gang. Presumably prioritising his work with avant-garde performance outfit the Wooster Group, Dafoe isn’t really relaxed in front of the camera – but he looks amazing, like Audie Murphy’s crackhead cousin. 15. Streets of Fire (1984) Dafoe doesn’t have a whole lot to do until the last 20 minutes of Walter Hill’s DayGlo rock’n’roll musical, and his twitchy greaser supervillain Raven is basically a nastier version of The Loveless’ Vance. But he makes the most of the climactic fight scene, giving it maximum voltage as he pummels Michael Paré with a platelayer’s hammer. 14. Auto Focus (2002) Paul Schrader has given Dafoe a good number of top-notch supporting roles, and this one, as the alleged murderer of sleazeball TV actor Bob Crane, is one of the most interestingly modulated. As video whiz John Carpenter, Dafoe moves from ingratiating manipulator to desperate killer with impressive conviction. 13. White Sands (1992) Dafoe proved he could carry a mainstream picture with this entertainingly twisty and atmospheric cop thriller directed by Roger Donaldson. Dafoe plays a smalltown lawman who enthusiastically stumbles into a high-stakes espionage kill-off; the patsy-type role doesn’t exactly play to his strengths, but he’s the movie’s solid centre. 12. The Last Temptation of Christ (1988) This was supposed to be Dafoe’s big breakthrough to leading-man status – as ever, he gives it his all, successfully conveying the deadly seriousness of director Martin Scorsese’s intent. But it didn’t really happen for him: Dafoe’s self-lacerating contribution was overshadowed by the wider furore, as the film was engulfed in protests, threats and bans. 11. Platoon (1986) Dafoe had a huge mainstream hit with Oliver Stone’s vision of the Vietnam war as a lawless charnel house. His role, memorably encapsulated in the film’s Christ-like poster image, is the film’s moral conscience, the good angel in Charlie Sheen’s ear. But, as we know, he is cut down by Tom Berenger’s brutal Sgt Barnes and then finished off in slo-mo by the Viet Cong. 10. Wild at Heart (1990) Dafoe is in David Lynch’s Palme d’Or winner for less than half an hour, but what an impact he makes. As sneering triggerman Bobby Peru, equipped with pencil moustache and prosthetic additions to his already-prominent choppers, Dafoe achieved his most alarming grotesque yet. The scene where he terrorises Laura Dern’s Lula is still genuinely upsetting. 9. Shadow of the Vampire (2000) Dafoe got a best supporting actor Oscar nomination for his role in this enterprising take on the making of the influential silent film Nosferatu. Under the layers of makeup and bald cap, Dafoe does an excellent job of making his Schreck/Orlok vampire-actor seem eminently plausible. 8. To Live and Die in LA (1985) In retrospect, the high point of Dafoe’s mainstream pomp. As the vicious counterfeiter Rick Masters, Dafoe makes for a properly scary Hollywood bad guy, opposite William Petersen’s 501s-wearing secret service agent Richard Chance. With Masters’ background as an artist, it’s a role that could cleverly take advantage of Dafoe’s never-buried-far sensitive side. 7. Tommasso (2019)/Siberia (2020) In Abel Ferrara, Dafoe has found a partner willing to give him free rein to explore his out-there preoccupations – as well as being one of the few directors to give him serious leading roles. These two films, unofficial companion pieces, are arguably Ferrara’s most personal, and show Dafoe at his best: articulate, committed and unfazed by even the weirdest dramatic situations. 6. The Hunter (2011) Dafoe has had to range widely in search of suitably heavyweight roles, and this one took him all the way to Tasmania. As a freelance secret operative assigned to hunt down the supposedly extinct Tasmanian tiger, he could deploy the tricky actor’s craft of just doing things methodically, on his own for long periods. There’s a moral crisis thrown in, too, at which Dafoe is a past master. 5. The Florida Project (2017) Dafoe got another supporting actor Oscar nomination for this fatherly role, in which he radiates concern and exasperation in equal measure as a Disney World-adjacent motel manager. The main focus of his anxiety are mother-and-daughter pair Halley and Moonee (Bria Vinaite and Brooklynn Prince); they, in truth, are the film’s stars, but Dafoe is the ballast. 4. Antichrist (2009) Whether or not you buy into the sincerity of arch provocateur Lars von Trier’s occult horror (and the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw certainly didn’t), there’s no doubting the total commitment of Dafoe and Charlotte Gainsbourg, the two main players in this dance of trauma, sex and death. Dafoe is a therapist attempting to treat his grief-consumed wife after their toddler son falls to his death; his super-earnest articulacy is infused with an unfamiliar note of superciliousness – though it’s of course abandoned by the time of the film’s nightmarish climactic confrontation. 3. At Eternity’s Gate (2018) With his seamed and blocky visage, Dafoe was perfect casting for Vincent van Gogh in Julian Schnabel’s treatment of the painter’s turbulent final months, and the film is very much a communion from one artist to another. The director focuses on Van Gogh’s act of looking, and as the possessor of Hollywood’s most piercing stare, Dafoe carries it off beautifully, as well as convincingly handling the more troubling later episodes. Many have tried to portray artistic rapture on screen without looking like an idiot; Dafoe is one of the vanishingly few who have pulled it off. 2. The Lighthouse (2019) There is something about being matched with a gifted co-star (see Antichrist) that brings out the best in Dafoe, and this two-hander with Robert Pattinson has the added sense of the passing of a baton to a new generation. As the elder and crustier of a pair of men looking after a lighthouse in the late 19th century, Dafoe handles some ripely ornate dialogue with aplomb in a battle of wits and authority with the sulky Pattinson. And like Lars von Trier, director Robert Eggers goes full eco-freaky and puts Dafoe through the wringer physically; the actor’s battered body stands up well. 1. Light Sleeper (1992) In the early 90s, before the juicy supporting roles and eye-catching cameos began piling up, Dafoe looked as if he had a long stint as a leading man in front of him, the sort of career Johnny Depp or Robert Downey Jr have had. Looking back, it’s clear that Dafoe was a shade too uncompromising to connect with audiences in the same way. But this now-unfashionable Paul Schrader film gave Dafoe a near-perfect role: a drug courier with an emotional investment in his clients, lovelorn over his ex-wife, and the unwitting focus of the romantic attentions of his supplier (played by Susan Sarandon). Light Sleeper allowed him to convey all the subtleties that make him a great actor: conviction, honesty, self-doubt and weakness. One of the great performances, well worth revisiting.Walking through the home-town museum built to honour Nursultan Nazarbayev, the former Kazakhstan president who built a personality cult around his rule, there are few signs of the anger that swept across the central Asian country earlier this month. Visitors to the imposing three-storey building in Shamalgan are treated to a maquette of the house where the young Nazarbayev grew up, a Mercedes that was part of his presidential motorcade in a glass box in the museum’s grounds, and family artefacts including a suit worn by his brother. Shamalgan, where Nazarbayev was born in 1940 and grew up in the shadows of the snow-capped Tian Shan mountains, is an hour’s drive from Kazakhstan’s biggest city, Almaty, and at first sight not much sets Shamalgan apart from the other poor villages in the area where much of the young people have left to find work. But turn a corner and there are a stretch of luxurious mansions, hidden behind tall gates, that belong to Nazarbayev’s brother Bolat, his sister, and the other family members of a president who was in office from 1990 and 2019 and who retained influence. Hi-tech cameras and security guards give the street the feel of a high-end gated community. “This town is a living reminder of how his family has robbed the country,” said Erbol Murzulayev, a local mechanic. “He doesn’t even care about the place he was born, he has forgotten about us. How can we still trust him with the rest of the country?” The museum opened in 2017, two years before Nazarbayev handed the presidency to his successor, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, widely seen as a move to safeguard Nazarbayev’s legacy and keep him close to power. But outside the museum’s walls, after a wave of protests, Nazarbayev’s future looks uncertain. The capital – Nur-Sultan, renamed after Nursultan Nazarbayev – may even be returned to its original Astana. The protests, the largest and deadliest in Kazakhstan’s history, broke out on 2 January in the western oil city of Zhanaozen over a rise in fuel prices but quickly turned into wider unrest over corruption and economic inequality. More than 200 people reportedly died and at the height of the protests the interior ministry said 10,000 people had been detained. In a separate statement on Tuesday, a senior aide to Kazakhstan’s prosecutor general said that 3,337 offenders were released after receiving a cautioning while over 1,000 people were currently under arrest. Much of the anger was directed at Nazarbayev and his family, with protesters chanting “old man out!” in reference to the 81-year-old former leader. Protesters also toppled and smashed a monument to Nazarbayev in Almaty, an ominous sign in the post-soviet region. Nazarbayev disappeared from view during the unrest, only reappearing in a video address on Tuesday, in which he described himself as a “pensioner” and said Tokayev now held full power. After the protests Tokayev looked to have tightened his grip on power, at the expense of the former president, by arresting Nazarbayev’s key allies and voicing rare criticism of his former mentor. Observers have pointed to Kazakhstan’s rampant inequality as the main reason behind the unrest. The average monthly salary in Kazakhstan is less than £450, while according to a 2019 report by KPMG, 162 people in the country own more than 50% of its wealth. Much of the elite property is in the hands of Nazarbayev’s extended family, and they are estimated to own at least £530m of luxury property in the UK, according to a report by Chatham House. Few places seem to encompass better the current economic grievances many Kazakhs have with the old regime than Nazarbayev’s home town. “We don’t really have a future here. Our country has been stuck in time,” said, Amina, 27, an English-language teacher at the local school in Shamalgan. She said she did not join the protests in Almaty but was sympathetic to those that protested peacefully. For a leader who has carefully developed his personality cult for decades, renaming airports, universities, and even the country’s capital after himself, the sudden downfall most likely came as a surprise, said the Central Asia specialist Alexander Cooley. “Nazarbayev really started to believe in his own cult that he created. That is what 30 years of isolation from the public can do to you,” Cooley said. “[He] completely misjudged the mood in the country, which is ironic for someone who cares so much about his public image.”Now, however, Nazarbayev cuts an entirely different figure from the image-conscious leader, and his video address will only further de-mystify him in the eyes of the Kazakh population, said Dossym Satpayev, a political analyst based in Almaty. “In the video, we saw a defeated, deflated, tired man. Kazakhs have never seen him like this before,” said Satpayev, adding it will now be important to watch how far Tokayev is willing to go in his effort to distinguish himself from Nazarbayev. “At the moment, a lot of negotiating and bargaining is being done between Tokayev and Nazarbayev’s group about his resources, his power, and, of course, about the legacy of Nazarbayev,” Satpayev said. Nazarbayev’s three sons-in-law have already stepped down from influential positions, while on Wednesday Tokayev removed the rights of a private recycling monopoly linked to Nazarbayev’s daughter Aliya. But, Satpayev argued, the very fact that Nazarbayev appeared in the video in the first place appears to hint at the route of compromise between the two men rather than a direct confrontation. At the same time, experts say, Tokayev will need to distance himself from Nazarbayev in order to appeal to the wider public who will be expecting tangible reforms. “We might soon see our own version of the 20th Party Congress,” Satpayev said, a reference to the 1957 speech given by the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev denouncing Stalin’s cult of personality, which sent shock waves across the Soviet Union. Whatever Tokayev chooses to do, museums like the one found in Shamalgan look like a product of a former era, said Satpayev. “It is clear his legacy left behind will not be the one Nazarbayev had in mind.”The documentary-maker John Pett, who has died aged 94, contributed three powerful episodes to ITV’s epic series The World at War. His style fitted perfectly with the aim of giving viewers an insight into how conflict felt for those immersed in it. The massive project, three years in the making and screened in 26 episodes over 1973 and 1974, was the brainchild of Jeremy Isaacs, the series’ overall producer at Thames Television. He was intent on combining newsreel images of the second world war with eyewitness testimony from all sides. Alongside its thematic structure and authoritative accounts from the different theatres of war, Laurence Olivier’s narration gave the programmes further gravitas, and Carl Davis’s dark but majestic title music conveyed the looming horrors to come. Pett was working for Thames Television when he heard about plans for the groundbreaking series and told Isaacs he would like to be involved. “Were you in the war?” asked Isaacs. “No, because I did my national service about 1947, but my brother was in Burma,” Pett replied. Isaacs immediately assigned him to produce and direct the episode about the Japanese defeat of the British there, It’s a Lovely Day Tomorrow, which picked up the story halfway through the war and had a title taken from a Vera Lynn song. Those strains accompanied footage of the “forgotten army” in Burma, following film of the singer’s wartime visit to them. Pett said the challenge was “to make both strategical and emotional sense in just one hour of viewing”. The result showed soldiers trekking through monsoon rains and thick mud, and hacking off tree branches to create a path in the jungle, “a steam bath closing out the sky, dense, imprisoning and a long way from home”, in the words of John Williams’s script. A former British army sergeant recalled it as “really scary” while a Japanese officer described it as “a friendly place, dark, where you could cover yourself and camouflage yourself”. Pett included similar firsthand insights in Morning, the episode about D-day – the long preparations, then “hours of death, fear, courage, of plans gone wrong, of rapid improvisation” – and Pacific, on the Americans driving back the Japanese from Tarawa, Iwo Jima and Okinawa. Such events in the big, wide world were a long way from the small north Devon village of Shebbear, where Pett was born. He was the son of Hilda (nee Larkworthy), who acted and sang in local productions, and George Pett, a farm labourer suffering the effects of shell shock and mustard gas from the first world war. Pett credited some of their peasant ancestors – “closet socialists and radicals” – with passing on to them, and him, a “need to dissent”. More than half a century later he would return to make a Channel 4 drama-documentary, Going Home: Shebbear (1983), recreating a year of his 1930s childhood, when his parents endured poverty that was eased only after they moved 50 miles away to Cheriton Bishop, where they ran a sub-post office together. Pett absorbed literature, music and radio, and attended Chagford school and two London technical schools that were evacuated during wartime: Borough Polytechnic, in Exeter, then Beaufoy Technical Institute in Budleigh Salterton. Although he failed his first-year civil engineering exams at the University College of the South West of England, in Exeter (later the University of Exeter), acting in plays there convinced him that his career lay on the stage. After army service (1945-48) with the Intelligence Corps as a field security sergeant, then the Educational Corps, Pett became an actor and assistant stage manager at Salisbury Arts theatre. A year at the Old Vic school in London (1948-49) was followed by touring with the West of England theatre company (1949-50) and more repertory experience. There were also appearances in a couple of BBC radio plays (1953-54) and a bit part as a wireless operator in the 1955 film Out of the Clouds. After a brief stint as a reporter and drama and film critic on the Croydon Advertiser, Pett got his break in 1961 when ITV’s newly launched Plymouth-based company, Westward Television, hired him to present its film programme, Stars in the West. He then anchored its news magazine and started making documentaries, regionally and for the network, then for the BBC and, later, Channel 4. After presenting The Price of a Record (1967), about the ambition that drove Donald Campbell until his death while attempting the world water speed record, he was a prolific director of single documentaries such as The Silent Valley (1971), about the demise of mining leaving a Cornish community devastated (a silver medal winner at the New York international film and television festival); Moonlight Sonata (1980), on the German bombing of Coventry; and The Story of English (1986), charting how Shakespeare’s language was taken to the New World. After making So Many Children (1966), about a group born with disabilities, he caught up with five of them over the next 20 years in Children No More (1976) as they went through adolescence and One in a Hundred (1986) to see how they were coping with adulthood. He also wrote and produced The Privileged (1968), a series about the expansion of universities and increase in students, and directed an Omnibus documentary on the cartoonist Ronald Searle (1975), and an Assignment programme, Secrets of the General, on the complicity between the former Paraguayan dictator Alfredo Stroessner and western governments (1993). He also taught at the Northern Media School, Sheffield, and Winchester University until retiring at the age of 85. In 1955 he married Greta Whiteley, and they had two children; they later divorced. In 1984 he married Victoria Goss. She and their daughters, Alexandra and Philippa, survive him, along with Vanessa and Jonathan, the children of his first marriage. • Basil John Pett, documentary-maker, born 23 July 1927; died 30 November 2021A 33-year-old man has been arrested on suspicion of the murder of an 86-year-old woman and the attempted murder of her 88-year-old husband, who was left with life-threatening injuries after they were attacked in their home. Freda Walker was found dead at the couple’s home in Langwith Junction, Derbyshire, on Saturday morning by a neighbour. Walker’s husband, Ken, a former district councillor, remains in hospital in a critical condition. Detectives had been trawling CCTV and conducting house-to-house inquiries to find those responsible, Derbyshire police said. The arrested man remains in police custody. Assistant chief constable Dave Kirby said: “Today’s arrest is clearly a significant breakthrough in the case but the investigation continues into this most appalling crime.” Police said a “serious level of violence” was used in the attack, and are considering whether more than one person was responsible. A leading line of inquiry is to establish whether the incident could have been an aggravated burglary. Investigators are appealing for anyone who was on Station Road between 4.30pm on Friday 14 January and 9am on Saturday 15 January to urgently come forward. “If you were on that street, either on foot or in a car, then please contact us as soon as possible,” Kirby said. Ken, who is a member of Shirebrook town council and was previously a councillor on Bolsover district council, is in a critical but stable condition in hospital, police said earlier in the week. The Bolsover district council leader, Steve Fritchley, said the attack had sent shockwaves through the community: “Ken retired from being a district councillor in 2019 and just when they should both be enjoying their twilight years together, this terrible incident has happened and our thoughts are with Ken and his family,” he said. “We have heard many people say ‘Oh Ken and Freda, what a lovely couple’, and they really were.” Anyone who may be able to help detectives with their inquiries is asked to contact Derbyshire police.Absences among NHS staff in England owing to Covid have fallen by 22% on the previous week, figures show, with signs the staffing crisis in the health service may be easing, although health leaders have cautioned that staff are still under “intense” pressure. There were more than 35,000 Covid absences on an average day in the week to 16 January, down from almost 46,000 the week before. However, the figures are still significantly higher than the absence levels before the Omicron surge. At the start of December, there were about 12,000 absences on an average day. Absences for all reasons, including Covid, were down by 13% and stand at 77,000 across the NHS. However, NHS and health leaders cautioned that “exhausted” staff remained under severe pressure on the frontline, and said that was unlikely to change for months. Prof Stephen Powis, the NHS England national medical director, said: “Even though the numbers are going in the right direction, NHS staff will have many tough months ahead as they continue to deliver patient care while managing competing demands. While staff absences remain high and continue to increase in some parts of the country, it is good to see they have been reducing week on week. He added: “The number of people in hospital for both Covid and non-Covid care remains high, and arrivals at A&amp;E via ambulance increased by more than 2,000, even as the largest and fastest vaccination programme in NHS history is boosting the nation and helping to protect people from the virus.” Separately released data showed the total number of critical care beds in England stood at 3,040 on Sunday, lower than the pre-Covid five-year average and significantly lower than the 4,834 beds required in the same period in 2021. Government data covering the whole of the UK showed that the number of Covid patients in hospitals had fallen again in recent days. Having reached a post-Omicron high of 19,930 on 10 January, the figure dipped below 19,000 on Tuesday. On average in the week to Tuesday, 19,375 patients were being treated in UK hospitals, equivalent to levels last seen in February 2021. There were 107,364 new cases of Covid-19 reported in the UK on Thursday, the government said. The figure is based on positive lab-confirmed PCR tests, but also includes most positive lateral flow tests reported in England and all lateral flow tests reported in Northern Ireland. A further 330 people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, bringing the total to 153,202. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 177,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. Despite the slight improvement in the national picture on patients in hospitals, Patricia Marquis, the director for England at the Royal College of Nursing, urged caution. “These figures are no grounds for complacency,” she said. “Our members remain under intense pressure and the data shows the level of staff absence is still very high, with bed occupancy rates showing little sign of declining. Nursing staff are facing huge seasonal pressures, with tens of thousands of vacancies, an enormous backlog and no end in sight. “As ministers relax the Covid-19 restrictions, nursing staff are exhausted. They need government to grip the reality, come up with a fully funded workforce plan and invest in those staff or there is real risk to patient care and of an exodus of experienced nurses.”West Ham need a back-up striker for Michail Antonio and David Moyes has identified Blackburn’s Ben Brereton Díaz as a potential target. That’s all well and good, but considering the Stoke-born Chilean superstar has already chipped in with 20 goals to help Blackburn’s promotion push this season, Blackburn are extremely unlikely to let him leave Ewood Park any time soon. Leeds, Brighton and Sevilla are also interested in Brereton Díaz, whose current employers value their man at £25m. Moyes is also interested in Nat Phillips, who has made just three appearances for Liverpool this season and will be allowed to leave in the current window. Watford have also enquired about the £15m-rated central defender, while Liverpool are about to recall Rhys Williams from a loan spell at Swansea in order to provide cover for a player sick of providing cover. Home from the Africa Cup of Nations after testing positive for Covid and now sidelined as he recovers from “cardiac lesions”, Arsenal’s out-of-favour former captain Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang could be off to Saudi club Al-Nassr on a six-month loan deal. You can read more on that story and Manchester United’s rejection of a potential loan deal for Jesse Lingard from Newcastle by clicking on this link. Lille striker Jonathan David is a man in big demand, with Chelsea, Spurs, Manchester United, Arsenal and Liverpool all believed to be keen on the 22-year-old Canadian international, who has scored 22 goals for club and country this season. Arguably the most public face of Barcelona’s reckless spending in the transfer market, Newcastle and Tottenham target Ousmane Dembélé has been ordered to defecate or get off the pot by his increasingly impatient manager, Xavi Hernandez. Signed from Borussia Dortmund in 2017 for a fee of £105m and rising, the French striker has just six months left on his contract but is refusing to sign a new deal, in a state of affairs that has got the antennae of a host of different European clubs twitching. “It is a difficult situation with Dembélé,” said Xavi. “The club have decided that if he does not renew, we have to look for a solution because they have been waiting too long. It has been five months that [sporting director, Mateu Alemany] has been speaking with the agents. Either he renews, or we look for a solution. The message is clear: either Dembélé renews or we look for an exit for the player – there is nothing else left for it. I don’t consider sending him to the stands. He says he wants to stay but then he does not sign. It is a shame.” Alemany has since suggested things are done with the Frenchman. In big-name managerial merry-go-round news, Zinedine Zidane is being tipped to take over at Paris Saint-Germain this summer, which could pave the way for Mauricio Pochettino to take over at Manchester United. Elsewhere in France, Thierry Henry could leave his position as Roberto Martinez’s No 2 at Belgium to take up the reins at struggling Bordeaux.Since the start of the pandemic, more than 150,000 people have died from coronavirus in the UK. But behind the figures are stories of family, friendship and love. As the country continues to grapple with Covid-19, we would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died after becoming infected in recent months. Share your tributes and memories You can get in touch by using the encrypted form below. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The top US diplomat Antony Blinken will seek to clarify any confusion left by Joe Biden’s suggestion that a minor incursion by Russia into Ukraine might not be met by an allied response in a major set-piece speech in Berlin. Blinken will assert that the sovereignty of Ukraine is a sacrosanct global principle that must be protected, while also seeking to address the Russian people directly by saying the US is not seeking to imperil the security that Russian people deserve. Blinken is in Berlin to shore up western unity amid signs of a Russian troop build-up on Ukraine’s borders. At a press conference on Wednesday, Biden admitted there were divisions between allies and implied a minor incursion into Ukraine might be met by a lesser response. Later the White House clarified his remarks to say he was drawing a distinction between a Russian physical land invasion over the Ukrainian border or other actions from the Russian playbook such as a cyber-attack. Biden’s initial remarks drew ire from the Republicans, who claimed he had green-lighted an invasion. They also caused concern in Ukraine, but after the White House mopping up operation Ukraine seemed to have been reassured. Blinken is due to meet his Russian opposite number Sergey Lavrov in Geneva on Friday, but he has said he will not be bringing written proposals in response to Russian demands for a legally binding agreement that neither Ukraine or Moldova will ever join Nato. Biden on Wednesday said he did not think Ukraine would qualify for membership soon. Russia wants a US commitment to Ukraine’s permanent exclusion Blinken will instead set out the issues on which the US is prepared to negotiate with Russia, covering stationing of intermediate missiles, transparency of military exercises and cyber-attacks. Nato is due to make a formal offer to Russia this week. Biden warned of possible disastrous consequences for Russia if an invasion went ahead, adding he expected one now to occur. The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, also sought to shore up transatlantic unity, talking of a robust EU response in the event of further attacks against Ukraine. “If the situation deteriorates, if there are any further attacks on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, we will respond with massive economic and financial sanctions. The transatlantic community stands firm in this,” von der Leyen said during the opening of the World Economic Forum. “We do not accept Russia’s attempt to divide Europe into spheres of influence,” she said. “If attacks happen, we are prepared.” The Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, hit back at Biden, saying his remarks would not help reduce soaring tensions over Ukraine and could even destabilise the situation further. Asked about Biden’s comments, Peskov said Russia had been receiving similar warnings for at least a month. “We believe that they in no way contribute to defusing the tension that has now arisen in Europe and, moreover, can contribute to the destabilisation of the situation,” he said. Despite repeated recent statements from Kyiv to the contrary, Peskov also said Moscow feared the sanctions threats by the United States might embolden Kyiv to try to resolve an eight-year conflict with pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine by force. The Kremlin spokesman declined to comment on a parliamentary proposal by a group of lawmakers to appeal to President Vladimir Putin to recognise two pro-Russian breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine as independent states. The proposal has long been under discussion in Russia but Peskov said it was a lawmakers’ initiative that still needed to be voted on and that he therefore could not comment In Ukraine, Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office, said Ukraine welcomed the fact that Biden had signalled that there would be a coordinated western response in the event of Russia making a move on Ukraine. He said the important point was that “western states have a common understanding that any negative scenario in relation to Ukraine or in general in Europe will receive a coordinated, sufficient and sensitive response”. “At the same time, it is important to understand that diplomatic efforts at various levels continue, and de-escalation steps are now the main goal of these efforts.” Romanian president, Klaus Iohannis, on Thursday welcomed French counterpart Emmanuel Macron’s announcement of a possible troop deployment on Nato’s eastern flank. On Wednesday, Macron expressed France’s “readiness to go further, and within the framework of Nato to commit to new missions ... in particular in Romania”. “I warmly welcome President Emmanuel Macron’s announcement on France’s readiness to participate in Nato’s forward military presence in Romania,” Iohannis tweeted.Bong Joon-ho, whose satirical thriller Parasite swept the Oscars in February 2020, it to direct Robert Pattinson in a sci-fi adaptation of Edward Ashton’s forthcoming novel Mickey7. The film will be made by Warner Bros, the studio to which Pattinson is also contracted for The Batman, in which he plays the lead role, due for release in March. According to St Martin Press, Ashton’s novel, which is published in February, concerns an expendable employee of a firm sent to colonise an ice world called Niflheim. Once there, he attempts to stop his replacement clone, dubbed Mickey 8, taking his place. Bong is also working with WarnerMedia on an HBO limited series based on Parasite. This is being showrun by Don’t Look Up director Adam McKay. Parasite became the highest grossing South Korean film ever, as well as the first non-English language movie to win best picture at the Oscars. Bong’s previous films include Snowpiercer, The Host, Okja and Barking Dogs Never Bite. Pattinson, who made his name in the Harry Potter and Twilight films, has won plaudits for his work on less mainstream movies such as Robert Eggers’ The Lighthouse, the Safdie brothers’ Good Time and Claire Denis’ High Life, which was also set in space.Commuters have welcomed their freedom to return to the office, despite many believing the government’s motives had more to do with political expediency than science. “We’re opening back up today for a mixture of reasons, the biggest of which is that the government needs a distraction because of all the things that have been going on in Downing Street,” said Marianne Phillips, an accountant on her way to the office for the first time since the pandemic began, at Euston station on Thursday morning. “But even though they might be opening up for the wrong reasons, it’s still the right time for people to get back to the office. Especially as any responsible company will be taking precautions – we’re being allowed to work flexitime, so we can avoid rush hours. I am slightly nervous because it’s been a long time but it’s the right thing to do, to get back to the office, and I’m happy I’m doing it,” she said. Emma, who works in the charity sector, was taking the opportunity to go to the office to collect some equipment before returning to work from home. “The government has only told us it’s OK to come back to the office because they want to be seen to be doing something,” she said. “We’ve had the same rules in place for ages and they need to change them every so often, to look like they know what they’re doing. “Having said that, the economy does need to recover and as long as I’m not required to commute during rush hour, I don’t mind coming in a few days a week.” Diana Ursachi, an accountant, said she wanted to return to her workplace full-time. “We lost my dad from Covid during the pandemic, so it’s not been easy,” she said. “But I’ve had Covid, I’ve had my three jabs, and it’s time to get back to normal. We live with other diseases. We need to learn to live with this one now.” But others were more sceptical. “How can they change the rules from one day to the next after just one little speech?” asked Yasmine Ikhlef, a business developer for the construction industry, who was at East Finchley station in north London. “It’s not right or fair to spend two years telling people that they can’t leave their house for fear of dying – and then suddenly say it’s OK to go back to work. I don’t trust this decision has anything to do with the science,” she added. “I fully expect that, in a few months, we’ll be told we need to all work from home again.” Others said they have made the decision for themselves already. Paul Lin, a website developer who was at Euston station, said: “I used to spend a fortune to waste between two and four hours commuting into London every day from Bedfordshire,” he said. “But the pandemic has changed all that. “I wouldn’t take any contract now that required me to work more than one day a week in the office. There’s still some resistance to that idea in my industry, but as far as I’m concerned, the pandemic has proven it’s not necessary for us to work in offices for even the majority of the time – my sector especially can work from home perfectly efficiently. “The old ways are gone now,” he added. “Employees’ attitudes have changed and employers are just going to have to catch up.”Kate Clanchy and her publisher Pan Macmillan will no longer be working together, and distribution of all of her titles is to cease, following widespread criticism last summer of her book Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me. Readers took to Goodreads and Twitter to point out racial tropes and ableist descriptions in the Orwell prize-winning book about Clanchy’s experience as a teacher. For example, one child was described as being “so small and square and Afghan with his big nose and premature moustache” while two autistic students were said to be “jarring company”. As a result of the complaints, Clanchy issued an apology in August and announced that her publisher had given her the opportunity to rewrite parts of the book. However, in a joint statement by Clanchy and Pan Macmillan published in the Bookseller on Thursday, it was revealed that plans for the revised version, which had been due to come out in autumn 2021, have now been scrapped. “By mutual agreement, Pan Macmillan and Kate Clanchy have decided to part company,” the statement reads. “Pan Macmillan will not publish new titles nor any updated editions from Kate Clanchy, and will revert the rights and cease distribution of Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me and her other works.” “Pan Macmillan wishes Kate Clanchy all the best for the future.” This means that Friend: Poems by Young People, an anthology of work by Clanchy’s pupils, will no longer be published by Pan Macmillan in March as planned. Debates over Clanchy’s work and wider issues around sensitivity in the publishing industry were reignited in December when Clanchy wrote an article for Prospect magazine entitled “Ostracised, disinvited, rescinded: what it’s like to get cancelled”. This followed a feature in the Telegraph about the “crisis” facing literary fiction, in which Pan Macmillan publisher Philip Gwyn Jones expressed “regrets” about how he and his colleagues had handled the initial criticism of Clanchy’s book. “We weren’t clear enough in our support for the author and her rights,” he told the newspaper, before later apologising for the remarks on Twitter. After the initial complaints about Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me surfaced in August, writers such as Philip Pullman and Amanda Craig came to Clanchy’s defence, while three of the book’s critics, Chimene Suleyman, Monisha Rajesh and Sunny Singh, received racist abuse from social media users. This led to an an open letter in their support, which was signed by more than 1,000 people. The events prompted an open invitation signed by the authors Nikesh Shukla and Yara Rodrigues Fowler among others which proposed the formation of a group that would “change the UK publishing industry for the better”. “Writers and workers frustrated by injustice in publishing should join a union and organise,” Rodrigues Fowler told the Guardian. “It is the only way to change the industry. History shows us that politely asking profit-driven corporations to change never works, but building collective power does.”On Wednesday, Boris Johnson’s government announced that plan B measures for England, which were put in place in December, will be scrapped. This includes mandates on face coverings, which will no longer be compulsory in indoor public spaces from 27 January or for secondary school classrooms from 20 January. The Department for Education is likely to remove guidance on their use in school communal areas in the coming days. This is in stark contrast to what other countries are doing in the midst of the Omicron pandemic – and let’s not forget, this is still a pandemic. With daily Covid-19 case numbers in the UK still above 100,000, and a daily average of more than 250 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, our situation is among the worst in the world. Though our case numbers are indeed falling, this may well be partly due to the measures imposed in plan B, such as wearing face masks and working from home. There is a risk that the removal of these measures could reverse this trend. Scotland is mitigating against this risk by maintaining the face mask mandate when it removes most restrictions from Monday. The US, meanwhile, is an example of a country enacting more stringent measures in order to bring the pandemic under control. Next week, the Biden administration will make 400m N95 (FFP2) masks available for free in the largest deployment of PPE in US history. We know that, when they fit well, these high-efficiency masks do an excellent job of protecting wearers and preventing the spread of infection. In fact, on 17 January, the UK Health Security Agency changed its guidance for healthcare workers so that FFP3 respirators (EU-certified masks) must be worn by staff when “caring for patients with a suspected or confirmed infection spread by the airborne route”. This is long overdue. And yet when it comes the public, the government seems much happier to throw caution to the wind. For people in England, the use of face coverings – of any sort – is no longer required. This does not mean that the risk of transmitting Covid-19 or being infected by it has reduced. Omicron continues to be the most infectious variant of Covid-19. While the mask mandate may have gone, and some people will joyously doff their masks, many will remain rightly concerned about Covid-19, the potential for getting long Covid and the effect that the lack of restrictions will have on the lives of vulnerable people. People will also be keen to avoid time off work isolating with Covid and recovering from the illness. So how can you protect yourself when most people stop wearing masks? The best way is to wear a mask that is designed to protect the wearer: an FFP2 or FFP3 mask. These are available in pharmacies, supermarkets and online, but you may need to try a few to find one that fits the shape of your face. If you want to avoid exposing others to your exhaled breath, make sure you choose a valveless mask. Although “disposable”, these masks can be reused until they break or become visibly unhygienic. I recommend using several in rotation, to allow them to “decontaminate” between uses. Masks with head straps will fit better and may last longer. Metal nose clips (as opposed to plastic ones) usually mould better to your nose, providing a closer fit – but unfortunately it can be hard to know before buying them which type of clip is used. While many industry-certified masks come as a standard size, smaller-sized masks are increasingly available. Nondisposable masks (sometimes called elastomeric respirators, if they are made from rubber) are also available. While these may resemble gas masks, with external cartridges that hold the filters, manufacturers are now designing these for public use, with simple, replaceable FFP2 or FFP3 filters that slot into the plastic frame and look no more threatening than disposable high-efficiency masks. The government says that it’s now up to us to assess our own risk and how we will mitigate it (although people are still advised to continue to wear face coverings in enclosed or crowded spaces and when meeting strangers). While we may not have choices about going to work or school, or how we get there, if we choose to, we can continue to use face masks to protect ourselves effectively. And don’t forget, anyone can have Covid … not just strangers. Claire Horwell is professor of geohealth at Durham University and has an honorary contract with the UK Health Security Agency • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. An earlier version referred to “more than 400 deaths a day” in the UK; while daily reported deaths peaked at 438 over recent days, the average daily deaths figure has been about 180 lower than this.On Tuesday evening, Nick Kyrgios was leaning into the stands taking swigs of a spectator’s beer. Two days later there was none of the showboating he so relishes at John Cain Arena. “Kyrgios Court”, as he calls it, is not the same as centre court, and a qualifier is not the same as a world No 2. Against Daniil Medvedev there were none of the cheeky antics displayed as he defeated Brit Liam Broady in the first round. Indeed, any hint of that signature jaunty smile during his more masterful moments – and there were a few during this belter of a second-round battle – vanished during those that were left wanting. By the end of the two hours and 58 minutes, Medvedev had simply produced more of the former and fewer of the latter. He is, after all, the reigning US Open champion and the tournament favourite. Pre-match, his Australian opponent described him as “probably the best player in the world at the moment”. Which, with the benefit of hindsight, is another way of saying Kyrgios is a pretty good player too. This 7-6 (1), 6-4, 4-6, 6-2 contest was one of fine margins between two players separated in age by only 18 months. Both boast big serves and a brilliantly varied technical repertoire. Only one has a big personality. And so the home crowd, sold out at 50% capacity, felt every emotion of the man they had come to see, who both celebrated and berated his supporters depending whether he was on the ascension or self-imploding. Medvedev, conversely, was a picture of unyielding calm, of almost machine-like consistency. In what gear he was operating we may never be sure. “I think no matter what the score is or how much pressure he’s under, he never kind of gets flustered,” Kyrgios said. “He just has so much belief in his game. I think he led the tour in wins last year. He’s just so confident right now. To be honest, I threw everything I could at him.” As it turned out, Medvedev simply saved his verbals for the end, when he complained to everyone who would listen that the now-infamous “siuuu” calls which have overtaken Melbourne Park and often came between his serves were disrespectful. “I guess some people just have a low IQ,” he told Eurosport, shortly after writing “siuuuu” on a broadcast camera lens above his signature. Like other players in the opening days of competition, he thought he had been booed. “[Remaining calm and focused] is the only choice when you get booed between first and second serve. You have to stay calm and win the match,” he told Jim Courier in his on-court interview. That prompted an avalanche of either boos or siuus, which drowned out Courier’s next question. “Sorry, I can’t hear you. Show some respect for Jim Courier. Let him speak please,” Medvedev added. “If you respect somebody, at least respect Jim Courier.” Cheers followed. The US great was quick on the uptake. “I think they are saying ‘siuuu’ which is a soccer, football, thing … I don’t think they are booing you.” Kyrgios felt it was the chair umpire’s job “to control the crowd and monitor it” but said the atmosphere was “awesome”. “You’ve got, like, you know, the most entertaining player playing in his home slam on Rod Laver – you’d expect the crowd to be like that,” he said of himself. “I can understand it’s a gentleman’s game, but it’s about time that people embraced some sort of different energy in this sport, otherwise it will die out.” On the court, the respect between Kyrgios and Medvedev was evident. That was clear in the way Kyrgios only feigned a tweener in the very first game, rather than actually going through with it. He failed to convert two break points in the second, was broken in the third, lost the fourth almost to love and won the fifth with an underarm serve. At times Kyrgios hypnotised the Russian with deliberately slow groundstrokes, forcing him to make the first move and then quickening the pace and ferocity in an instant. He toyed with his opponent’s serve, sending down a top-spin forehand, a sliced backhand and then a delicate volley. Medvedev, being Medvedev, responded with two aces (he served 31 all up). When Kyrgios broke back to level the score at 4-4 it seemed as if something magical might happen. When he lost the tie-break 7-1 a meltdown felt imminent. A spectator squawked for him to “serve underarm” and he gave them an expletive-ridden piece of his mind. The crowd can be inconvenient sometimes. Medvedev again rose to the occasion in the second set. Up 4-3, he drew Kyrgios in and then spat him back out, sent him scurrying in vain to the baseline for one of the less aesthetically pleasing tweener attempts on his resume – a genuine one this time – before digging his own hole to climb out of. Three deuces later he did, and set about a victory dance, his racket and towel flailing up and down with his arms. The crowd once again had permission to engage. Two games later the inner monologue must have been even louder as he shot an anguished look to the heavens for some assistance to save him from two set points. When Medvedev converted the second he slumped to the changeover, muttering “I can’t serve any bigger” and using his arms to motion Medvedev’s relentless returns. And it was true – Medvedev kept hitting them back. The admirable restraint also remained throughout the hoo-ha up the other end. The gesticulations and code violations, whooping and cursing. Sometimes Kyrgios was in a rivalry with himself. Sometimes it was with the serve clock. Nevertheless, the third set was his, sealed with a drop shot. But Medvedev would not be beaten. In the fourth stanza he earned the crucial break to go up 4-2. When he made it 5-2 to love Kyrgios smashed his racket, pulled out a new one and then lost his final service game via two unforced errors. Medvedev flicked his hand like a rapper and swaggered, cool as a cucumber, over to where Courier was waiting for that interview. “You have tough opponents like Nick here,” Medvedev said. “That is why we love tennis. Any match, anything can happen. I just want to play my best and try to run good, to hit good shots, hit some winners and hopefully this can be enough to do something big.” He will next face Botic van de Zandschulp of the Netherlands, with likely more scalps to come. But if this is not the match of the tournament by the end of next week, it will certainly come close.There is a terrific warmth and tenderness to Kenneth Branagh’s elegiac, autobiographical movie about the Belfast of his childhood: spryly written, beautifully acted and shot in a lustrous monochrome, with set pieces, madeleines and epiphanies that feel like a more emollient version of Terence Davies. Some may feel that the film is sentimental or that it does not sufficiently conform to the template of political anger and despair considered appropriate for dramas about Northern Ireland and the Troubles. And yes, there is certainly a spoonful of sugar (or two) in the mix, with some mandatory Van Morrison on the soundtrack. There’s a key climactic scene about how you disarm a gunman in the middle of a riot if you have no gun yourself, which has to be charitably indulged. But this film has such emotional generosity and wit and it tackles a dilemma of the times not often understood: when, and if, to pack up and leave Belfast? Is it an understandable matter of survival or an abandonment of your beloved home town to the extremists? (Full disclosure: my own dad left Belfast for England, though well before the era of this film.) It is 1969 and Jamie Dornan plays a man who lives in north Belfast, a largely Protestant district but still with some Catholic families. He is an easygoing charmer, away in England a fair bit during the week, doing skilled carpentry work and harassed with the need to pay off a tax bill. When his long-suffering wife (Caitríona Balfe) writes to the Inland Revenue asking for confirmation that his debt is finally paid off, it prompts the authorities to look further into his murky affairs and decide he owes another £500. This is such a horribly unglamorous, un-cinematic moment that it surely has to be taken from real life. The family includes two boys, the older Will (Lewis McAskie) and younger Buddy, played by newcomer Jude Hill, whose stunned, wide-eyed incomprehension sets the tone. The grandparents live with them under the same roof and are played with beguiling sweetness by Ciarán Hinds and Judi Dench (the latter pinches every scene by deflating the menfolk with wisecracking remarks from behind her copy of the People’s Friend). Violence explodes when unionist hardmen burn the Catholics out of their homes and set up barricades to protect their new fiefdom against republican retaliation – a gangsterism that requires payments from local families, enforced by tough guy Billy Clanton (Colin Morgan), accepted more or less pragmatically by local man Frankie West (a great cameo from Michael Maloney) but resented by Dornan’s character. He starts showing his wife and kids assisted-emigrant brochures for Vancouver and Sydney: places beyond the reach of the terrorists and the taxman but so alien they might as well feature on Star Trek, which the boys watch on TV every week. And poor Buddy just has to carry on with his life, which involves much unrequited pining for a girl in his class. The film moves with an easy swing from home to street to schoolroom to pub and back home, and it’s perhaps fullest and richest when nothing specifically tragic or Troubles-related is happening. I loved the scene in which Buddy is schooled on what to say if a stranger demands to know if he is Protestant or Catholic: does he lie or double-bluff with the truth? (I was reminded of the Dave Allen routine about what happens if you try sitting on the fence and claiming you’re Jewish – the hard man replies: “Are you a Protestant Jew or a Catholic Jew?”) The family get some escapism at the movies: Raquel Welch in her furry bikini in One Million Years BC, the flying car going over the cliff in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, and High Noon on TV. There’s a trip to the theatre to see A Christmas Carol; the late John Sessions gives his final performance as the Belfast stage actor Joseph Tomelty playing Marley’s ghost. But inevitably Buddy gets drawn into some scrapes: nicking a bar of Turkish delight and then getting involved in looting a box of washing powder from a riot-hit supermarket. It’s not quite right to say that there’s a streak of innocence in the nightmare of this film, but certainly a streak of normality and even banality, which assumes its own surreal tone. Love letters to the past are always addressed to an illusion, yet this is such a seductive piece of myth-making from Branagh. • Belfast is released on 21 January in cinemas.The US state department has described the Uyghur human rights issue as a genocide and the largest-scale detention of an ethno-religious community since the second world war. And yet to hear one leading professional sports owner tell it, “nobody cares”. Chamath Palihapitiya, a billionaire investor in the NBA’s Golden State Warriors, used the most recent episode of his All-In podcast to weigh in, dismissing the Uyghur crisis as “a very hard, ugly truth” that’s “below my line”. When his co-host David Sacks countered that the Uyghurs were a great, if not pressing, concern, Palihapitiya dug in: “If you’re asking me do I care about a segment of a class of people in another country? Not until we can take care of ourselves will I prioritise them over us.” There’s no doubt Palihapitiya’s comments were callous, selfish and confirmed popular suspicions of how the 1% views the world. But they were also an honest reflection of the NBA’s attitude towards the Uyghur genocide and China more generally. As Palihapitiya’s soundbite went viral over the weekend, the Warriors were quick to minimise his role with the team. “As a limited investor who has no day-to-day operating functions with the Warriors, Mr Palihapitiya does not speak on behalf of our franchise, and his views certainly don’t reflect those of our organisation,” the team said in a statement on Monday. Hours later, Palihapitiya circulated his own statement, recognising that “I come across as lacking empathy” upon re-listening to his comments. For the past seven years, Xi Jinping’s Chinese Communist party has advanced policies aimed at the Turkic Muslim Uyghur minority in the western Xinjiang region, marginalizing them to the brink of extinction. It’s believed that at least 1 million Uyghurs have been arbitrarily detained inside government internment camps. At more than 380 government black sites, Uyghurs have been subject to psychological indoctrination and forced sterilisation, while those detained have been coerced to manufacture clothing, face masks and other products. Ever since the Washington Bullets made history in August 1979 as the first US pro sports team to be invited to China following an ease in diplomatic relations, the NBA has owned the inside track on the sports world’s most coveted growth market. State media carried NBA games in the 1980s, fueling the game’s popularity. The global success of the 1992 USA Olympic squad, AKA The Dream Team, inspired a generation of Chinese players. In 2002 the Houston Rockets chose Shanghai native Yao Ming with the draft’s top pick, marking the first time an international player had been selected that high without having previously played at a US college. And while China has not produced many NBA-calibre players besides Ming, a 2016 Naismith Hall of Fame inductee who chairs the Chinese Basketball Association, Stephon Marbury, Gilbert Arenas, Steve Francis and many others Americans have been enjoying blockbuster second acts playing in China after their NBA careers were done. This two-decades-long cultural exchange has set the foundation for the NBA’s China operation, which has been valued at more than $5bn. But as the league’s interests in China have deepened, it has struggled to walk the line between respecting the free speech rights of its core stakeholders and appeasing its sensitive Chinese partners. Three years ago the Philadelphia 76ers’ Daryl Morey, one of the league’s most respected general managers, tweeted in support of the Hong Kong protests. The message cost him his position with the Houston Rockets and resulted in a temporary ban of NBA games on state TV – an estimated $400m hit. When LeBron James toed the company line and said Morey was “not really educated on the situation”, his standing in China took a major hit, and Hong Kongers took to the streets again to protest him. Last fall Chinese TV blacked out a Boston Celtics games after centre Enes Kaenter Freedom, a Swiss-born Turkish Muslim who has been a strident CCP critic, assailed the state’s human rights record in Xinjiang, Tibet and Hong Kong. In 2020 allegations of child abuse surfaced at NBA-supported, CCP-run basketball academies, including one in Xinjiang. And while the NBA closed the Xinjiang academy in the wake of those allegations, its business relationship with China did not fundamentally change. The Guardian emailed the league for a statement on Palihapitiya; it did not respond. Given the efforts the NBA has made to market itself as a league that’s more attuned to injustice than others – two years ago the Milwaukee Bucks led a weekend long sports walkout following the shooting of Jacob Blake, for example – some critics including Ted Cruz, Tucker Carlson have claimed the NBA only cares about social justice when it isn’t bad for business. They have a point. But where they lose it is in trying to hold to account Black players, coaches and team executives who prioritise the fight against racism in America (something they experience in their daily lives) over a genocide halfway around the world. If anyone should take responsibility, it’s Silver and the league’s owners for putting profits ahead of the human cost. It’s not just the NBA. Late last year tennis pro Peng Shuai mysteriously disappeared after she made sexual assault allegations against a Communist party leader. This issue has yet to be fully resolved, yet only the WTA stopped their activities in China in response; other leagues have not stopped their relations with China in solidarity. Beijing is weeks away from hosting the Winter Olympics and in December the Biden administration cited the “ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity … and other human rights abuses”, as the reason they wouldn’t be sending a government delegation to the Games. But that boycott has been denounced by the World Athletics president, Sebastian Coe, as “a hollow, meaningless and damaging gesture” – a stance that could have something to do with the two Diamond League athletics events that are slated for Chinese soil this summer. Hence why it’s so surprising that Palihapitiya would be the one to give voice to the sports world’s apathy toward the Uyghurs. Until he opened his mouth, few NBA fans knew him. A founding member of Facebook’s management team, Palihapitiya helped spearhead the portal’s transformation into a $100bn business – only to come to regret that effort. “The short-term, dopamine-driven feedback loops that we have created are destroying how society works,” he told an audience at Stanford’s business school in 2017. Last January, Palihapitiya announced plans to challenge incumbent Gavin Newsom in California’s gubernatorial recall election, promising to bump the state tax down to 0 from 16% if elected. But he pulled out less than a month later. Palihapitiya, whose family fled Sri Lanka for Canada when he was a child, acknowledged this history in his clarifying statement on Monday. “As a refugee, my family fled a country with its own set of human rights issues so this is something that is very much a part of my lived experience,” he wrote. “To be clear, my belief is that human rights matter, whether in China, the United States, or elsewhere. Full stop.” But by then there was no more denying how sports leagues really feel when it comes to sport’s wider attitude toward the Uyghurs and the issue of civil rights in China. Not after Palihapitiya said the quiet part out loud.The ECB has revealed a tweaked county structure for 2022 that returns more red-ball cricket to mid-summer but does not rip up everything and throw it to the wolves. After the summer scheduling came in for heavy criticism following England’s 4-0 Ashes drubbing, Neil Snowball, the ECB’s managing director of county cricket, accepted that change was on the way. He confirmed that 2022 was an interim year based more on autumn reaction from the counties than the winter’s mishaps. “We’re still putting together the feedback from the tour,” he said, “and then we need to get the first-class counties, the ECB, the PCA and the other stakeholders together and work out a plan through this year so hopefully we can start making some changes from 2023. “So, whether it’s teams or whether it’s actual fixtures, I think we probably need to play less and focus on high intensity. A lot of this is about quality – it’s the quality of the cricket that we’re playing in the right conditions. I think that’s what we need to try to focus on. “I think what we need to do is have a comprehensive look at the picture and at all the things that we’ve talked about – whether it’s the ball, the pitches, the coaching, the domestic structure.” The County Championship will return on 7 April, with seven rounds in the June and July window when the weather and pitches should be palatable. There is a return to two division cricket, after the Covid-enforced group stages, with 10 teams in the top division, and eight in the second, the promotion and relegation places based on the results at the end of the 2019 summer. Yorkshire remain in Division One, despite the ongoing ECB investigation. No decision has yet been made on their current suspension from holding international games. Two more red-ball games have been added to the schedule: First Class County Select XI matches against the tourists, New Zealand in May and South Africa later in the summer, with the intention that Test players could be drafted in if necessary. Meanwhile, the Vitality Blast enters its 20th year, kicking off with the champions Kent Spitfires taking on Somerset on the opening night in a rematch of last year’s final. How glorious that Darren Stevens – hypnotic inspiration to Australian Whatsapp groups – will kick the tournament off. He is one of five men in this year’s tournament to have played in the first competition in 2003. The competition will run for seven weeks, with a Roses match on the first Friday of the competition, culminating in an already sold-out finals day at Edgbaston on 16 July. There will be 10 double headers alongside Charlotte Edwards Cup matches, many of them during the half-term week at the beginning of June, in an attempt to attract more crowds to women’s domestic T20 games. And the 50-over Rachael Heyhoe Flint Trophy gets its first finals day at Lord’s, which dovetails nicely with the renaming of the North gate in her honour. The Bob Willis Trophy, which closed the men’s season for the last two years – triumphantly in 2020, rather less so in 2021 – has been quietly retired, though may return in a different form in 2023. There is also no place for the Champion County fixture this summer. As last year, the Royal London Cup 50 over trophy will run alongside the Hundred, but this year the final will be held on a Saturday, rather than a random obscure Thursday.Good morning. There was a lot of initial excitement around the House select committee tasked with investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol securing the cooperation of the former White House press secretary and longtime Donald Trump insider Stephanie Grisham. According to sources, Grisham has told the committee that in the days leading up to the attack, Trump hosted secret meetings in the White House residence. Grisham was Melania Trump’s chief of staff when she resigned on 6 January 2021, the day Trump supporters stormed the US Capitol in an attempt to halt the election certification of Joe Biden’s win. Her interview with the House committee was more significant than expected, according to sources, with her informing investigators that details of whether Trump actually intended to march to the Capitol after his speech at the Ellipse rally would be memorialized in documents provided to the US Secret Service. What took place and who took part in these secret meetings is still unknown, but Grisham purportedly provided the names of other Trump aides who would have that information, including Trump’s chief of staff, Mark Meadows, and former chief usher, Timothy Harleth. Supreme court rejects Trump’s attempt to shield documents from Capitol attack panel The supreme court has rejected Donald Trump’s request for an emergency stay to block the release of White House records to the House select committee tasked with investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol – a blow to the former president that could shed significant light on his role in the events of the deadly day. This order allows the committee to obtain from the national archives more than 700 documents of some of the most sensitive White House records from Trump’s administration, including call logs, daily presidential diaries, handwritten notes and memos from his top aides. Democrats fail to advance voting rights bill as Senate holdouts defend filibuster Yesterday Senate Democrats failed again to pass sweeping voter rights protections, as all 50 Republicans in the chamber united in opposition against the measure, as they have done for the past four months. Republicans once again blocked debate by relying on the filibuster, a Senate rule that requires 60 votes to advance legislation to a final vote. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer’s plan to advance voter rights by amending the filibuster ultimately failed, with moderate Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema defending the parliamentary tactic, despite heavy pressure from the party and Biden. This failure to pass voter rights protections was not just a loss for Democrats, but for Biden, whose prospects look worse than ever. In other news … Children in the US are being infected with Covid-19 in record numbers – yet their rate of vaccination has lagged. A hacking attack on the International Committee of the Red Cross has exposed the data of more than 515,000 vulnerable people. Ghislaine Maxwell’s legal team has filed a request for a new trial over the revelations that a juror may not have disclosed an experience with childhood sexual abuse during jury selection. A Tongan man swept away by the tsunami stayed afloat by swimming between islands for more than 24 hours. Stat of the day: US livestock animals produce somewhere between three and 20 times more manure than people produce in the US each year. US livestock produce between 1.27bn and 1.37bn tons of waste a year, which is partly why devices looking to turn manure into energy sources are catching on – the waste-derived biogas industry appears to be booming; globally, the industry is predicted to reach $126bn by the year 2030, more than doubling over the next decade. Don’t miss this: a true Marvel Author Douglas Wolk read all 27,000 of the Marvel comics for his book, All of the Marvels. It was six decades of stories ranging from the well-known Iron Man to the Unbeatable Squirrel Girl, whose superpowers include “proportional speed and strength of a squirrel” – and a knack for creative nonviolent conflict resolution. … or this: multimillionaires v billionaires An airport in the super-rich enclave in the Hamptons has become a flashpoint in what has been described as “the 2% v the 1%” and “the have-everythings v the have-a-lots” – those who are just wealthy enough to live in East Hampton and those who are so wealthy they can afford to fly in and out. Climate check: bless the rains down in California California received more rain from October to December than it did in the previous 12 months – and those heavy rains have allowed for the return of endangered coho salmon for the first time in decades. “We’ve seen fish in places that they haven’t been for almost 25 years,” said Preston Brown, the director of watershed conservation for the Salmon Protection and Watershed Network. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last Thing: actors and parasites Scientists have named a tarantula-killing parasitic worm after famed actor Jeff Daniels, inspired by his role in the 1990s cult classic, Arachnophobia. The Tarantobelus jeffdanielsi inhabit spiders’ mouths and can impact their behavior in strange ways, including causing them to walk on their tiptoes. “In Hollywood, you haven’t really made it until you’ve been recognized by those in the field of parasitology,” Daniels said of this honor. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe company co-producing Tom Cruise’s forthcoming space film has unveiled plans for a film production studio and a sports arena in zero gravity. Space Entertainment Enterprise (SEE) has said their planned completion date is December 2024 for the module, named SEE-1, which will dock on Axiom Station, the commercial wing of the International Space Station (ISS). The site will host films, television, music and sports events – although on-site audience capacity is yet to be determined – as well as content creators who want to develop, produce, record, broadcast and livestream 250 miles above Earth. Third-party providers will be able to use the facilities, but SEE also intends to make its own content. Axiom Station will then separate from the ISS in 2028. Axiom won the contract to develop the commercial wing earlier this month. “SEE-1 is an incredible opportunity for humanity to move into a different realm and start an exciting new chapter in space,” said SEE co-founders Dmitry and Elena Lesnevsky. “It will provide a unique and accessible home for boundless entertainment possibilities in a venue packed with innovative infrastructure, which will unleash a new world of creativity. “With worldwide leader Axiom Space building this cutting-edge, revolutionary facility, SEE-1 will provide not only the first, but also the supreme quality space structure enabling the expansion of the two trillion-dollar global entertainment industry into low-Earth orbit.” Axiom is the company that intends to send Tom Cruise and director Doug Liman to the International Space Station this year to shoot what will now be the second movie to be shot in space. Cruise had been planning to jet off in October 2021, but the trip was put back a few months for reasons reportedly relating to the $200m budget. Meanwhile, a Russian film crew successfully flew to the ISS earlier in October for a 12-day shoot on The Challenge. That film, about a surgeon who has to operate on a sick cosmonaut in space because his medical condition prevents him from returning to Earth to be treated, is scheduled for release later this year. Although documentaries featuring footage filmed by astronauts are now common – and live, global television broadcasting took a giant leap forward with the Apollo moon landings – only modest attempts have been made to film fiction beyond the final frontier. Despite films set in space being a staple of the industry, logistical and financial barriers meant the heavy lifting was done by creative prop departments and special effects teams to help audiences suspend their disbelief. A seven-minute short called Apogee of Fear was made in 2008 by space tourist Richard Garriott, featuring acting debuts by various baffled astronauts Some scenes from 1984 Soviet film Return from Orbit were also shot in space. Recent attempts to re-create zero gravity – and the claustrophobia – of space have paid dividends for mainstream film-makers. Years of research and effort and million-dollar innovations were behind the verisimilitude of Sandra Bullock and George Clooney’s weightlessness – and inter-orbit freefalls – in Alfonso Cuarón’s 2013 film Gravity. That film, which cost $100m, made $723m at the global box office and won seven Oscars.There have been signs of a growing return to office working in London, with 8% more journeys recorded on the London underground network compared with a week ago. The increase came after the government ended work-from-home guidance immediately on Wednesday afternoon, with Sajid Javid claiming the Omicron coronavirus variant was “in retreat”, despite the number of new infections running at more than 100,000 a day. Transport for London said 1.09m entry and exit “taps” with contactless cards or Oyster were recorded up to 10am on Thursday on the tube – about 80,000 more than last Thursday’s morning peak. Bus journeys were up 3% week on week, with 1.19m boarding taps recorded this morning. There had already been signs of growing weekday journeys in London throughout the month, with total tube journeys throughout Wednesday up 4% week-on-week – despite the partial closure of the Bank branch of the Northern Line, a vital commuter line serving the City. A four-month closure to complete the upgrade of Bank underground station started on Sunday. Bus journeys were likewise up 2% on Wednesday. The changed guidance appeared to have no discernible difference on road traffic in cities across the country, with morning peak congestion slightly lower on Thursday than Wednesday in London, Manchester and the West Midlands urban region, according to data from the satnav firm TomTom. No data was yet available from railways, although anecdotal evidence from operators suggested there had been no significant signs of an uplift. Trains in particular were hit hard by the reimposition of work-from-home guidance in December, in response to the spread of the Omicron variant. Journey numbers had reached 70% of pre-pandemic levels in November, but fell to below 40% in January, with services affected by staff absences as well as people working from home. Latest provisional numbers showed just over 50% of passengers on trains overall, at the start of this week. The ending of work-from-home guidance will be followed next week by the lifting of rules making face masks mandatory on public transport from next Thursday. The change was welcomed by the Rail Delivery Group, with some in the industry saying the Covid regulations deterred passengers by implying trains were less safe than other environments. Nevertheless, user groups said removing masks would make many passengers feel less safe. Transport for London will continue to make face coverings a condition of carriage.Thus endeth an absolute bazzer of a day. In the women’s competition, Halep and Sabalenka are through but Kontaveit, Raducanu and Muguruza are out; in the men’s Medvedev and Sinner are through, but Murray is out. Thanks for your company and comments; join us for more fun tomorrow. Sinner seals it with a break, stretching wide to guide a difficult return back, and Johnson, frazzled from too long achieving nothing, dumps into the net. Sinner meets Taro Daniel next. I keep saying it, but Johnson has nothing for Sinner’s serve, and though he retains his own, a backhand return dumped into the net seals a love hold and the Austro-Italian is just a game away. His potential last-eight meeting with Tsitsipas looks tasty in the extreme. Barbara Schett notes that Sinner still has the body of a child, and that needs to change before he can win a major. I’m not sure about that – I think it depends on how long his matches are – but his limbs are noticeably thin. Thing is, they give him leverage and flexibility, so I’d not be so quick to dismiss them, though I doubt he’s ready to go five sets with your Medvedevs and Zverevs of this world. And he makes trouble for himself at 3-2 40-15, whacking a forehand at Johnson with the whole court to aim at, but another forehand elicits the net; his opponent just doesn’t have the game to put him under any pressure. Sinner leads 6-2 6-4 4-2. Back with our men, Sinner now leads Johnson 6-2 6-4 3-1, and this has been a very impressive performance. His serve is firing, his groundstrokes are on point, and his shot-selection is mature. Halep tells Eurosport she’s worked hard and happy she’s reaping the rewards. Mats then says that when he got married, he was good for three years, but eventually he felt unhappy on the court because it was impinging on his bliss. Halep, recently married, isn’t in that space though – her husband is with her, tennis is her priority, and she’s in a good space in her life. She thinks she’s calmer on court too – I’d agree with that, and I’m sure the happiness in her personal life is part of it, but I’m also sure no longer being the best player not to win a major also helps. Asked what she’s eating to play so well – she’s won seven matches straight – she says that she’s been eating ham and cheese and otherwise just a few eggs. Asked about playing so late, she says it was hard to stay awake but the Kyrgios v Medvedev match was great and she really enjoyed it. At 30, she’s old enough to start enjoying the game, and last year wasn’t easy because she was injured, but she’s ready to play some good matches her and is happy with her aggression today. Finally, she’s told that given she was coached by Darren Cahill and played doubles with Aussie girls, she’s basically Aussie, and accepts the nickname “Aussie Simona”. The interviewers’ obsession with Australianness is quite something. Devastating, spectacular behaviour from Halep, who absolutely wipes Haddad Maia off the court. She is gunning for this, and meets Kovinic, who beat Raducanu next. Ah, that’s a bit of a shame, her v Raducanu would’ve been something, but if Halep keeps this up this pot is hers. Back with the men, Sinner has broken Johnson first up, and the end looks night in this one too. He leads 6-2 6-4 1-0. Seven in a row for Halep, who’s absolutely flying. No one won anything by playing well in round two, but make no mistake: she is playing well and is one game away from progression. Johnson gets to 30, but Sinner bangs a violent serve down the middle and that’s the second set. He leads 6-2 6-4 while, on Laver, Halep has to go through deuce but eventually secures her double-break. Haddad Maia is not long for this match, the score 6-2 4-0. Meantime, Halep consolidates despite a game featuring two doubles, and that’s five in a row for her. She leads 6-2 2-0. Sinner has Johnson’s serve under constant pressure, but at 30-all, Johnson finds a kicking ace, his second of the game ... then nets a forehand. He goes long in the next rally, and this might be the set here ... he needs a first serve, can’t get one, and when Sinner sends a forehand spinning to the corner, Johnson can’t respond. Sinner will now serve for the second set. A forehand winner and backhand return earn Halep two break points; she goes long with a forehand return to cede one, but punishes another onto the line, and at 6-2 2-0, she’s nearly there and both players know it. Johnson is making a better fist of this set, and at 40-30, he finds a big serve out wide, racing in to despatch a clean-up high volley. If he can make it to a breaker, he’s got a chance, but he’s not making any impression when Sinner has the balls. 4-3 to him, first set Sinner 6-2. Looking at the draw, Sabalenka and Swiatek are the best of Halep’s half. I’d take her to beat both. Halep is playing very nicely indeed, and when Haddad Maia goes long on the forehand, she seals the set 6-2. Sinner races to the net to retrieve a drop, flipping cross-court; it earns him break point, but Johnson, who rig is worth a once-over, finds a big serve and quickly cleans up. He leads 3-2 in set two, having lost the first 6-2. Halep now leads 5-2 and though Haddad Maia is playing pretty well, there’s just nothing she can do. Sinner bangs a forehand down the line which Johnson squash-shots back; it dips over the net, but a terrific get on the volley earns Sinner 6-2 2-2, and he’s just too good. Sinner, meanwhile is 16/1 behind Medvedev, Zverev, Nadal and Tsitsipas. That’s a bit tight – I don’t think he’s ready yet, and it’s take something significant to beat the top two. Zverev seems to have got over a hump in recent times, and though I’d not take him to beat Medvedev in a final, he’s probably good enough to beat everyone else. Halep is whacking it – she’s such a powerhouse – and holds to love, having lost just one point on serve so far, and I’m checking the odds on her to win the thing. She’s third favourite at 13/2, behind Barty, Osaka and Halep. I’d say her best is better than Barty’s, but I’d love to see them play, as I would her v Osaka. 4-1. Halep is giving Haddad Maia hell here, but she eventually wrangles a hold, sealing the deal with a big service winner down the middle. Halep leads 3-1. Johnson is playing OK, but Sinner is just too good for him and takes the first set 6-2. Not gonna lie, I absolutely love Halep and her confounding mix of fragility and invincibility. It’s great to see her back, and women’s tennis being as unpredictable as it is, I’d not totally rule her out of title contention. She leads 3-0. Back on court, Halep has broken Haddad Maia for 2-0, and Sinner is absolutely wasting Johnson, leading 5-1. Emma Raducanu lost in three to Danka Kovinic, but was hampered by finger-blisters and raised her reputation even higher with her canniness and tenacity. Andy Murray was beaten by Taro Daniel in straight sets, but the match was an intense and competitive one. Daniil Medvedev beat Nick Kyrgios in a thriller, then registered his disapproval of behaviour in the crowd. Aryna Sabalenka’s servve malfunctioned (again), but she made it through, while Garbine Muguruza lost to Alize Cornet and Anett Kontaveit lost to Clare Tauson. Sam Stosur, US Open champ in 2011, lost to Anastasia Pavlyuchenova – a defeat that marked the end of her singles career. She received precisely the gratitude you’d expect. Alex De Minaur is into round three following a straight sets win over Kamil Majchrzak. And Nick Kyrgios lost to Daniil Medvedev in four thrilling sets and in front of a buzzing crowd, after which Medvedev criticised those cheering his fault. We’ll have a report for you on that presently. Sinner is a serious player and a potential major winner; Johnson, though no mug, will do well to hang with him, and as I type that, he seals the double break to lead 3-0. OK, and breathe. But not too much: Sinner and Johnson are away, Sinner leading 2-0 in set one, while Halep and Haddad Maia are about to knock up. Interviewed on Eurosport, Medvedev continues the teacher vibe, saying he’s not angry just disappointed. He expected a row, playing the home favourite, especially that being Kyrgios, but didn’t like people cheering his faults, surmising that those making the noise “probably have a low IQ”. Or maybe they’re just bad at answering IQ-style questions, who can say. Anyhow, he says a few years ago he’d have had some tantrums, broken some rackets and shouted at his box for no reason, but he’s more mature now. He didn’t want to lose his serve, and felt a bit in danger in set three, especially with Kyrgios pumping up the crowd, but he came through in set four. He is an absolute player. Medvedev says he came to win and he’s happy he did, his stoic face plastered on. It’s not easy when you get booed between first and second serves, he says, and of course boos follow – Jim Courier says they’re saying “Siuuuuu”, explains it’s a soccer thing, and they continue. Medvedev, though, is naused right up and tells people to show respect for Courier, who won the Aussie Open, even if they don’t have respect for him – it’s a bit supply teacher, but he’s right. Courier then gets nearer to explains again, without chastising the grown adults making it, and Medvedev maintains that it’s distracting, which it is. He thinks he’s got the game to win the thing, but we love tennis because other people do good things, and the crowd warm to him, through the suiuuing. Good for him. That’s brilliant from Medvedev, riding out the wave of patriotism to impose his superior fitness and class – he meets Gasquet next. But Kyrgios remains a special player and character – he created a proper event there, and loved every second of it. So did we, and all those lucky enough to be there in person. Medvedev gets 0-15, so Kyrgios slams his racket into the court and serves an ace with his new one; of course he does. But Medvedev then moves him side to side before dispensing a disguised drop and Kyrgios doesn’t have the gas to run it down; he knows this is it, going long with a forehand, and that’s two match points and 2-5 15-40... Medvedev is such a pro, and he races through a love hold sealed with a kiss an ace. He leads 7-6(1) 6-4 4-6 5-2. Yeah, on Laver, Medvedev digs out a backhand that gives him a break in set four, and at 4-2 he’s just two holds away from the match. More on today: Emma Raducanu, though. She is an absolute superstar, brimming with talent, mentality and equanimity; we’re going to be seeing a lot more of her. Kovinic looks emotional, saying it was amazing and that she really enjoyed the match – she’s been waiting a long time to get to this stage of a major. She’s glad she showed she can play at a high level and was low on energy in the third set, so didn’t want to show emotion in order to conserve what she had. Well done her. Back on Laver, we’re on serve in set four, Medvedev leading 3-2 and by two sets to one. That was a bazzing match - well played both – and Kovinic meets Halep or Haddad Maia next. She’s mever made the last 32 of a Slam before. She needs a first serve, can’t find one, and Raducanu waits for her, slamming a forehand down the line and into the corner! But what a backhand down the line Kovinic finds at 40-30! Even if Raducanu loses here, her stock will rise – her gutsiness and intelligence mark her as very special – but though she makes 0-15, Kovinic clatters a forehand winner to draw level in the game. Next, she dredges up an ace, Raducanu nets a backhand, and after two hours 37 minutes, Kovinic has two match points... Lovely hands at the net from Raducanu, giving her 15-0, and she quickly makes 40-15, securing the hold when Kovinic races in to meet a poor drop, only to blaze wide. Kovinic leads 5-3 in the decider, and will now serve for the biggest win of her career. Kovinic holds to love, and she’s a game away from round three. So, Kovinic leads Raducanu 6-4 4-6 4-2 and Medvedev leads Kyrgios 7-6(1) 6-4 4-6 1-0. Raducanu is hitting again, but will have to go through deuce for her hold. Meanwhile, Kyrgios ignores Medvedev’s opening ace to pounce on a short serve and make 30-40 with a forehand winner! He then out-thinks Medvedev at the net, earning the chance to hit a winner from the back ... only to swipe it wide! But a double follows, so we go again, while Kovinic breaks Raducanu with a lob, presented to her by a tame forehand! It’s all going on, and as I type that, Medvedev seals his hold. Medvedev disappears to change clothes, so the crowd enjoy a boogie. I’d still expect him to resolve things in this set, but... It must be distracting for Medvedev, having to compete in the party atmosphere Kyrgios has created. He’s not done anything to set the crowd against him – they’re just for their man – but it’s so unusual to see this kind of thing in tennis that he won’t be impervious to it. Raducanu is now less vex, punishing a love break-back! Her ability to deliver under pressure, oof madone! Another massive serve, this one down the middle, a drop, and Kyrgios wins set three! That is incredible, 15 minutes ago he looked absolutely bushed, but there’s your Kyrgiosian paradox yet again. Medvedev leads 7-6(1)6-4 4-6. Raducanu will be vex if she loses from here, having fought so hard only to cede a break with carelessness on her decent wing. A bird turns up, so there’s a short recess, while on Laver a booming first serve from Kyrgios gives him set point! Kyrgios is in the zone, a lovely touch giving him 15-0 before he nets a forehand; Raducanu, meanwhile, nets a backhand, her third error of the game on that wing, and Kovinic has 3-1 in the decider! Kovinic makes 0-30, Raducanu looking ragged for the first time, and when she blazes a backhand wide, she faces three break points... Kyrgios really is the consummate showman, but he’s not short of substance either; he’ll have to serve for the set, though, because Medvedev holds easily, doing well to keep concentration in the maelstrom. Laver is buzzing and Kyrgios is noising them up something fierce, a tweener setting up a winner that somehow passes through Medvedev for 40-15; I’m not sure any other player takes any of the three points he’s won this game, but this isn’t any other player, and he quickly sealsthe consolidation! Kyrgios leads 5-3, while Kovinic holds for 2-1. Oh my days, huge net-battles in both matches! Raducanu wins one for 15-40 and Kyrgios wins the other, via gorgeous forehand, for the same! The crowd on Laver go wild ... and wilder still when, after Medvedev claws back a point, Kyrgios comes to the net, runs across a passing shot, leaps, plays a hip-high volley, and sets off a lap of honour which he ends with some dancing! He leads 4-3 with a break, while Raducanu and Kovinic are still at it, now at deuce. Kyrgios serves three aces and holds for 3-3 – Medvedev did likewise in the previous game – and he’s making a fight of things, but having to constantly come from behind is very wearing. Raducanu holds to 30, and she’s hitting that forehand now. I’m not sure if it’s the painkillers, if the pain’s dulled, or if she’s got used to hitting through it, but she’s looking pretty good. Medvedev is so solid, and he now leads 3-2 in set three. After that match, we’ve got Halep v Hadad Maia, while after Kovinic v Raducanu, we’ve got Johnson v Sinner. It’s ridiculous! Kovinic goes long with a backhand down the line, handing Raducanu 30-40, then a forehand belted cross-court flies past her ... and drops just out! Deuce, and Kovinic hangs on for 1-0 in the decider. I hate to say it, but Kovinic will be feeling extremely frazzled. She didn’t make the most of a gifted opportunity, failing to exploit her opponent’s injury – it was almost like she didn’t know about it – and will now be feart that her chance has gone. What’s great about Raducanu – well, a lot – but she’s able to do what Daniel was talking about earlier, to compete with intensity and equanimity, simultaneously. As that set finished, Kyrgios was berating the umpire, but I’m not sure why. Kovinic, meanwhile, has gone off, presumably to get her heed straight, because she’ll feel like she missed an open goal. But Raducanu’s injury actually made her harder to read, especially when the drive-forehand returned, and the way she laughed her way through adversity must’ve been pretty disconcerting. Kovinic makes 0-30 but a drop-lob combo, followed by a banging forehand, haul Raducanu level. Then, at 30-40, another drop sets up the put-away, and this is another tremendous match. A big serve then earns advantage and set point – Raducanu is some competitor – and Kovinic goes long on the forehand! Somehow, Raducanu wins set two and we’ve got waselves the decider we deserve! Kovinic 6-4 4-6 Raducanu Serving at 4-5, Kyrgios faces 0-30, a delectable drop closing the gap. But Medvedev wins the next point and now has two goes at taking the set ... missing a straightforward volley on the first. Kyrgios, though, goes long with a backhand, and given how little he’s played lately, and that he’s recovering from corona, it’s hard not to see this match as over. Kyrgios (1)6-7 4-6 Medvevev From 40-15, Raducanu fights back, finding a booming forehand to raise break point and looking mystified in the aftermath. She can’t force it home, but then finds another, laughing away – this must be pretty disconcerting for Kovinic, who finally settled into her diet of backhand and slice, only for everything to change. And this time, Raducanu directs her around the court before panelling a forehand down the line to seal the break! She’ll now serve for set two! “Huge respect for Andy,” emails Thomas Harrington, “but after this defeat, he seriously needs to consider giving up competing in Grand Slams (with the exception of Wimbledon of course). To be struggling like this in a second-round match again is not good, the physicality of best of five sets in a Slam make it impossible for him to be competitive in this format now, and the damage it could do to his hip and surrounding area, who knows? He needs to concentrate on best of three tournaments – he showed last week he can still compete and still be competitive, there are more tournaments for him to win still BUT only in ATP events, and he needs to start prioritising those events in order to prolong his career, I hope he does.” You tell him! I’m sure he’s investigated how competing will affect his body, and my guess is he’s still enjoying it – I’m certainly enjoying watching him – and you’re a long time retired. When you’re that kind of competitor, I doubt you can get properly going unless it’s a major. Well done Nick Kyrgios! Eventually, he hangs on, prancing with joy then noising up the crowd – it’s great to see. Medevedev leads 7-6(1) 4-4. Raducanu slams a drive-volley wide, giving Kovinic 30-all, a fine leaping backhand volley raises break point, and it’s quickly snaffled. We’re now at 4-4 in set two, and though it must be tiring for Kovinic to generate power of slices, she seems to have things worked out now. ...which Kovinic wins, and she quickly closes out through deuce. Back on Laver, meanwhile, Kyrgios is serving at 0-30, 3-4 down in set two, and though he soon makes 40-30, Medvedev whips a forehand winner onto the line for deuce and we begin some back and forth. But Medevedev looks a lot fitter, and however this game shakes out, it’s hard to seethis going more than four sets, max. What’s so noticeable here is the way Raducanu has adapted her game to play the shots she can play, using wiles and touch to manipulate the ball and move Kovinic around the court. And have a look! A backhand winner, thunked cross-court, gives her 0-30, and though Kovinic fights back to 30-all, an error hands over a point for the double break... Back on Court, Raducanu has just fought through deuces to hang onto her break; she leads 4-2 in set two, first set Kovinic 6-4. Daniel meets Johnson or Sinner next, and looks every bit as happy as he should, happiness most of us will never know. He’s into round three of a major for the first time, and says it’s amazing to win in front of so many people. “Amazing level from me,” he declares – not words I’ve ever uttered, or at least ever had cause to utter – and he was telling himself “It’s important but it’s not important”. I’ve not heard him interviewed before, he seems a very nice boy, and says he got goosebumps a few times in the match when the crowd were going mad. Tomorrow he’ll take a break “to feel myself”, then get ready for Saturday. I enjoyed that – it’s so great to see Murray competing with so much intensity – and enjoyed Daniel just as much. On match point, he serves and volleys for the first time – great thinking, colossal stones – and puts away a winner to send him through! He’s been so good today. Murray-Daniel has been an excellent tussle, and when Murray makes a volley for 15-all, Daniel will be wondering ... wondering how to dematerialise another ace, down the middle – his fourth of the set! Murray then nets a backhand, having done well to play himself into the rally, Daniel, who’s won four matches to get to this stage, now has two match points! We’re on serve in set two of Medvedev-Kyrgios, the former leading 7-6(1) 2-1. A lovely backhand drop gives Daniel 15-30, and might this be his chance to finish things? Maybe! He wins a duel at the net – not something that’s happened often, if at all in the match – raising two break points! He loses the first when netting a backhand ... but then Murray nets! In 90 seconds, Daniel will serve for the match at 6-4 6-4 5-4! He’s done brilliantly in this set, doing just enough to avoid being broken and waiting for his moment. Well, here it is! Can he hold it down? Raducanu consolidates for 2-0, but Kovinic is keeping things social by giving her backhands to hit. It’s also worth noting, though, that Raducanu has things worked out a little, and she ties Kovinic in knots at the net, forcing her to attempt a forehand on her backhand side, leaning across herself. She holds, though, for 1-2, while Daniel battles to a crucial hold and 4-4 against Murray, finding a wondrous backhand down the line on gamepoint. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. Medvedev gives Kyrgios a proper sonning off in the breaker, taking it 7-1. He leads by one set to love. Murray, meanwhile, digs deeper than the earth’s core to make 4-3 through deuce. I am in awe of that man for so many reasons, many of them totally unrelated to tennis, but his ability and desire to compete are spectacular. Medvedev leads Kyrgios 2-1 in the breaker, on serve, then wins the next two points on Kyrgios’. That’s 4-1 him, and you’d think that’ll be enough for the set, even with the Kyrgiosian paradox. Raducanu is struggling, unable to put any pop on her forehand. I’m not sure if she’s taken painkillers, or if painkillers even work kill that kind of pain, but if she has, she should be coming up on them soon; can she stay in the match for long enough, or win two sets with her backhand and forehand slice? A colossal serve from Kovinic saves a break point, but then she rams a backhand in the pillar and goes wide with another! Raducanu breaks for 1-0, first set 6-4 Kovinic. Excellent from Daniel, a slower serve out wide surprising Murray and clinching another crucial hold. Murray will return to the well, but he’s running out of road; it’s 3-3 in set three. OH MY DAYS! Daniel clatters a backhand down the line, but Murray’s at the net and on the stretch to guide a volley back into the centre of the court. He really is an unbelievable athlete. But it only gives him 15-all and Daniel wins the next three points ... but Murray hangs in there, making deuce with another fine volley! Back on Laver, Kyrgios now leads 6-5... Kovinic breaks Raducuanu to love, and from 0-3 down, takes the first set 6-4! Women’s tennis is so so good. This is just ridiculous – there’s so much going on I don’t know what to do with myself. On Laver, three games in a row from Kyrgios give him 5-4, and Medvedev is now serving to stay in set one. Raducanu has decided to go for it, Wawrinka-style, and a backhand down the line gets her 0-40. Kovinic closes to 15-40, but then goes long with a backhand of her own; Raducanu will now serve to stay in the first set at 4-5. Murray’s coming to the net much more often now, and after two sets finally looks settled into the match; he holds for 3-2. Meanwhile, Raducanu finds a lovely forehand slice for 0-30... On which point, she’s really struggling here, broken again; she’s got blisters right where she holds the racket, and Kovinic is now serving for the set at 5-3. “Not sure that Raducanu has sorted out the mental side of her game,” emails Phil Russell, “so much as decided she will just turn up when it’s a Slam, which is frankly something we can all learn from.” That’s part of it, though. Working out how to produce her best when it matters most, and that she needs to be fresh todo that. Murray is definitely on top here, beginning to open his shoulders and let the forehand go. But when he forces Daniel to go long, raising another break point, an unforced error hands him deuce ... and when he plays a terrific backhand approach, Daniel somehow spirits a floaty winner down the line! That’s a great shot, though Murray might rue not anticipating it – I’m not sure the volley was beyond him. And when he misses another volley, his chance evaporates and we’re at 2-2 in set three, first two to Daniel. Where else can you get cod philosophy and tennis? Exactly. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. Back on laver, Kyrgios has just broken Medvedev for 4-4. I did not see that coming, except I did see it coming because it’s Kyrgios, so that which one doesn’t see coming is therefore coming, the Kyrgiosian paradox. Eesh, Kovinic breaks again, to love, and Raducanu is struggling with her forehand in particular, unable to flow through the ball. On the opposite wing, she’s got a double fist to help, but I doubt Kovinic obliges her with many balls down that side. It’s now 3-3 in set one. Ach, while I was investigating the aforementioned fingers, Murray ceded his hard-earned break in self-flagellatingly tame fashion. Still, he’ll feel more in the match than at any previous stage. While all that was going on, Kovinic retrieved a break from Raducanu who, at 3-2, has the trainer out strapping her fingers. Murray spanks a forehand, taken nice and early, to seal the first game of set three. That should give him some confidence, because he needs to attack Daniel to have any kind of chance here. Thing is, Daniel has and is serving beautifully, unloading the suitcase ... but at 30-0 Murray plays him, drawing him to the net then running in for the pass, before a decent return eventually gives him 30-all, and when he comes to the net again, a volley forces Daniel to dump one! For the first time, the pressure looks like it’s telling ... but Daniel finds a first serve and Murray nets cross-court for deuce. He’s created a fair few opportunities so far, but hasn’t been good enough to take them at the crucial moments ... and here’s another! This time he gets a second serve to attack, he steps in ... and Daniel, perhaps enticed to put more on it, goes long! Murray is some competitor, but Daniel still leads 6-4 6-4 0-2! By the way, Auger-Aliassime meets Dan Evans next – that’ll be a jazzer – and Paire meets Tsitsipas. Don’t mind if we do! Oooh yeah! Benoît Paire, one of the great can’t be arsed mavericks, has beaten Grigzy Dimitrov in four! He looks pretty pleased about it, which is lovely to see – how he uses his talent is none of my business, but I’m glad he’s feeling fulfilled by victory. Raducanu has broken Kovinic again, and looks very nicely grooved. It’s frankly ridiculous how good she is, and how sorted she has the mental game of progressing through the rounds with minimum fuss but maximum prejudice. This is terrific from Daniel, finding that first serve while Murray struggles for consistency. He gets to 30-0, then curls one off the frame and onto the line for three set points! when it’s your day it’s your day, and another big serve is all he needs! Murray 4-6 4-6 Daniel Raducanu has consolidated for 2-0 and Medvedev for 3-1, both in set one. Murray holds to 15, forcing Daniel to serve for 2-0 following a sit-down. He’s held it together really well so far, and this game will be about getting his first go in. If he can, he’s nearly through; if he can’t Murray will drag him into deep waters. Anyone got a spare eye? Kyrgios has just saved two break points, before going long, and now trails Medvedev 1-2, while Raducanu has broken Kovinic in game one and Auger-Aliassime has beaten Davidovich Fokina 7-6(4) in the fifth of five tiebreaks. Phew. I hurt just thinking about it (and because I’m hurting because I’m old). And 30-0, Daniel nets a backhand; can Murray get into the rallies and make him wonder? He cannot, a big serve inciting a netted return and another ace sealing the deal. He leads 6-4 5-3 and is playing superbly here. Medvedev races through deuce to hold while, on Court, Raducanus and Kovinic are away. Excellent from Murray, coming back from 0-30 with four points in a row, spurred by an ace; he’s going to make Daniel work for this while, on Laver, Medvedev has just saved two points to stop Kyrgios breaking him as the first time of asking. Murray misses a chance for 30-all, and at 40-15, Daniel mashes an ace down the middle to lead 4-2 in set two. Also going on: Emma Raducanu will soon be away against Danka Kovinic, so i’ll be watching that one too. Life is good! Elsewhere, a brutal match between Davidovich Fokina and Auger-Aliassime is nearly over; they’re in the final set playing their fifth breaker of the match, and it’s 2-2, four hours 14 minutes in. Expletive ouch. Murray is struggling here, a blazing backhand down the line giving Daniel 30-all and second later Murray is facing a break point that’d mean four games lost in a row. Murray, though, isn’t going away, and forces a long backhand, then manufactures a volley at the net, fashioning a winner from a ball smacked right at him, to save a further break point. Back and forth we go, before a Daniel backhand return flies wide, and Murray is still alive; of course he is. What a ridiculous competitor and human being! Still, Daniel leads 6-4 3-2. Thanks Mike and morning, afternoon and evening all. Daniil Medvedev and Nick Kyrgios are making their way onto court, so I’ll be watching them as well as Murray and Daniel, but know that Daniel has just consolidated to lead 6-4 3-1. Second set: Murray 4-6, 1-2 Daniel* (*denotes next server) Murray falls to 15-30 and then has a word with the umpire about something before settling back into his service stance. Is he rattled? He could be. Daniel on the other hand appears invigorated by that previous hold and he manages to break, securing the game with a backhand winner. And with that, I’ll hand you over to Daniel Harris who will take you through the evening session, which is under way with some tasty encounters. Bye for now. Second set: *Murray 4-6, 1-1 Daniel (*denotes next server) An epic hold for Daniel in an 11 minute 36 second game! The Japanese, for the first time, lets his high level momentarily slip early on. He falls to 15-40. But he saves the first break point with an overhead that a scrambling Murray cannot reach, before a wicked forehand sets up another overhead winner - and saves another break point. Murray jumps on the overhead bandwagon at deuce and he has another break chance. A brain fade robs the Scot though - he opts for a cute backhand drop shot as he runs towards the net, which falls short but he makes up for it on the second deuce with a soft hands at the net. Break point No 4. My goodness, Daniel lands a pearler of a drop shot! We continue until finally, after four deuces, 16 points and a total of four break points saved, Daniel holds serve. Second set: Murray 4-6, 1-0 Daniel* (*denotes next server) Back to the game on John Cain Arena, where Murray is facing an examination of his serve. He needs just under three minutes to pass. And here’s the latest on Djokovic. The players change over... which gives me time to remind you that the Women’s Ashes begins today, more specifically in about half an hour. If cricket’s your thing, you can join my colleague Tanya Aldred for every ball of the first T20 of the series: First set: *Murray 4-6 Daniel (*denotes next server) Daniel is very impressive once more as he secures the first set! At 30-0 he advances to the net to finish off in clinical fashion and bring up three set points... he needs just one of them, an ace sealing the deal. High quality tennis from the world No 120, and Murray will have to come from behind if he is to progress. First set: Murray 4-5 Daniel* (*denotes next server) Murray hangs onto Daniel’s coattails with a hold. But the Japanese will now serve for the opening set. Meanwhile, bored of the Djokovic saga? Strap yourselves in... First set: *Murray 3-5 Daniel (*denotes next server) Another two break points fall Murray’s way, but he can’t convert this time as Daniel rallies, firing a forehand winner before Murray returns into the net. The Japanese has 1o winners to his name so far. First set: Murray 3-4 Daniel* (*denotes next server) A perfectly-executed drop shot from Daniel puts him 30-15 up on Murray’s serve. The Scot then finds the net with a regulation forehand - and he’s apoplectic about the mistake and the position it puts him in. Break point for Daniel... and a double fault at this stage certainly doesn’t help Murray’s mood. The Japanese breaks through again! First set: *Murray 3-3 Daniel (*denotes next server) Murray has a chance to break back but he squanders it with a weak volley with an open court at his mercy. Daniel gets there and saves the break - Murray should have finished that off, no question. He gets another chance soon enough though, and this time he takes it, a lovely sliced backhand setting it up. We’re back on serve in the first! First set: Murray 2-3 Daniel* (*denotes next server) Of course Murray was involved in an epic opener on Tuesday - five sets of high drama against Nikoloz Basilashvili. How much will that encounter impact him today? We’ll find out soon enough, but for now he holds, to love, without expending too much energy. First set: *Murray 1-3 Daniel (*denotes next server) Murray’s off with a few of groundstrokes here as Daniel consolidates his break and opens up a two-game lead early on in this first set. First set: Murray 1-2 Daniel* (*denotes next server) An epic game that lasts nearly 14 minutes! Murray gets funky at the outset with a drop shot - Daniel reaches it, but his ball in out at the baseline, before the Japanese pulls out a sensational backhand to force deuce. Some of his shotmaking so far has been very impressive. Murray then faces break point but saves it with an unreturnable serve before the Scot shows he’s capable of making some nice shots too, with a couple of forehand winners including one down the line on the fourth deuce of the game. The game continues to swing back and forth, Murray is forced to save a second break point, Daniel accidentally smashes the ball into the umpire in her chair, we go to more deuces and when a third break chance comes along, Daniel pounces! First set: *Murray 1-1 Daniel (*denotes next server) And a comfortable start for Daniel on his serve. He holds to love. First set: Murray 1-0 Daniel* (*denotes next server) Off we go then, with the sun squeezed out beyond the tramlines at this time of day on Rod Laver. Murray holds his first service game, although Daniel gives an indication of what’s he’s capable of at 0-40 down with a ferocious forehand winner. No dramas for Murray though. Oh dear, the first “siuuus” heard, and we haven’t even started yet. In-form 12th seed Elena Rybakina was forced to retire from her match against China’s Zhang Shuai due to injury. The Kazakh player was trailing 6-4, 1-0 when she had to throw in the towel, and that early finish is why we are about to welcome Murray and Daniel onto John Cain Arena on time. That match about to start shortly, with the players just being introduced onto court (Murray gets a huge cheers from what looks like a decent crowd - pretty near to the 50% capacity by my reckoning). And while we’re on the subject of local hopes, Alex De Minaur is safely into the third round, posting a comfortable 6-4, 6-4, 6-2 win over Kamil Majchrzak on Rod Laver Arena. De Minaur next plays Pablo Andújar. “I know Pablo very well,” De Minaur said. “I’ve hit a lot with him. You know, he’s a terrific competitor. He’s had some amazing wins. So, it’s a great position for me to be in. Look, I’m just enjoying it every second of it. Keeping the positive vibes going and hopefully...” De Minaur said his plans for this evening involve Nick Kyrgios. “Of course I’m tuning in! I’m pretty sure all of Australia is tuning in! It is going to be a hell of a match. Expect, you know, showtime from Nick. Expect one of the most solid guys on tour with Daniil. It will be a popcorn match. I’m definitely not going to miss it.” Also earlier today, local favourite Sam Stosur’s singles career finally came to an end with defeat to Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova. The former US Open champion lost 6-2, 6-2 but was showered with tributes after the match. She bows out as a true great of Australian tennis, writes my colleague Emma Kemp: Briefly, the tale of the tape so far on day four of the 2022 Australian Open (courtesy of Reuters): Third seed Garbine Muguruza, a runner-up at Melbourne Park two years ago, suffered a shock 6-3, 6-3 defeat at the hands of French veteran Alize Cornet. “Today, I stepped on the court thinking I’d have fun. That’s the best way I play. There was a lack of fun sometimes in my 16-year career. But right now I want to enjoy it,” Cornet said. “I don’t know how many years I have left. Today was a perfect gift.” Joining Muguruza in making an early exit was sixth seed Anett Kontaveit, who lost 6-2 6-4 to 19-year-old Clara Tauson - the girls’ singles champion at Melbourne Park in 2019. Former French Open champion Iga Swiatek booked her place in the third round, the seventh seed advancing with a 6-2, 6-2 win over Sweden’s Rebecca Peterson. Britain’s Dan Evans, the number 24 seed, moved through to the next round after his opponent, Arthur Rinderknech, pulled out with a wrist injury. Last year’s quarter-finalist Andrey Rublev made short work of Ricardas Berankis with a 6-4, 6-2, 6-0 win over the unseeded Lithuanian to reach the third round for the fourth time. The Russian fifth seed next meets Marin Cilic who beat Norbert Gombos 6-2, 6-3, 3-6, 7-6(6). Diego Schwartzman, seeded 13th, fell to a 7-6(6) 6-4 6-4 defeat against world number 175 Christopher O’Connell, while Maxime Cressy outclassed Tomas Machac 6-1, 3-6, 6-1, 7-6(5) to reach the third round of a major for the first time. Second see Aryna Sabalenka surrendered the opening set, like she did in her opener, before outclassing China’s Wang Xinyu 1-6 6-4 6-2 on Rod Laver Arena to reach the third round. Local wildcard Maddison Inglis followed up her victory over US Open runner-up Leylah Fernandez with a 7-6(4), 2-6, 6-2 win over American qualifier Hailey Baptiste. Daria Kasatkina eased past Magda Linette 6-2 6-3 to set up a third-round clash with seventh seed Iga Swiatek. Kasatkina has beaten the former French Open champion in three sets when they faced off for the first time in Eastbourne last year. Here we go again. Day four at Melbourne Park and the tennis is relentless. We’ll immediately turn our focus to five-time finalist Andy Murray and his second-round encounter with Taro Daniel. It’s wildcard v qualifier, and given it’s Murray, entertainment is virtually guaranteed (most probably over the course of five sets). The evening session on Rod Laver Arena kicks off with a blockbuster between Daniil Medvedev and Nick Kyrgios, while across Melbourne Park on Margaret Court Arena US Open champion Emma Raducanu continues her bid to win a second grand slam against Danka Kovinic. Plus lots, lots more. Feel free to email or tweet @mike_hytner if you have anything to get off your chest. Otherwise, let’s crack on.The team behind Disney+’s highly anticipated drama about Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee have revealed there was pushback about one possibly controversial scene. According to the show’s makers, a scene featuring Sebastian Stan (who plays Lee) having a conversation with an animatronic version of his own genitals initially baffled the network who commissioned the programme. “There was gentle pushback, because you’ve got to push back a little when a talking penis is presented to you. But Hulu was extremely supportive,” writer Robert Siegel told Variety, of the network who produced the show, before Disney+ decided to bring it to the UK. Siegel says the scene was not his own invention, but hails from Lee’s autobiography, Tommyland. “As much as I’d like to take credit for that, I was simply adapting a chapter from [Lee’s] memoir,” says Siegel. “I think it might be a first [for television].” Pam &amp; Tommy tells the tale of Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee’s infamous 90s sex tape, which became publicly available after it was stolen from a safe in their house. Starring alongside Stan is one-time Downton Abbey star Lily James as the ex-Baywatch actor. It is based on a 2014 Rolling Stone article, Pam and Tommy: The Untold Story of the World’s Most Infamous Sex Tape, which details how, once they discovered the tape was missing, they tried to contain the leak. Shooting the scene involved a team of specialist technicians, responsible for bringing the replica genitals to life. “You’ve got four puppeteers working with an animatronic penis,” commented director and executive producer Craig Gillespie, who described the shooting process as “just awkward”. The programme was created without involvement from the real-life celebrities who inspired it, with Anderson not responding to the show’s attempts to contact her. “She’s chosen not to engage,” says Siegel. “So we’ve respected her desire not to be involved.” Her friend Courtney Love has previously commented on the show’s production, however. In May, she wrote a now-deleted Facebook post stating that the sex tape was a “form of sexual assault”, being highly critical of Pam &amp; Tommy for revisiting the incident. “My heart goes out to Pammy, further causing her complex trauma,” Love wrote. According to Stan, Lee had a slightly warmer reaction, being “touched and appreciative that I took the time to even reach out and connect”. However, he didn’t want to become formally associated with the project. The contentious scene appears in the second of the series’ eight-episode run. The genitals are voiced by actor Jason Mantzoukas, whose credits include playing The Good Place’s Derek and Adrian Pimento in Brooklyn Nine-Nine.When a blizzard struck Toronto earlier this week, Greg Cooke did what he and his neighbours knew was expected of them. They grabbed their shovels and worked for hours to clear the sidewalks from snowdrifts that nearly reached their knees. Mindful of elderly residents with trouble walking, they made sure to clear all the way to the edge of the street. The next morning, Cooke went outside to find a snowplow had passed through once again to widen the road and pushed all the snow back on to the sidewalk. “They push up these solid, chunky boulders of snow. And so it was even worse for people to pass through than it would have been if we hadn’t done anything,” said Cooke. “It was comically absurd.” Monday’s storm battered the country’s largest city for less than a day, but its effects have nonetheless highlighted Toronto’s infrastructure vulnerabilities, its lingering inequities – and its dependence on cars. While the city’s struggles with snow have often prompted sneers from other regions of the country – Toronto’s government is still mocked for calling in the army to help dig it out from a series of relentless snowfalls in 1999 – critics say many of the challenges are the result of policy failures that prioritize vehicles over pedestrians. At its peak, Monday’s blizzard left hundreds of cars stranded on roads and highways across the city, with many of the vehicles simply abandoned by frustrated drivers The city’s transit commission said during the worst of the storm, 540 buses were stranded on the road for hours – including one salvaged by a group of Torontonians – and the subway system was forced to shut down. The city’s mayor, John Tory, warned on Tuesday that it would take days to get the roads fully cleared, and 600 road plows, 360 sidewalk plows and 200 salt trucks were deployed. But on Wednesday, residents were still posting images of sidewalks and bike lanes fully covered in snow. Meanwhile, the city’s school board announced eight schools would remained closed for a third day after the contractor hired to remove snow was unable to complete the work. “The last couple days have highlighted how close to failure our transportation system operates all the time – because we base it around cars,” said Shoshanna Saxe, a civil engineering professor at the University of Toronto. “For those of us who had the privilege of not needing to drive anywhere, it was a fun day in the snow. But for people who needed to drive, they were forced to take risks. Some were stranded for hours on highways. Doctors and nurses had to abandon their cars in the road to get to hospitals in the middle of the biggest wave of Covid we’ve ever seen,” she said. Saxes pointed to recent efforts in Sweden, where sidewalk clearing is prioritized ahead of roads. The aim of policies is to address systematic shortcomings that have an outsized effect on people with mobility issues, including those in wheelchairs, health issues and parents pushing small children in strollers. “When you decide not to plow a certain neighbourhood for a few days, you’re also now limiting the ability for someone with a disability to actually leave their home,” said Maayan Ziv, a Toronto-based photographer and founder of AccessNow. “Accessibility, in general, is often an afterthought.” Because she relies on a power wheelchair to move around the city, Ziv says the snow often forces her to cancel meetings and appointments and can strand her at home for days. Toronto city council recently approved nearly C$1.4bn ($US1.1bn) in spending on future snow clearing – a victory for residents who have long complained that sidewalks are inaccessible. But the winning bidders in the contract have warned it could take more than a year to obtain the hundreds of vehicles needed to do the job. “We live in this cold part of the world where it does snow every year, and yet, we’re still facing these issues. And when the city is failing to recognize those needs, it falls in on kind of the goodwill of neighbours,” said Ziv. “There is beauty in that and people working together and supporting each other. But an entire city can’t – and shouldn’t – rely on good Samaritans with their shovels”The government should adopt a programme of “helicopter money” to support households hit by escalating energy bills, according to a leading thinktank with Labour and Tory MPs on its advisory board. The Social Market Foundation (SMF) said the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, should support millions of low- and middle-income households through the cost of living crisis with a simple programme of US-style one-off cash payments worth £8.5bn. The proposal comes two weeks before the energy regulator, Ofgem, announces a rise of as much as £500 on the annual price cap on energy bills from April. In a blog written by the SMF chief economist, Dr Aveek Bhattacharya, the thinktank urged Sunak to reject the overcomplicated solutions being put forward by the energy industry that would encourage people to use more energy and prop up ailing suppliers. Bhattacharya said a cheque for £300 should be sent to households that did not have a higher rate taxpayer, with an additional £200 for those on universal credit or legacy benefits, helping those who rely on the basic state pension or disability benefits. He said: “An emergency cash payment would also have the benefit of being a clear one-off intervention, whereas other proposals would risk committing the government to costly ongoing subsidies, that it would find politically difficult to end.” When the pandemic hit in 2020 the Trump administration in the US rejected mechanisms to subsidise workers through a furlough scheme or welfare benefits, preferring a system of oneoff cash payments, described as “helicopter money”, to taxpayers on low and middle incomes. Bhattacharya suggested the payments could be styled “Rishi’s cola (cost of living assistance)” and bear the chancellor’s signature. The proposal follows calls from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, an anti-poverty charity, for an “immediate emergency payment for people on the lowest incomes” to help them through the coming months. Sunak is known to be considering a deal with energy companies to reduce the price cap to prevent inflation from escalating in April. A loan of as much as £20bn would be needed to maintain bills near current levels, according to energy industry leaders. Inflation rose to 5.4% in December and, according to the Bank of England, will reach 6% in April when the energy cap is raised. Bhattacharya said that by staggering the payments over several months “any contribution to rising inflation can be minimised, and potentially avoided”. A Treasury spokesperson said: “These measures would cost £8.5bn, roughly the equivalent of the government’s investment to tackle elective backlogs in the health service over the next three years.” The spokesperson said support was already being targeted towards the lowest paid, by cutting the universal credit taper, worth £2.2bn, and increasing the national minimum wage by £1,000 a year on average for a full-time worker. “We have also frozen alcohol and fuel duties to keep costs down and are providing targeted support to help households with their energy bills,” they added.Senate Democrats failed again to pass sweeping new voting protections on Wednesday, in what may be the most brutal blow yet to efforts to strengthen protections for voters at a perilous moment for US democracy. Just as they have done four other times in recent months, all 50 Republicans united in their opposition to the measure. They relied on the filibuster, a Senate rule that requires 60 votes to advance legislation to a final vote. Despite heavy pressure from Joe Biden and fellow Democrats, two senators, Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, have dug in defending the measure, preventing Democrats from getting rid of it. In a rebuke to Biden, Sinema gave a speech on the Senate floor last week making it clear she would not support changes to the filibuster. Manchin has also consistently made his support clear. “I will not vote to eliminate or weaken the filibuster. The filibuster plays an important role in protecting our democracy from the transitory passions of the majority and respecting the input of the minority in the Senate,” he said in a speech on Wednesday. Their opposition set up a showdown as the ultimately doomed bill was taken up for discussion on Wednesday. Late in the evening, Republicans used the filibuster to vote to end debate on the bill, effectively blocking it from advancing. Immediately afterwards, Democrats moved to hold a vote to try and change the filibuster rules anyway. The effort failed 52-48, with Manchin and Sinema voting with all 50 Republicans to preserve the filibuster. Sinema loudly said “aye” when it was her turn to vote in favor of preserving the filibuster changes. “I am profoundly disappointed that the United States Senate has failed to stand up for our democracy. I am disappointed — but I am not deterred,” Biden said in a statement. “Our Administration will continue to fight to pass federal legislation to secure the right to vote. We will not stop fighting against the anti-voter legislation that Republican legislatures continue to push at the state level—and to champion and support state and local elected officials who work to enact pro-voter legislation,” Kamala Harris said in a separate statement. “Isn’t protecting voting rights, the most fundamental wellspring of this democracy, more important than a rule?” Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, said just before the vote on the filibuster change. Speaking on NBC’s Today show on Thursday morning, Harris also said: “We as Americans cannot allow this blatant erosion of democracy, that’s the topic and let’s not get distracted by political gamesmanship.” She added that foreign leaders “are asking what is going on with voting rights in America.” Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia said Democrats were seeking to restore a “talking filibuster”, where senators have to hold the floor of the US senate to prevent a vote on legislation. “We’re going to take up a rules reform proposal that will not blow up the senate,” he said on the Senate floor Wednesday evening. “It switches the secret filibuster into a public filibuster. It makes both parties work on the floor to get the kind of extended public debate we joined together to seek.” Senator Angus King of Maine, who once defended the filibuster, said the process that was in place was a “second cousin once removed of the filibuster”. “I’d venture to say if we had the rules we have today, we wouldn’t have the Voting Rights Act and the Civil Rights Act,” he said. Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader, described Wednesday as “in all likelihood, the most important day in the history of the Senate.” He said the Democratic proposal was just “smoke and mirrors”, and accused Democrats of undertaking a plot to “to break the Senate”. The voting rights measure has failed before, but Wednesday marks the first time they have taken a formal vote on changing the filibuster. Its likely failure marks a profound setback for Biden’s presidential agenda. The president spent an enormous amount of political capital in recent weeks pressuring Manchin and Sinema to support rule changes to the filibuster, giving a speech in Atlanta and traveling to Capitol Hill to try to get support. In stirring remarks just before the vote on the voting rights bill, Raphael Warnock, a Democrat from Georgia, said senators could not praise the legacy of Dr Martin Luther King, Jr while voting against voting rights. “You cannot remember MLK and dismember his legacy at the same time,” Warnock said. “I will not sit quietly while some make Dr King a victim of identity theft.” “Those of us who are students of Dr King, I know I have, often wonder ‘what would I have done if I was alive during the civil rights movement?’ I know that we all would like to think we had a fraction, just a small fraction of the courage it took for John Lewis to cross that Edmund Pettus Bridge,” he said. “Well, for those of us who serve in the United States Senate in this moment, in this moral moment, we do not have to wonder … we don’t have to wonder what we would have done. I submit that what we would have done back then we are doing right now. History is watching us.” The bill that failed on Wednesday, Freedom to Vote: John R Lewis Act, combined two major voting rights bills into a single mega bill. It would have set a national baseline for election access, guaranteeing 15 days of early voting as well as online voter registration. It protected local election officials from harassment and partisan interference in their jobs and curbed gerrymandering, the severe distortion of partisan district lines. It also restored a key piece of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that required places with a history of voting discrimination to get their changes approved by either the justice department or a federal court in Washington before they go into effect. The bill’s failure comes as states across the US have waged an aggressive effort to restrict voting access after the 2020 election, which saw record turnout. In total, 19 states have passed 34 bills that restrict voting access, making it harder to request and return a mail-in ballot, among other measures, even though there was no evidence of fraud, either in mail-in voting or otherwise, in 2020. Many of those efforts are obviously aimed at Black and other minority voters who helped Democrats win in 2020, activists say. At the same time, Republicans in state legislatures are redrawing electoral districts at the state legislative and congressional level to virtually guarantee their re-election for the next decade. Seeing Democratic gains in traditionally Republican districts, Republicans have redrawn the lines to simply make many districts uncompetitive for the next decade, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. There is also growing concern about what experts call election subversion – efforts to inject more partisanship into election administration and counting votes.The little steel bulbs that litter parks, roadsides and city centres – the discarded canisters from Britain’s second favourite drug, laughing gas – cause misery to many communities. But now one blacksmith has found an innovative use for them: turning them into handmade kitchen knives. The prevalence of the canisters has prompted some councils to impose local bans, while the home secretary is keen to outlaw them nationally. But Tim Westley’s handmade kitchen knives are gaining a cult following among environmentally conscious foodies after being endorsed by chefs committed to low waste. Since promising to make at least two-thirds of his blades from empty “nos” canisters, Westley knives are selling in record time on his website, Clement Knives. “I usually make about five a week, and when they go on the site there’s a rush to buy them, especially in the run-up to Christmas. This week it was only two or three minutes before they were all gone,” he said. “I’d like to think customers are buying them because they like the zero-waste concept rather than that they just want a knife.” Westley, 33, a former artist-in-residence at London’s Museum of Water &amp; Steam, moved his forge to south-west Scotland last year. He has always been committed to knife making using recycled materials, including metal dredged from canals with magnets. Then, on walks with his dog, Mayday, he became troubled by the sight of littered piles of canisters, and worried that they posed a risk to cyclists of skidding. Last year his friend Douglas McMaster, the founder of Silo, the UK’s first zero-waste restaurant, challenged Westley to recycle the canisters into knives. The resulting experiment proved such a success that Westley has promised to only use recycled canisters for all his blades. For the handles he uses recycled plastic. According to Home Office figures, nitrous oxide, or laughing gas, is the second most popular drug among 16- to 24-year-olds, behind cannabis. The government is consulting on making the possession of laughing gas a crime. However, the drug charity Release has cautioned against criminalising what is a relatively benign substance if heavy use is avoided. But there is consensus that laughing gas’s popularity has created an ugly littering problem. Westley is doing his bit to reduce this modern form of waste, using traditional blacksmiths’ techniques. For a typical 210mm blade he uses 10 nos canisters in a process he says is laborious but worthwhile. He first cuts off the ends of the canisters with an angle grinder, then opens and flattens them with a hammer on an anvil. The flattened pieces of soft steel are then forge welded on either side of a harder carbon steel used for the sharpened edge. Westley said: “It’s call San Mai, which has been used for years by Japanese knife makers. They use two soft layers of steel around a hard steel in the middle. The only difference is that I use nos canisters for the soft steel. It’s using an ancient technique to address a modern problem.” He added: “It is more hassle, but it’s worth it because we should be using more of the materials we already have. My knives are just as good, if not better, made with materials found off the street. And there is no industrial processes involved, so there is zero waste.” In fact, Westley says the knives use more waste than they create. All the steel off-cuts go to a scrap metal dealer and the worn sanding belts used for polishing the blades are turned into plant pots. Westley gave the first nos canister knife he made to McMaster and has been supplying his restaurant with knives ever since. McMaster said they equalled any knife he had used, despite their grungy appearance caused by the recycled materials involved. His chef colleagues at the low-waste London pizzeria Crate are also using them, and McMaster is planning to feature Westley’s knives on his Zero Waste Cooking School YouTube channel.The Sun has baffled social media users with a Thursday edition front page that appears to be attempting to support Boris Johnson via a pie-chart made with a real pork pie, and the pun headline that Johnson is “crust” ahead. The pie is divided into three sections, labelled “End of Covid rules”, “Partygate inquiry” and “Revolting MPs”. The largest portion of the pie – presumably the positive news in the paper’s view that Covid restrictions in England are ending – has an arrow pointing to some mustard saying “Cutting the mustard”. On the other side a different label suggests that the prime minister is still “in a pickle”. As one observer noted, that’s not really how pie charts work. And as another noted, it’s not really clear how they got there anyway. Some credited it to the famous “boffins” that the tabloid often refers to in any story featuring scientists. Several people on social media linked the bizarre front page to the fact that the newspaper’s deputy editor, James Slack, is himself implicated in the “partygate” scandal, having been forced to issue an apology for a Downing Street party held in his honour during Covid restrictions as he left his role as Johnson’s head of communications. Others likened it to something out of the Chris Morris television news satire, Brass Eye, in particular one scene where Morris stands in front of a similarly bizarre chart. The reported attempt to oust the prime minister by a group of Tory MPs who had been elected in 2019 in the “red wall” seats has been named the “pork pie plot” by supporters of Johnson. Ostensibly, it refers to the fact that Alicia Kearns is one of the more prominent figures, and she is the MP for Rutland and Melton, which includes Melton Mowbray where the famous pork pies are made. However, some observers have noted that it carries more than a whiff of snobbery about it, looking down on newly elected Conservative MPs from the north of England. The Sun’s front page may warrant further investigation by the Twitter account Graph Crimes, which regularly exposes people making bizarre claims via charts on social media. Or possibly it is just a thankless task to try to analyse it at all. • This article was amended on 21 January 2022. The image of Chris Morris is taken from Brass Eye, not The Day Today as an earlier version said.The reopening of Australia’s most isolated state has been suspended indefinitely to allow West Australians to get booster shots, as the more transmissible Omicron variant rips through the nation. Just one month after promising that from 5 February double-vaccinated interstate and international travellers would be allowed to enter Western Australia without quarantine, the WA premier, Mark McGowan, has said that all entrants will need to self-isolate for 14 days, be triple-dose vaccinated and take tests. “From 12.01am on Saturday 5 February, the hard border will stay, with new settings that will have a focus on both safety and compassion,” McGowan said. The premier did not provide a new date for when quarantine-free travel would be allowed into WA. However, the list of people exempt from the hard borders will increase. People attending funerals, court, visiting those in palliative care or who are terminally ill, or those with strong recent connections, will now be allowed into the state after testing and quarantine. McGowan labelled the Omicron Covid spread a “new state of emergency” but said the border rules would be reviewed during the coming weeks. “Unfortunately, the world changed in December, Omicron arrived,” he said. “It would be irresponsible and reckless for the state government to ignore the facts and ignore the reality of the situation playing out on the east coast. “Allowing hundreds or thousands of Omicron-infected people to fly straight into Perth from 5 February with no testing, no quarantine and no public health measures would cause a flood of Covid across our state. It would cause a surge in cases, a surge in hospitalisations, and result in thousands of people not being able to work or go to school. We know that bad health outcomes lead to economic pain.” Under the new rules, international travellers will be required to quarantine in a hotel for seven days and at home for seven. McGowan said the decision was based on research showing that people who received a third dose of vaccine were 64% protected against infection compared with just 4% protection when inoculated twice. He did not cite the source of the research. “In addition, protection against severe disease is maintained at 80% to 90% for people with two doses, but increases to 98% for people with three doses,” he said. For two years, as the Covid pandemic has stretched hospitals and killed millions across the globe, WA has remained isolated from the nation, and the world, and has been mostly virus-free. WA has a third dose rate of just 28% – by 5 February that rate is expected to climb to between 35 and 38%. It is unknown when the state will hit the new 80% or 90% triple-vaccination goalpost, but McGowan said it would take some time. Perth airport has 45 flights scheduled for 5 February and the tourism council chief executive, Evan Hall, said the industry had been taking bookings, recruiting staff and securing supplies for the reopening. Thousands of passengers were due to fly into Perth airport on 5 February. The surprise announcement came as the Australian Nursing Federation state secretary, Mark Olson, pushed for the opening to be delayed. There are 79 confirmed active cases in WA. Of these, 23 are in hotel quarantine and 56 are in self-quarantine. No cases are currently in hospital. McGowan labelled the Omicron variant an unforeseen catastrophe and said he was watching what was happening on the other side of the nation, citing surging cases in New South Wales. “I mean, does anyone deny what’s going on over there is not that? People aren’t going to work, hospitals are overflowing, hundreds of people are dying, and the state’s ICUs have got huge numbers of people, lots of people on ventilators.” WA’s safe transition plan, which was announced in November, set the way for the state’s reopening based on Delta variant. That plan has been replaced. “If we can hold back this current Omicron outbreak, we will be one of the only places in the world that can achieve a high third dose rate before we reach widespread community transmission – something worth striving for,” McGowan said. “It is worth saving lives, reducing hospitalisations and limiting the number of people with Covid and becoming very ill.”Almost £1.2bn worth of fruit, veg and bread is binned in the UK every year, with one in five consumers stating the reason they waste so much is they “don’t know what to cook”. Close to 76m items – an average of nearly three a household – are thrown away every week, according to data based on research by the Censuswide, which asked consumers how much food they threw away. The scale of the waste is staggering, with 914m potatoes, 733m tomatoes and 728m carrots ending up in dustbins each year. More than half of the 2,000 consumers polled on behalf of Sainsbury’s admitted they felt guilty about the amount of food they threw away. A fifth, however, explained the reason they wasted so much was they did not know what to cook. A similar proportion said they could reduce their food waste if they knew more recipes. The issue of food waste is coming to the fore as households, hit with rising shopping and energy bills, struggle to make ends meet. The habit is also terrible for the planet because of the high greenhouse gas emissions associated with food production. Sainsbury’s said the average UK household threw away 142 carrots, onions, tomatoes, courgettes, potatoes and loaves of bread a year. Nevertheless, the survey found Britons started 2022 with ambitions to mend their ways, with one in five resolving to cut their food waste and one in 10 aiming to bring down their carbon footprint and buy secondhand products. To help shoppers tackle food waste the supermarket is promoting recipes for easy-to-make and affordable soups that use up vegetables that might otherwise get chucked out. The recipes include soups such as roasted tomato and pepper, and pea and leek, which it says can feed a family of four for under £5. Mark Given, the chief marketing officer at Sainsbury’s, said there was a common misconception that making soup from scratch was difficult. “We’re determined to show our customers that this isn’t the case whilst providing them with healthier options that will help them reduce their food waste, one bowl at a time.”The former Conservative MP Christian Wakeford has alleged that party whips told him he would lose funding for a new high school in his constituency if he did not vote with the government. The claim came as the senior Conservative William Wragg urged MPs to report government ministers, whips and advisers to the Speaker – and even the police – for what he claimed was attempted blackmail of some colleagues suspected of possibly opposing Boris Johnson. Anger among Johnson critics escalated again on Thursday after sources briefed that rebels were losing their nerve. Another MP opposing Johnson denied that letters of no confidence had been withdrawn after Wakeford defected to Labour. “These briefings of withdrawals are pure invention from No 10,” one said. “Wakeford may have stayed some people’s hands yesterday but this isn’t going into reverse.” Speaking at a Labour event on Thursday, Wakeford backed up the claims by Wragg that threats involving public money were made by the whips. “I was threatened that I would not get a school for Radcliffe if I did not vote in one particular way,” he said. “This is a town that has not had a high school for the best part of 10 years. “How would you feel when they hold back the regeneration of a town for a vote? It didn’t sit comfortably. That was the start of me questioning my place, where I was and ultimately to where I am now.” Wragg, who chairs the public administration and constitutional affairs committee (PACAC), which looks into the work of government and the civil service, said whips had threatened to withdraw funding from the constituencies of MPs opposing Johnson. Speaking at the start of a hearing of the PACAC, attended by Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, and Alex Chisholm, the department’s most senior civil servant, Wragg said he believed the actions breached the ministerial code. “In recent days a number of members of parliament have faced pressures and intimidation from members of the government because of their declared or assumed desire for a vote of confidence in the party leadership of the prime minister,” he said. “It is, of course, the duty of the government whips’ office to secure the government’s business in the House of Commons. However, it is not their function to breach the ministerial code in threatening to withdraw investment from members of parliaments’ constituencies which are funded from the public purse. “Additionally, reports to me and others of members of staff at No 10 Downing Street, special advisers, government ministers and others encouraging the publication of stories in the press seeking to embarrass those who they suspect of lacking confidence in the prime minister are similarly unacceptable.” “The intimidation of a member of parliament is a serious matter,” he added. “Moreover, the reports of which I’m aware would seem to constitute blackmail. As such it would be my general advice to colleagues to report these matters to the Speaker of the House of Commons and the commissioner of the Metropolitan police. And they are also welcome to contact me at any time.” Wragg asked Barclay and Chisholm to convey his concerns to ministers and the civil service, which they said they would. Johnson said he had seen no evidence to support the claim made by Wragg. A No 10 spokesperson said: “We are not aware of any evidence to support what are clearly serious allegations. If there is any evidence to support these claims we would look at it very carefully.” The Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, said allegations about potentially criminal offences would be a matter for the police. “While the whipping system is long established, it is of course a contempt to obstruct members in the discharge of their duty or to attempt to intimidate a member in their parliamentary conduct by threats,” he said. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said the alleged threats to withdraw investment to force support for Johnson were “disgusting”. She said: “These are grave and shocking accusations of bullying, blackmail, and misuse of public money and must be investigated thoroughly.” Ed Davey, the Liberal Democrat leader, said the claims showed Downing Street was “now in full scorched earth mode”. He said: “All Boris Johnson cares about is saving his own skin. He’s acting more like a mafia boss than a prime minister.” Wragg was one of the first Conservative MPs to call publicly for Johnson to go because of allegations about lockdown-breaching Downing Street parties, saying the prime minister’s position had become untenable. For Johnson to face a confidence vote among his MPs, 54 of them – 15% of the total – would need to submit letters seeking this to the 1922 Committee, which represents backbenchers. There have been regular predictions this week that the total was about to be met, but it has not yet happened. Wakeford, introducing a speech by Rachel Reeves in Bury the day after his defection, said it was “a great honour, if not a surprise, to be here today”. He said Labour was “ready to provide an alternative government that this country can be proud of and deserves, and certainly not to be embarrassed by, that is one of the reasons I am here today.”.Care homes have said staff with Covid must not be allowed to return to work despite this week’s announcement by the health secretary, Sajid Javid, that legal self-isolation requirements are to be lifted across England. Barchester, one of the UK’s largest care home operators, said it would defy any attempt to weaken self-isolation rules for staff. The chief executive, Pete Calveley, said: “I don’t care what the government says, we are going to make sure we do a risk assessment on every individual. [Lifting self-isolation] is probably fine for the general public but not for care homes.” Announcing that “we must learn to live with Covid, in the same way we have to live with flu”, Javid said on Wednesday: “We’re looking to replace legal requirements on self-isolation with advice and guidance.” But with Omicron remaining highly infectious and deaths from the latest variant still rising, social care providers are being cautious and demanding clarification from the government. There were 194 deaths from Covid notified by England’s care homes in the week ending 14 January, up from 133 the previous week and the highest level since the beginning of March 2021 when the devastating Delta wave was receding from social care. Mike Padgham, who operates care homes in Yorkshire and is the chair of the Independent Care Group, said: “I can’t see it changing for us for some time. It is still dangerous. I think there will be face masks and PPE in care homes for several more months. The only concession I can see coming is more visitors than the three [that are currently allowed].” While lifting self-isolation could help ease the severe staffing crisis in social care, which is being exacerbated by Covid infections among workers, care operators have a duty to keep residents safe, and they also fear taking risks that could breach their insurance terms. The National Care Forum, which represents not-for-profit care homes, estimates that its members are working with only two-thirds of the staff they need when vacancies are added to sickness absence. Vacancy rates have almost doubled since April and now stand at 11% in England, the Care Quality Commission regulator said this week. Calveley, who oversees 250 care homes, said: “We will test people on day five and six and if they are negative they can return to work. If not, they can’t”. Barchester said there needed to be further analysis of the mortality caused by Omicron in care homes before it lifted the requirement for staff to self-isoate, but that could be possible in the future. Nadra Ahmed, the executive chair of the National Care Association, which represents independent care operators, said lifting self-isolation advice for care staff could leave operators liable if it resulted residents getting infected. “How does this impact on infection, especially with Omicron, which is so infectious and the spread is greater?” she said. “Are we saying that in a care setting now we are not worrying about infections?” On Thursday, the Department of Health and Social Care was unable to clarify what the plan to lift the self-isolation requirement meant for care workers. Vic Rayner, the executive director of the National Care Forum, said: “We need to understand what are the stages to get from where we are now, with isolation and funding to support staff who are isolating, to what appears to be a move to a discretionary position. The government needs to be really clear in advance about what this will mean for those working in health and care, and not leave it till the last gasp to outline a workable situation.”The personal library of Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the late US supreme court judge who became a liberal and feminist icon for championing women’s rights, is up for auction. Among more than 1,000 books from Ginsburg’s collection are legal textbooks from her student days, literature, feminist classics, and works by her fellow supreme court justices. A highlight of the online sale, which runs until 27 January, is Ginsburg’s personal and heavily annotated copy of 1957-58 Harvard Law Review, from the year she was a member. Another is a first edition of the feminist pioneer Gloria Steinem’s memoir My Life on the Road, inscribed: “To dearest Ruth – who paved the road for us all – with a lifetime of love and gratitude – Gloria.” Catherine Williamson, the head of the book department at Bonhams, which is selling the collection, said: “A person’s library can give us a sense of who the individual is and how she came to be. Justice Ginsburg’s library is no different, as it records her evolution from student (and voracious reader) to lawyer and law professor, to judge and finally, justice of the United States supreme court. “The books Justice Ginsburg chose to keep on her own bookshelf showcase the rich inner and intellectual life of one of the most influential women in recent American history.” Ginsburg, who died of pancreatic cancer at the age of 87 in September 2020, was only the second woman appointed to the US supreme court. She was nominated by Bill Clinton in 1993, and was known as a champion of gender equality and women’s rights and a defender of civil liberties. The vacancy she left on the supreme court bench was filled by a conservative judge, Amy Coney Barrett, nominated by Donald Trump in one of his last acts before losing the presidential election in November 2020. The sale includes books, photographs and ephemera dating from Ginsburg’s years as a law student through to her years at the supreme court. Among the novels are Catcher in the Rye, Lady Chatterley’s Lover and works by Leo Tolstoy and Alexis de Tocqueville. Kate Millet’s Sexual Politics and books by Susan Sontag and Erica Jong are among feminist classics in the collection. A copy of Toni Morrison’s Beloved is inscribed by the author to Ginsburg and her husband. A copy of Ginsburg’s own book, My Own Words – a collection of writings covering gender equality, opera, being Jewish and the workings of the supreme court – has an estimate of between $1,000 and $2,000.*Mariam and her sister were on the national boxing team and the youth boxing team. They were ordered by the Taliban to stop practising, and are frightened they may be targeted in future. The interview was interrupted by a hail of gunshots near the place they are staying. About two weeks after they took Kabul, the Taliban sent two gunmen to our doorstep. They told us: “Forget your dreams. The Islamic emirate is here now, you should stop boxing, and not go to the stadium.” I had been a member of the Afghan national boxing team when the Taliban arrived. It took me three years to make the team, my family and friends had supported me a lot, and I had done a lot of training before I was finally able to do it. My sister had been part of the youth team for several months. In August, me and my sister and the other team members went to the Olympic headquarters to prepare for a match, and the guards from the previous government took our identity cards to register us. We went to pick them up some days later, and we think some of the Taliban who were there followed us home. The next day, at around 3.30pm, some of them came to our house and asked for the girls who did boxing. We said we didn’t know what they were talking about, and had nothing to do with any sports. But they said: “We saw you at the stadium.” Then they told us to stop boxing. It was a very bad day, one that I will never forget. They were very brutal, and said: “How can you go to a stadium full of men and let them watch you exercising? As a woman, why are you even taking part in sports?” My brother is also a boxer, but the threats were only for me and my sister. We had already got a threat letter from the Taliban and we were scared they might come looking for us again, so we left our house and moved to a rented room. Things are difficult for us women who are involved in sport, we haven’t been able to go out at all. Two women boxers were beaten up by the Taliban in the street. My parents are now in danger because of our sports – we are afraid they will come back for us. I am sure that while the Islamic emirate is here, we will not be able to box, even if they do not kill us. If I could leave, I could continue with boxing, and my sister could continue her education. She is a teenager and high school is closed for girls. I really feel sad now, because I don’t have the boxing club, or money for expenses to practise on my own. I am am losing my skills. I originally started training as a runner, then I saw women doing boxing and there were only a few. I decided to get involved and helped inspire others. When the Taliban came, about 100 women were doing boxing. Please become our voice and tell the people of the world about our situation. Our lives are in danger because of our sport. *The name has been changed for this article.Lennie James has missed being on stage. It is where he started out and it’s still how he measures himself as an actor. But now that he is back in a rehearsal room, he’s got the jitters. “I’m petrified,” he says, a bearded head-and-shoulders on Zoom in a back room of the Old Vic theatre, London, in preparation for his part in Caryl Churchill’s two-hander A Number. The play, revived from 2002, is set in a near-future world where cloning is widespread and is structured round a series of confrontations between a father and a series of clones of his son. Exploring identity and what it means to be human, James will play the father to Paapa Essiedu’s son. “I’m more scared than I have ever been in my life … I don’t know what made me think it was a good idea but I was very much looking to be challenged, and this play certainly does that.” Now 56, James has come to be better known for his TV work, from Jed Mercurio’s Line of Duty (he played the fatally flawed DCI Tony Gates in the first series, which some still consider to be the best) to Morgan Jones in the post-apocalyptic dramas The Walking Dead and Fear the Walking Dead, and Nelly Rowe, another flawed hero, in Save Me. But the old muscle memory is twitching back to life, he says, and the pace of theatre affords him more thinking time, compared with the riptides of episodic TV drama where rehearsals are a luxury – “If you’re doing 16 episodes a season you’re getting a new script every eight days or so.” He was asked to be in A Number twice by two different directors, both times opposite Essiedu, so there is a certain serendipity to this theatre comeback after a 15-year gap. “One [director] came through me saying: ‘It should be you and Paapa.’ Another came through Paapa saying: ‘It should be you and Lennie.’ It makes it hard to say no because, whatever the experience turns out to be, the universe is trying to put the two of us together.” What does it mean, if anything, that both characters in Lyndsey Turner’s production are men of colour? “As far as I’m concerned, it is the story of all the things it’s about but it’s also the story of two Black men and the story of a Black father and a Black son. That’s only because it can’t be anything else – it’s me and Paapa.” James’s background in foster care has been well documented, and he drew on it in 2000 when he wrote the Bafta-nominated drama Storm Damage, about a teacher returning to the children’s home in which he grew up. James’s mother died when he was 10 years old after a long-term illness. He was taken into a children’s home in Tooting, south London, with his older brother, and later placed with a foster mother and siblings. He wrote the drama to “pay homage to my foster mother”, who set up a home after discovering that some children were getting lost within the system. “I was trying to tell the story of the first two years of my foster mother’s kids’ home and what it did to us as a family as well as what it did to the kids that came through.” The acting has always run in tandem with the writing. He performed in his first play at 16 but wrote a play just a year later that won a National Youth Theatre competition and was published by Faber. He has, in the past, talked whimsically of catching the acting bug after following a girl he liked into an audition. Was that really what set him off? It was more a search for belonging, he suggests, which he found on stage: “I went to an all-boys school, and if you could name a sport, we had a team for it. You didn’t have an identity unless you were picked for a team, even if that was the chess club. “When I did my first play [Just Good Friends] at the Cockpit theatre in Marylebone, central London, I got stopped walking across the road by the show’s choreographer, Karen Rabinowitz, who said: ‘Are you going to do this again, Lennie? … I think you can do it and I think you can do it professionally.’” So you were picked for the team? “That’s exactly what it felt like to me. That’s all I needed.” He saved up to pay for his auditions and got into two drama schools – the Guildhall School of Music &amp; Drama and Rada – but decided to go to the former when he realised he would be the only Black student in his year at Rada compared with three others at Guildhall. Still, he felt adrift at first. “Yes, it was lonely and I felt very vulnerable, very out of my depth. I had gone to drama school because I felt like I knew nothing about the profession and I went there to learn.” He felt pigeonholed as the “working-class Black guy” but luckily, because the school had a jazz course, he found affinity with some of the musicians. “There was the Reggae Philharmonic, the Jazz Warriors, Steve Williamson and the girls who played the violin in Soul II Soul. Bryn Terfel was there and we’d go for a drink with him … I spent quite a lot of time hanging out with them all in the basement.” He was a jobbing actor for the next two decades, but just before he turned 40 he left for LA. Why? “I had done at least one lead in a television show and a number of leads on stage. I was being told that I should be satisfied with that because that was a definition of success over here for someone who – as I took it – looked like me. I just wasn’t willing to let somebody else decide what my ambition should be. I wanted to challenge myself as an actor, to see what was possible. I landed there when I was a relative grownup and I seemed to arrive at the right time; it went stupidly well for me immediately.” Does he think an actor of colour would need to leave Britain for better parts today? “I don’t think we’ve got there but I do think the options for actors of colour are broader than they were. The UK has opened itself up a little bit to the possibility of us. I was part of a generation where it was accepted, particularly in television, that we weren’t necessarily representative of universal stories. I remember a friend who was on a long-running television show. He’s a Black actor and his character had had a number of love interests who had been exclusively white. He went to producers and said: ‘Why don’t we have someone who is Black next time?’ He was told: ‘We can’t have a Black-on-Black relationship because audiences won’t identify.’ That statement, I don’t believe, would be made by anybody in British television in 2022.” James has three daughters with his wife, Giselle Glasman, whom he met in youth theatre back in the day. Given that he has successfully hammered down the doors but knows the strain of it all too well, how would he feel if they wanted to go into the business? “Two of them are in it, behind the scenes, and one of them isn’t. I’m fine with that. I work in a profession that, ultimately, you do because your heart can’t let you do something else. So if my girls want to work in this industry, it’s got to be because they really want to and they can sustain themselves through the ups and the downs. So far, they’re managing that, and I’m exceptionally proud of all of them.” There is also the significant but absent influence of his mother in his life. Was she a natural performer? It’s hard to say because he knew her only as a child knows their mother, but there are some clues to the woman she might have been that he recounts tenderly. “She used to sing at church on her own and I had a photograph of her on the boat, coming from Trinidad to England, where she is in the middle of the dancefloor. No one else is on it and she’s just dancing up a storm.” Would she be surprised at how her youngest son turned out? “She would be shocked. I was a shy, quiet kid. I’d spend a lot of time curled up behind her legs on the couch. There wasn’t any real sense that Lennie then was going to end up being an actor. She’d be less shocked if it was my brother because he was much less shy then.” He has stayed close to his brother, who works on building sites and DJs at the weekends. “He’s like one of those old roving DJs of our youth, who sets up in a pub and plays Barry White.” He must be immensely proud of his famous sibling. “The thing about my family is that there’s not a huge allowance made for the fact that I’m the fella on the telly. There’s a minute of: ‘Oh look, you’re back [from LA],’ and then: ‘The bins need taking out.’” A Number is at the Old Vic, London, 24 January to 19 March.Aldi is ditching grocery deliveries via Deliveroo to focus on its own home shopping service as consumers return to stores in greater numbers. About 100 of the German retailer’s 950 UK stores offered grocery orders and home deliveries through Deliveroo during the pandemic when shoppers increasingly chose to shop online. Recent industry data has indicated a return to more normal shopping habits, with online grocery sales in December down 3.7% on the same month in 2020, and accounting for 12.2% of total groceries, compared with a peak of nearly 14% last year. During lockdowns, supermarkets including Waitrose, Morrisons, Sainsbury’s and the Co-op turned to Deliveroo to help with extra demand for home deliveries. Rapid delivery operators, including Getir, Gorillas and Zapp, have also entered the UK market. Tesco and Sainsbury’s have also been trying out their own rapid delivery services – Whoosh and Chop Chop – to take on the likes of Getir, Deliveroo, JustEat and Uber Eats. Aldi’s move, which was first reported by the Grocer trade journal, marks a first shift away from food delivery, which is seen as less profitable, particularly for low-cost retailers whose business model is based around saving costs through simplicity and efficiency. It comes after a strong Christmas for the retailer and grocers in general, helped by fears of the Omicron variant, which dampened desire for eating out at restaurants, cafes and pubs. An Aldi spokesperson said: “We have decided to end our trial with Deliveroo to focus on our click-and-collect service, which remains on offer at more than 200 of our stores nationwide.” On Thursday Deliveroo said its sales were up 36% in the three months to 31 December compared with the same period a year before and 11% ahead of the previous quarter. However, the figures showed a slowdown from the annual run-rate of 70%. It said grocery sales made up 8% of the food delivery specialist’s total in the second half of 2021, up from 6% in the same period in 2020. Will Shu, the chief executive of Deliveroo, said: “Despite a challenging backdrop, we continued to strengthen our customer proposition, widen our customer base and execute against our strategy.”Downing Street is to hold talks with the artist Tracey Emin after she said one of her works should no longer hang inside No 10 because of her concerns about alleged parties inside the building. The artwork, More Passion, which has red neon lettering spelling out the words of the title, has been on display inside 10 Downing Street for a decade, since it was put there during David Cameron’s time in office. Emin said she wanted it taken down as she felt a neon work was associated with a party atmosphere, and those in No 1o did not need “any encouragement on this level”. Asked about her request, Johnson’s spokesperson said: “My understanding is that the work was gifted to the government art collection with an agreement to initially display it in No 10. We will obviously now discuss the location of the work with the artist, and I believe it will remain part of the government art collection that displays works in a number of locations.” In an interview with BBC Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour, Emin said reports of lockdown-breaching parties inside Downing Street has given her misgivings about its location. “I don’t want the work back, because I donated it,” she said. “I would simply like at the moment for it to be taken down, because the neon is notoriously for a party atmosphere. You have them at funfairs, casinos, bars or whatever. I really do not feel that No 10 needs any encouragement on this level.” Emin said Boris Johnson had told her he liked the work being in No 10, but added: “I want it taken down and this government, I will tell you what they need, they need compassion. That’s what they need, not passion. They don’t need more party atmosphere. “Most of us are obeying the rules in every single way because this pandemic has affected everybody, whether it is financially, whether it was health-wise, people dying or whatever. And this government doesn’t seem to care about that.” The government art collection, comprising 14,000 works, displays them in official buildings around the UK and in embassies and consulates overseas. A spokesperson for the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, which administers the collection, said: “When an artwork comes into the government art collection, the collection can display the work at any of its 365 locations. On occasions the collection may consult with an artist when a work is going to a specific location.”The estate of Jimi Hendrix is suing the heirs of the trailblazing guitarist’s former bandmates after they allegedly threatened to sue for “millions of pounds” in unpaid royalties dating back decades, Billboard reports. In December, Lawrence Abramson, a British lawyer representing the families of the Jimi Hendrix Experience bassist David Noel Redding and drummer John Graham “Mitch” Mitchell, sent a cease-and-desist letter that claimed they owned a stake in Hendrix’s music and threatened to sue for infringement. In a case filed on 18 January in Manhattan, the Hendrix estate and Sony Music, the exclusive licence holder of Hendrix’s catalogue, requested a legal declaration stating that they owed nothing. They said that the claims were invalid given that Redding and Mitchell signed “broad general releases” and agreements not to sue in exchange for “significant monetary consideration” after Hendrix’s death. Their lawyers claim that Redding signed in April 1973 and Mitchell in September 1974 agreeing to release the Hendrix estate from legal claims, Rolling Stone reports. The Hendrix estate and Sony said that the settlements “specifically” concerned the band’s recordings and that there had been no claim by Redding and Mitchell or their successors “for almost half a century … concerning the copyright ownership, exploitation of these recordings by plaintiffs or payments of royalties”. Hendrix and Sony are not suing for damages, but a ruling that exonerates them of the claims made by representatives for Redding and Mitchell. The Guardian contacted representatives for Redding and Mitchell’s estates, who said they could not yet comment. In the cease-and-desist letter, representatives for the Redding and Mitchell estates argued that the agreements reached in 1970 were unenforceable and that they were owed millions in royalties dating back to 1973. Hendrix formed the Jimi Hendrix Experience in 1966. They scored hits, particularly in the UK, with songs such as their cover of All Along the Watchtower and originals Voodoo Chile and Purple Haze. The group broke up in 1969 after Redding’s departure. Hendrix died in September 1970 at the age of 27. Redding died in 2003 and Mitchell in 2008. Lawyers for the group’s rhythm section claim that “both died in relative poverty having never received their true entitlement from their works, performances and founding membership of the Jimi Hendrix Experience”.Kamala Harris has joined in on the White House’s campaign to repair Joe Biden’s flub on Ukraine in his press conference on Wednesday, where he revealed Nato is divided on how to respond to a “minor incursion” from Russia. “The president of the United States has been very clear, and we as the United States are very clear: if Putin takes aggressive action, we are prepared to levy serious and severe costs. Period,” Harris said in a Thursday morning appearance on NBC’s Today Show. Host Savannah Guthrie countered that the White House had been “less than clear”, issuing a statement just minutes after Biden’s press conference affirming the “united response” between the US and its allies. “Savannah, I’m being clear with you right now. If you’re interested, I’ll continue to be clear,” Harris said in response. During Wednesday’s two-hour press conference – his second solo press conference since taking office – Biden made surprising remarks on the decision Nato allies will face depending on the severity of a Russian incursion. “What you’re going to see is that Russia will be held accountable if it invades, and it depends on what it does,” he said. “It’s one thing if it’s a minor incursion, and then we end up having to fight about what to do and not do etc.” Asked to clarify what constitutes a minor incursion, Biden pointed to cyber-attacks and the presence of Russian intelligence officers. “There are differences in Nato as to what countries are willing to do, depending on what happens,” Biden said. “If there’s Russian forces crossing the border … I think that changes everything.” In a clarification issued 30 minutes after the end of the press conference, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said: “If any Russian military forces move across the Ukrainian border, that’s a renewed invasion, and it will be met with a swift, severe and united response from the United States and our allies.” The kerfuffle has alarmed the Ukrainian government, with one official telling CNN that Biden’s comment “gives green light to Putin to enter Ukraine at his pleasure”. Harris went on the defense for Biden when Guthrie asked how “damaging” it was that Biden “openly talked about division within Nato countries and Nato allies”. “I think your audience knows Joe Biden has been working as the former head of foreign relations, and as the former vice-president and a senator in a role of leadership on foreign policy, for years,” Harris said. “I have witnessed him continuously engage in direct and honest conversations with our partners and allies, and this is no exception.”A Belgian-British teenager has flown into the record books by becoming the youngest woman to fly solo around the world. Zara Rutherford, 19, touched down at Kortrijk-Wevelgem airport in Flanders just after 1pm local time on Thursday, completing a 52,000km (28,100 nautical mile) journey that took in 31 countries across five continents. “It’s just really crazy. I haven’t quite processed it,” Rutherford, draped in British and Belgian flags, told reporters. She said there had been “amazing moments”, but also times when she had feared for her life. “I’d say the hardest part was flying over Siberia, because it was just extremely cold. It was minus 35 degrees on the ground … If the engine were then to stop, I’m hours away from rescue and I don’t know how long I could survive.” Making a smooth landing on the runway, she became the first woman to fly alone around the world in a microlight plane and the first Belgian to circumnavigate the globe solo by air. Rutherford’s parents are pilots and started taking her up in small planes when she was a toddler. By the age of 14 she was learning to fly and dreaming of a round-the-world trip. “The dream was really to fly around the world. But I always thought it was impossible: it’s expensive, dangerous, complicated, a logistical nightmare,” she said in a TV interview earlier this month. “So I never really thought about it twice. And then I was finishing school and I thought: if I am going to do something crazy with my life this is the perfect time to do it.” On 18 August last year she took off in her two-seater Shark Aero, one of the fastest lightweight aircraft in the world, which can reach speeds of up to 300km/h. Flying west, she stopped in the UK, Greenland, the Americas and Russia, then looped down to south-east Asia, north to India, the Middle East and Egypt, and back to Europe. Unable to fly at night or in clouds, Rutherford could only fly during clear daylight. She encountered all weathers, including conditions she had never been trained to deal with in temperate Belgium. There were freezing temperatures in Greenland, Alaska and Russia, desert haze in Saudi Arabia, thunderstorms at the equator, wildfires over California and smog over India that reduced visibility. Russia was her toughest challenge but also one of the highlights. “One of the most impressive moments was flying over Siberia, because it is just so remote and I don’t know if I’ll ever get to see it again,” she said. Saudi Arabia also stood out as “really beautiful, very diverse and the weather was great”. A snowstorm grounded her in the north-eastern Russian city of Magadan for a week. Extreme weather also forced a three-week stay in Ayan, a small town of 800 people in the country’s far east, with few English speakers and no wifi. Locals were “very kind and willing to help”, she said. Rutherford also had to navigate fast-changing Covid restrictions and bureaucracy. She cancelled a stop in China after a government change of rules meant she would have had to quarantine. This became one of the scariest moments of the trip, when she had to navigate one of the busiest aviation routes in the world to reach South Korea while avoiding Chinese and North Korean airspace. Her journey from Mumbai to Dubai was a gruelling eight-hour flight mostly over water, ending with a diversion to another airport 60 miles south of the Emirati city because of a rare storm. Then there were routine chores. Christmas Day in Singapore was spent dealing with a flat tyre. When she was stuck in Alaska waiting for her Russian visa, she worked on plane maintenance and applying to universities. Now back in Belgium, she plans to study electrical engineering and hopes to become an astronaut. The teenager, who cites her inspirations as the American aviation pioneer Amelia Earhart and the Russian cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova, said she hoped her journey would encourage more girls to take up science and engineering. “Growing up I didn’t really see many female pilots or female computer scientists,” she has said. “Those are two of my passions and it’s quite discouraging when there is no one that you can relate to that does any of those things.” She said she hoped “other girls see me and think: ‘I’d love to fly one day, too.’”The last chance for federal legislation to stem the tide of Republican state-level attacks on the franchise died this week, when Senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema rejected a bid by the Senate’s Democratic majority to change the filibuster rules to allow the passage of two voting rights bills. The Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act would together serve to establish a baseline of federal rules enabling access to the ballot in all 50 states, and would restore the congressional authority to oversee new election laws in states that have a history of racist voting restrictions – a civil rights-era provision that was gutted by the Republican-controlled supreme court. But the two bills have been blocked repeatedly by Senate Republicans, who have used the chamber’s supermajority rule to prevent them from coming to a vote. With the support of President Biden, who endorsed filibuster changes in a speech in Atlanta last week, the Democrats hoped to carve out an exemption that would finally allow the bills to be passed – Sinema and Manchin, after all, had both professed support for the bills themselves, though Manchin’s endorsement had to be cajoled. And exemptions to the filibuster are nothing new: according to Exceptions to the Rule, a book about the filibuster by the governance scholar Molly Reynolds, the filibuster was amended 160 times between 1969 and 2014. Both Manchin and Sinema supported a carve-out to the filibuster just weeks ago, when they both agreed to amend the rule to allow the Senate to raise the national debt ceiling. But evidently, voting rights are different. Last Thursday, in a tearful speech on the Senate floor, Sinema announced that she would not support changing the filibuster to pass the bills. She called for compromise, and chided Democrats for not doing more to reach out to Republicans to treat the nation’s “disease of division”. For his part, after a meeting with Senate Democratic leaders on Tuesday night, Manchin, too, reiterated that he would not support a voting rights filibuster carve-out, and dismissed fears that Black Americans would be denied the ballot. “The government will stand behind them to make sure they have the right to vote,” Manchin said. “We have that. The things they’re talking about are in court.” Responsible adults, assessing the state of voting rights in America in good faith, would of course know that neither the Republican party nor the federal courts are partners in the effort to preserve voting rights. Republican-controlled state legislatures have spent years imposing restrictive laws that make it harder and harder for people of color to vote, and have now progressed to making it easier for themselves to discard the voters’ preferences if they choose. These efforts have largely been supported by the federal courts, where Republican partisans in robes have gutted voting protections and given the green light to severe restrictions. It was the supreme court’s evisceration of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, in the cases Shelby County v Holder and Brnovich v DNC, that spurred congressional Democrats to write the John Lewis Voting Rights Act in the first place – the bill that Manchin and Sinema profess to support. The Republican party and much of the federal judiciary won’t preserve the franchise; they’re in fact working in concert to destroy it. Any competent and honest political observer will acknowledge this. That Manchin and Sinema will not suggests that they are either cynical or stupid. For the past year, Manchin and Sinema have used the filibuster, and the Democrats’ paper-thin majority in the Senate, to flex their own influence, withholding their support on essential measures and hampering the Democrats’ agenda – most recently the Build Back Better Act, the Biden social infrastructure bill that Manchin single-handedly killed in December. They have served primarily as saboteurs, scuttling hopes that a Democratic trifecta in government might yield the actual realization of Democratic priorities. To hear Manchin and Sinema tell it, the filibuster has become a kind of totem: they speak of preserving the rule as a way of maintaining the principle that unity, cooperation and bipartisanship remain both possible and desirable. But for all their platitudes, there is little evidence that the filibuster encourages compromise. Critics like the writer and former Senate staffer Adam Jentleson have suggested that the filibuster in fact incentivizes obstructionism, giving the minority more opportunities to sabotage the majority’s agenda and few reasons to try to shape it. But Manchin and Sinema are immune to reality. They still speak as if the procedural accident of a 60-vote threshold represents some kind of republican virtue. Getting rid of it, they say, will plunge the country into disunity and distrust. One wonders what they think the state of the country is now. Manchin and Sinema’s naive intransigence on the filibuster is now helping the Republican party to usher in an era of nationwide voter suppression and election subversion that will end meaningful representative government as we know it. The senators insist on delivering bromides to cooperation and bipartisanship, and baselessly claim that the Republican party, radicalized against democracy and increasingly centering its politics around interpersonal cruelty, can be persuaded to support voting rights if only the Democrats were kinder, more patient and less willing to use the power that the voters gave them. Listening to them try to justify themselves, Manchin and Sinema sound bizarrely detached from reality, as if they’re reading lines from the wrong play. The Senate they describe, the Republican colleagues they imagine themselves to have, the country they think they are living in – none of these bear much relation to the present reality of politics in America. They offer no solutions for that reality, and no insight into its increasingly frayed constitutional order. Their best ideas consist of pretending that the Senate is not what it is, pretending that Republicans are not who they are. Like ostriches with their heads in the sand, they think that if they pretend not to see what is happening, then the circumstances will change by the force of their denial. This hasn’t worked, but Manchin and Sinema seem more committed to maintaining the delusion than to protecting the rights of this American people. And this is what makes their failure to do what is necessary to protect voting rights not only a tactical failure, but also a moral one. Moira Donegan is a Guardian US columnistDoes Armie Hammer ever yearn for the time when the worst thing people said was that nobody liked him? “Ten Long Years of Trying to Make Armie Hammer Happen” was the cruel but incisive headline of a 5,000-word BuzzFeed article from 2017 which concluded that only a wealthy white man could not merely have withstood so much failure but have been rewarded for it. The US actor tweeted about the piece, calling it “bitter AF” before making a celeb’s exit from the social media platform: he deleted his account then quietly reactivated it. Those must seem now like halcyon days. Hammer’s fall began a year ago when messages surfaced online, purportedly sent from him to various extramarital partners, suggesting an erotic interest in cannibalism. Sexual assault allegations were made by multiple women, while an accusation of rape prompted a Los Angeles police investigation. Hollywood tends to act fast when handling a scandal in the age of social media and #MeToo: Hammer was dropped immediately by his agents, William Morris Endeavor. He exited projects including the Jennifer Lopez romcom Shotgun Wedding, Amma Asante’s cold war thriller Billion Dollar Spy and The Offer, a 10-part series about the making of The Godfather. His scenes in Taika Waititi’s soccer comedy Next Goal Wins were reshot with Will Arnett taking his place. It was too late, however, for Disney to excise him from its plush new version of the Agatha Christie whodunnit Death on the Nile. Shot before the pandemic, the film has remained moored, if not quite dead in the water. Its prospects were not enhanced by controversy surrounding another cast member, the Black Panther star Letitia Wright, who recently retweeted an anti-vaccine video that was described as “hot garbage” by her fellow Marvel Cinematic Universe alumnus Don Cheadle. While Wright’s behaviour is merely irresponsible, the allegations against Hammer (which he strongly denies) are criminal. As a prominent figure in Death on the Nile’s ensemble cast, it would have been too costly and complicated for Disney to reshoot his scenes using a replacement. That was the last-ditch course of action taken by Sony when the 2017 release of Ridley Scott’s All the Money in the World coincided with abuse allegations against Kevin Spacey. His scenes as the billionaire J Paul Getty were reshot with Christopher Plummer, who later earned an Oscar nomination for the part. Meanwhile, loud sighs of relief must have emanated from everyone associated with the action comedy Baby Driver, which also featured Spacey but pipped the scandal to the post by four months. When reshoots are not an option, the best a studio can hope for is damage limitation, burying any incendiary elements low in the PR mix. Hammer appears briefly in the trailer for Death on the Nile, and is still featured in publicity material; but unlike co-stars such as Kenneth Branagh (who also directed the film), Annette Bening and even Wright, he hasn’t received the compliment of his own individual character poster. Including him in promotional interviews would also be too steep a risk, and hardly necessary when there are plenty of other famous faces in play. Disney had similar problems recently with another release. Like Death on the Nile, Steven Spielberg’s musical West Side Story faced a lengthy delay to its release because of the pandemic; it was also tainted by a sexual assault allegation that arose during that pause against one of its stars, Ansel Elgort, best known as a star of Baby Driver – a movie that is beginning to look jinxed. One irony is that Spielberg and the playwright Tony Kushner gave Elgort’s character some bad-boy credentials that were absent from the original Broadway show and the previous 1961 film. In their version, the romantic lead Tony is an ex-con who spent a year in prison after almost beating a rival gang member to death. The actor, who has a face like a scoop of vanilla ice-cream, is far too pretty and pouty to render that backstory convincing. It would be impossible to say whether the allegation, which Elgort has denied, describing the relationship with his accuser as “brief, legal and entirely consensual”, influenced the movie’s miserable box-office performance, but put it this way: it didn’t help. Even so, Disney hardly placed Elgort under house arrest. He was grouped with co-stars for press interviews, shifting the focus away from him and on to the movie. He also made a string of TV appearances in environments that promised zero chance of any curveball questions. The safest route for studios dealing with scandal-struck stars must be to resort to a media blackout such as the one imposed on Shia LaBeouf around the release of the drama Pieces of a Woman. After the musician and actor FKA twigs issued a lawsuit against him last January alleging emotional, physical and sexual abuse, Netflix removed any mention of LaBeouf from publicity surrounding the movie, including the awards season campaign that brought his co-star, Vanessa Kirby, an Oscar nomination. He issued a partial denial. It can even be necessary to quietly sideline actors involved tangentially in another star’s scandal, at least until the air clears. Some press interviews with Paul Bettany to promote the Amazon Studios drama Uncle Frank in late 2020 were withdrawn at the last moment to avoid questions about the dubious texts between the actor and his friend Johnny Depp, which had been made public during Depp’s unsuccessful attempt to sue the Sun newspaper for calling him a “wife beater”. Depp may have been replaced by Mads Mikkelsen in the third Fantastic Beasts movie and had his recent film Minamata offloaded by MGM on to another distributor, but acclaim for the Marvel series WandaVision seems to have successfully laundered Bettany’s reputation. He was even doing the publicity rounds again recently, accepting GQ’s Boss Leading Man award and complaining to one newspaper that it was “an unpleasant feeling” to have his private correspondence read aloud in court. Maybe next time he might not join in with the banter of a chum who is fantasising about killing his ex-wife. Just a thought. The question of how far such controversy reaches is moot: bad publicity of any sort is too great a risk. Even so, there may be good news for Disney from a business perspective with Death on the Nile. The picture was greenlit while Branagh’s Murder on the Orient Express (which featured Depp among its cast) was on its way to a worldwide gross of $352m (£258m). As in the case of that 2017 whodunit, it is surely the combination of Branagh, Christie, a starry ensemble and a glossy, old-fashioned style of cinema – rather than any one performer – that will motivate the valuable older demographic to see the movie. One of the benefits of star-studded casts is that there is bound to be something for everyone. It’s like any half-decent biscuit tin: who cares if one or two are broken? No one would pretend that the allegations against Armie Hammer aren’t serious. But in terms of audience recognition, prestige and prizes, he is no Kevin Spacey. Beyond journalism and social media, it may be the case that older audiences don’t even know who he is, let alone what he is alleged to have done. Of course, wariness about returning to cinemas tends to be higher among that same demographic, which means that the release of Death on the Nile will not be plain sailing. If the movie does run aground, it might be one thing that can’t be blamed solely on this Hammer horror. • Death on the Nile is released on 11 February.A Danish “biotech” company in which Novak Djokovic holds a majority stake is working on a “frequency” treatment for Covid-19 that an expert says bears similarities to the principles of homeopathy. The world No 1 men’s tennis player was forced to leave Australia on Sunday after the country’s immigration minister cancelled his visa on the basis that his presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. On Wednesday it emerged Djokovic had acquired an 80% stake in QuantBioRes, the website of which says it designs treatments for viral diseases and resistant bacteria through “predicting the electromagnetic frequency” that can interfere with a virus’s activity. “At QuantBioRes, we work in utilising unique and novel Resonant Recognition Model … a biophysical model based on findings that certain periodicities/frequencies within the distribution of energies of free electrons along the protein are critical for protein biological function and interaction with protein receptors and other targets,” the website says. It carries a quote from the Serbian-American scientist Nikola Tesla: “If you wish to understand the universe, think of energy, frequency and vibration.” Dr Darren Saunders, an Australian biomedical scientist, said the approach described on the QuantBioRes website was reminiscent of homeopathy, an alternative and unproven treatment that claims illness-causing substances can, in minute doses, treat people who are unwell. Homeopaths claim that by diluting these substances in water or alcohol, the resulting mixture retains an “imprint” of “frequency” of the original substance that triggers a healing response in the body by causing an energetic shift. Saunders said in his opinion it was “a stretch” for QuantBioRes to call itself a biotech company. “The ‘innovative technology’ they describe on their website does not reflect contemporary understanding of how biochemistry works,” Saunders said. “If any athletes or other potential investors would like advice on not blowing their cash on this stuff, my fees are reasonable.” The website says the company will “soon start testing different treatment approaches”, but a link encouraging people to “learn more” appeared to be broken when the Guardian attempted to access it. A link to a July 2020 announcement that QuantBioRes would test Covid-19 deactivation mechanisms also appeared to be broken. Prof Peter Collignon, an infectious diseases physician and antimicrobial resistance expert, said the QuantBioRes website used “fancy terms” without providing any evidence of success of the methods it promoted. “They’ve given nothing in the way of data,” he said. “People are looking out for new molecules all the time, but the website describes a way of finding a new molecule without providing any evidence of success.” The chief executive of QuantBioRes, Ivan Loncarevic, denied that the methods developed by his company had anything to do with homeopathy, and defended the lack of data on the company’s website. “What we do has absolutely nothing to do with homeopathy,” he said in an interview. “The theory behind homeopathy is that you can transfer information from a chemical to another substance, such as water. What we do is to develop peptides with specific functionality. This is pure, classical science. “Of course we are not putting our data on our website for every idiot to look at. We will soon publish an article in a scientific journal that will collect all our clinical testing.” When asked when the article would be published, Loncarevic said: “With a little luck, in two to three months, after peer review.” Asked about Saunders’ opinion that it was “a stretch” for QuantBioRes to call itself a biotech company and that the “innovative technology” described on its site did not reflect contemporary understanding of how biochemistry worked, Loncarevic replied: “That’s because we are innovative.” He said other pioneers in engineering or science, such as Elon Musk and Galileo, had faced similar criticism when first airing their views. On the subject of broken links, he said this was the first time he had heard of the problem and “it’s not [done] on purpose”. Additional reporting by Philip Oltermann in BerlinHello, and happy Thursday, It’s difficult to figure out what to say about the kind-of-surprising-yet- not-really-surprising-at-all collapse of Democrats’ effort to pass sweeping voting rights legislation. Yes, the defeat is a major blow to Joe Biden, who spent significant political capital over the last few weeks, pushing the bill. Yes, the defeat makes Democrats, who pledged to protect voting rights when they took control of the US Senate last year, look incapable of governing. Yes, it’s disturbing to see just one Republican – Lisa Murkowski of Alaska – voice any kind of support for sweeping protections to support the right to vote. Yes, it’s astonishing to see two moderate Democrats block the bill because of their unflinching support for an arcane Senate rule. Yes, the defeat comes at a uniquely dangerous moment for democracy. There are plenty of takes to go around about why this push didn’t succeed – and I expect there will be more in the coming days. Biden should have pushed harder on voting rights sooner. Democrats were too ambitious in their proposal. Democrats should have focused on a narrower fix to the Electoral Count Act. Some of this thinking falls into what Brendan Nyhan, a political scientist at Dartmouth, calls the “green lantern theory” of the presidency – a belief that the president can do anything, persuade anyone, if they try hard enough. In the end, the reason the voting rights bills failed was simple – 50 Republicans didn’t support the proposals and two Democrats didn’t support changing the filibuster. After watching the fight in Washington play out over the last few weeks, I’m not sure there’s anything Chuck Schumer or Biden could have done to change that. Maybe I’m wrong. That doesn’t mean that the 50 Republicans who blocked the bill should evade scrutiny. As others have noted, 16 current GOP senators voted to reauthorize the Voting Rights Act in 2006, but oppose the current bill, which would update the most powerful part of the law. Republicans have said Congress has no constitutional role in elections, ignoring a provision in Article I that explicitly authorizes Congress to set federal election rules. But the thing that’s stuck with me the most over the last week is an idea that undergirded the entire voting rights debate, sometimes spoken out loud and sometimes unsaid – the idea that voter suppression just isn’t that bad right now. I saw it a few months ago when an unnamed White House adviser told the Atlantic Democrats would figure out how to out-organize new voter restrictions (“show us what the rules are and we will figure out a way to educate our voters and make sure they understand how they can vote and we will get them out to vote”). Biden made a similar comment on Wednesday afternoon, saying “no matter how hard they make it for minorities to vote, I think you’re going to see them willing to stand in line and defy the attempt to keep them from being able to vote.” I saw it when Republican senators consistently touted that 94% of Americans said it was easy to vote in 2020 and that turnout was higher than ever. And I saw it on Tuesday, when Joe Manchin, one of two key Democratic holdouts on the filibuster said no one was going to be blocked from voting. “The laws are there, and the rules are there, and basically the government, the government will stand behind them and give them the right to vote,” Manchin said. “We act like we are going to obstruct people from voting; that is not going to happen.” Of course, there’s a mountain of evidence that cuts against all this. Election officials in Texas are rejecting an astronomically high number of absentee ballot requests after the state imposed new restrictions. After Georgia enacted new limits on the availability of drop boxes, the number of voters who used them dropped significantly. Republican lawmakers across the country are also redrawing electoral districts in a way that weakens the influence of Black, Hispanic, and Asian voters, especially in rapidly diversifying places. It’s an invisible form of voter suppression, but perhaps the most powerful, because the votes of those affected will matter less. I had this in mind when Senator Kyrsten Sinema, another Democratic holdout, argued on the Senate floor that passing voting rights legislation would not get at the underlying ills of political division in the US. It was a good line in her speech that just didn’t match up with reality. A provision in the Democratic voting rights bill prohibits severe partisan gerrymandering – something that would go a long way towards fostering more bipartisan compromise. At almost the same time the voting rights bill was taking place on Wednesday, the election board in Lincoln county, a rural and heavily GOP Georgia county near Augusta, was meeting to vote on a plan to close six of seven polling locations. Residents there have been organizing for weeks to block the move, saying that many in the county lack transportation and would have to drive far to get to the single polling location. The county says closing the polling places will save money and make it easier to administer elections. The plan stalled Wednesday evening, but it’s the type of thing that the federal government would have more oversight over if Democrats were able to pass their bill. “If it happens here and they’re successful, maybe we’re the pilot,” said the Rev Denise Freeman, a longtime resident who has been fighting the closures. “Maybe we’re the showcase for the rest of the world to disenfranchise voters so select people can stay in power.” Also worth watching … I interviewed Martin Luther King III and his daughter Yolanda about what comes next in the fight for voting rights. Governor Ron DeSantis is proposing a massive new state agency to investigate election crimes, even though there’s little evidence of fraud in Florida. Preparations for the upcoming Texas primary are a bit of a mess as officials struggle to implement the state’s new voting restrictions. Officials have reported rejecting high percentages of mail-in ballot applications. The Ohio supreme court struck down GOP-drawn maps for both the state legislature and Congress, saying they were so partisan they violated the state constitution. Republicans in Virginia and Arizona have introduced a slew of new voter restrictions.“Pelléas is a one-off”, says François-Xavier Roth in the sleeve notes to his new recording, “The first exemplar of what opera was to become in the 20th and 21st centuries and of what it can no longer be”. As one of the turning points in the evolution of opera, Debussy’s masterpiece is already very well represented on disc, but Roth’s performance, which stems from a production at Opéra de Lille last year, differs from all its predecessors by having the period instruments of Les Siècles in the pit. In an opera whose drama depends so much on the minutest nuances of the word-setting and the web of orchestral motifs underpinning it, the use of gut strings and turn-of-the-20th-century woodwind and brass adds an extra dimension to the expressive palette. The gains are obvious right from the opening, where the dark, slowly churning strings, playing without vibrato, conjure up the atmosphere of ambiguity and veiled menace that pervades the whole work, right through to the trickle of woodwind tears with which it ends. Roth makes Debussy’s handling of orchestral colour seem more magical than ever, and even though his orchestra lacks the sheer tonal heft of a modern band, the great climaxes, such as Golaud’s explosion of rage in the third act, or Pelléas and Mélisande’s final meeting in the last scene of the fourth, seem more intense than ever, while the moments of quiet lyricism are wrapped in textures of extraordinary delicacy. Because of Covid restrictions, the Lille staging directed by Daniel Jeanneteau was never performed before a live audience (though it was streamed), and this audio recording was able to achieve a studio-like clarity as a result. In an opera in which words matter so much, it’s a huge advantage having an entirely Francophone cast (though Debussy apparently favoured a non-French Mélisande, to emphasise her other-worldliness). Here every single syllable is distinct. Pelléas is a role that falls between conventional categories and here it’s the tenor Julien Behr, contrasting perfectly with Alexandre Duhamel’s baritone Golaud. Behr’s performance is quite staid, even in the more ecstatic moments, while Duhamel is never overbearing either; Golaud can never be the true “hero” of this opera, but in this recording he seems more sinned against than sinning, though Vannina Santoni’s velvety Mélisande seems utterly guileless too. The sepulchral Arkel is Jean Teitgen, the very fine Geneviève is Marie-Ange Todorovitch, while Golaud’s son Yniold is sung by a boy treble (Hadrien Joubert) rather than the usual adult soprano. But what matters most is the sense of a true ensemble performance, which makes Debussy’s endlessly beguiling score seem more miraculous than ever.Five hundred and fifty years ago next month, the king of Norway lost a deposit he had put down to settle a debt: more than a hundred wild, treeless islands in the sub-arctic North Sea. The Scottish king, James III, had wanted Rhenish florins, but he had to settle for Shetland instead. The archipelago eventually became part of the UK and has since developed a diverse, distinctive musical culture. This weekend, at the annual Celtic Connections festival in Glasgow, the Shetland 550 concerts will celebrate it, bringing together experimental composers, jazz performers, poets and players of traditional tunes. The series is co-curated by the award-winning fiddler Chris Stout, who was born in the three-mile-long Fair Isle (population: 68) before moving to the Mainland at eight (population: 18,765). “Although, even there, you’re still only ever three miles from the sea,” he says. The Scottish influence on Shetland “was a very slow thing to happen”, he says; the English language didn’t make an impact until the late 18th century. “And when I say English, a very, very Scots tongue would have been used then.” To come from such a place often affords “an amazing feeling. It’s so small; you know your history so well because, for a large part of it, nobody moved on or out.” Its bare, craggy landscape is also very beautiful, with “mirrie dancers” (northern lights) through the winter and summer skies that never go dark. “But it’s not for the fainthearted,” he warns. “There’s nowhere to run and there’s nowhere to hide. If you try, you’ll probably fall off a cliff.” The intensity of being a Shetlander is a factor, he believes, in its passionate music. This includes the 340-tune Shetland fiddle repertoire, strong on shimmering resonance and layers of tones, like Norwegian fiddle music, but with danceable rhythms from Scottish pipe tunes. “It’s quite a cacophony, yet there’s a space in it that allows you to lean into it and feel your own emotion. It says a lot about who we are.” The popularity of fiddle music also shows how the islands absorb and adore influences from overseas. The fiddle was not indigenous, but introduced to islanders in the 18th century by Hanseatic sea-traders from northern Germany who played tunes to pass dreary hours on the waves. Through the centuries, Shetland has been an international trade hub for whaling, fishing and more recently oil, so ideas from other cultures have always travelled in. Nowadays, the National Trust, renewable energy, satellite-launch research (on Unst), tourism and online home working bring employment and curious outsiders. Born from that mix, music “has been part of everyday life for Shetlanders for ever”, says Inge Thomson, who used to play accordion tunes every day growing up on Fair Isle with her lighthouse-keeper father. A seasoned collaborator with Karine Polwart and the folklore collective Modern Fairies, she loves “trowie tunes” – troll tunes – from the tiny island of Fetlar, comparing their short, repetitive passages to music from Scandinavia. At Shetland 550, she will premiere her piece Myrkabrod Mynta, a work commissioned in 2019 by the KLF’s Bill Drummond as part of a series of compositions in the dead languages of Britain. It is written in Norn, the language spoken in Shetland before Scots and later English took hold, which is derived from Old Norse and still peppers Shetland dialect – the title translates as The Hill Mist Endeavours to Form Shape. Using the old language with music to try to describe the land has been fascinating, Thomson says. She regularly experiments with electronics to try to replicate the sounds of Shetland. “Growing up on Fair Isle, I like the sound of static, the whirl of windmills, the shimmery top-end sound of shingle, the sub-bass of a stormy sea. Living in those islands, you can’t not hear the elements. They become musical, too.” Other unique musicians have thrived on Shetland. They include the late “Peerie” (Little) Willie Johnson, a guitarist from the Yell who developed his own style of folk and jazz fusion, influenced by western swing and Gypsy tunes that he first heard on the radio, then taught himself by ear. Today, the jazz saxophonist Norman Willmore improvises around Shetland tunes in cross-genre collaborations – even trying to bend and shape his breaths to echo different techniques on string instruments. He was born on a kitchen floor in Shetland and spent his childhood not liking Scottish folk tunes “at all”, leaving home at 18 to study jazz. Hundreds of miles away in Wales, he realised the uniqueness of his home culture; he would get into “massive jams” after school “with people of all generations, which I know now was unusual”. The biggest lesson he learned in early adulthood was that “music brings so much community to ordinary people” – something that is also strengthened by people who leave the islands to gather ideas, Stout adds, before they return. There are other bands to shout about: the rockabilly group Isaac Webb Trio have signed to Wild Records in Los Angeles; the four-piece female close-harmony group Herkja recently reinvented Wicked Game as a spooky piece of subtle indie; and the beloved party band the Revellers cut up folk with the clamour of metal and the rough edges of punk. Stout credits their shared, dramatic birthplace as something that has helped them all along. “If you know where you come from, you can have a [musical] idea, look out into the world with security, and it’s fantastic. That’s what Shetland has given so many of us: a solid platform to leap off from.” Celtic Connections festival begins 20 January in Glasgow. Shetland-focused concerts are Norn Voices, Glasgow Royal Concert Hall, 22 January; and A Peerie Foy, Old Fruitmarket, 23 January. Both are filmed for the festival digital programme, available 26 January.Robbie Dunne, who was banned from riding for 18 months in December after being found to have engaged in a campaign of bullying and harassment against fellow rider Bryony Frost, has lodged an appeal against both the finding and the penalty imposed in the case. Dunne denied all but one of the charges against him at a hearing in front of a three-person panel last month, but was ultimately found to have engaged in “conduct prejudicial to the integrity, proper conduct and good reputation of racing” by subjecting Frost to a persistent campaign of physical, verbal and online bullying and intimidation over a seven-month period from February to September 2020. The British Horseracing Authority brought a series of charges against Dunne after Frost lodged a formal complaint against him in September 2020. Its case included six alleged instances of bullying and harassment, including two during races at Leicester and Market Rasen, and a confrontation after a race at Southwell when Frost told the panel that Dunne “promised” to cause her physical harm by “putting [her] through the wing [of a fence]”. “The independent judicial panel has received an appeal from the representatives of Robbie Dunne in relation to the finding and penalty imposed on him by the disciplinary panel after its recent hearing,” the BHA said in a statement. The independent judicial panel will now convene an appeal board for the hearing and liaise with representatives of all parties regarding a potential date for the hearing, which will be communicated in due course.” Dunne initially had seven days from the publication of the panel’s written reasons for their finding on 6 January to lodge an appeal, but the 36-year-old rider was subsequently granted an extension until 20 January. Lucky Max stands out at Winter Million The £100,000 Sovereign Handicap Hurdle is the feature event on the first day of the inaugural Winter Million meeting at Lingfield on Friday and it has attracted a strong field including Metier, a Grade One winner as a novice, and three challengers from Ireland. Metier has failed to add to his decisive victory in the Tolworth Hurdle in three subsequent starts, but he hinted at a return to something like that level when fourth in a valuable race at Ascot just before Christmas. Harry Fry’s runner also has form on heavy going, unlike Emmet Mullins’s Carrarea, a sole ride on the card for Irish champion Paul Townend. Fellow raider Lucky Max (3.35), however, is a winner on deep ground and defied a 15lb hike in the weights to complete a hat-trick in a big field at Cork in December. The sixth and eighth horses home there were winners next time, he gets on really well with useful 3lb-claimer Jack Foley and Sean Doyle’s fast-improving six-year-old looks the pick of the prices at around 6-1. Market Rasen 1.30: The market leaders Minella Buster and Le Grand Lion both put up improved performances last time. A strong pace seems certain here and that just tips the balance in favour of Ben Pauling’s six-year-old, who proved his stamina at Huntingdon last month. Lingfield 1.50: Le Ligerien has never been the most consistent of performers but his debut win over fences at Chepstow a fortnight ago was backed up by a strong time so perhaps a wind op over the summer has done the trick. Market Rasen 2.05: Angels Landing improved to finish within five lengths of a useful winner at Ludlow earlier this month and starts his handicapping career on a very fair mark. Lingfield 2.25: If On The Blind Side runs to the form of his close second in a Grade Two in November, he will take all the beating but his last two outings have been well below par and Emitom, returning to hurdles after two tries over fences, may be the more reliable option. Market Rasen 2.40: Mullenbeg was easy to back on her debut 11 days ago but she powered clear to win with any amount in hand and Milton Harris’s mare looks overpriced again at around 12-1. Lingfield 3.00: Broken Halo improved from his chasing debut to win a handicap at Exeter in a decent time on New Year’s Day, and can take this step up in class in his stride. Market Rasen 3.15: A 3lb rise in the weights is unlikely to stop Hunny Moon following up his course-and-distance win in November. • The Market Rasen meeting is subject to an 8am inspection due to the threat of frost.As the tide rose, it began to look perilous for Millie the jack russell-whippet cross, who had defied the efforts of police, firefighters and coastguards to pluck her from treacherous mudflats. So the rescuers had to think imaginatively, and came up with the idea of attaching a sausage to a drone and hoping the scent of the treat would tempt Millie to safety. It worked gloriously and Millie has been reunited with her grateful owner after following the dangling sausage to higher, safer ground. Millie disappeared after slipping her lead in Havant, Hampshire, and after frantic public appeals was spotted on the mudflats, in danger of being engulfed by the tide. She resisted efforts to encourage her to a safer spot until a drone pilot suggested attaching food to one of the unmanned aerial vehicles that had been used to track the dog. “It was a crazy idea,” said Chris Taylor, the chair of the Denmead Drone Search and Rescue team. But they pressed ahead and after checking Civil Aviation Authority regulations, and the MTOW [maximum takeoff weight] of their machines, the rescuers calculated they could attach a single sausage to a drone. Taylor said: “One of the local residents on the beach where we were flying from supplied us with the sausages – I think they were from Aldi. The woman cooked them up for us and we attached them with string.” To the joy of the rescuers, Millie took the bait. “If we hadn’t had got her away from that area the tide would have come in and she would have been at risk of drowning,” said Taylor. “It was something we had never tried before – the sausages were the last resort, as we couldn’t reach her by kayak or any other means. “Because Millie was hungry it worked at luring her away from the danger to higher ground, which wouldn’t go underwater. We certainly would consider using sausages again: every dog and search operation is always going to be different, but if we were ever in a similar situation again we would employ the same methods to lure the dog.” Though the sausage worked, skittish Millie raced off again but was finally reunited with her owner, Emma Oakes, after being spotted inland from the marsh. She ran towards Oakes’s father, Tony, and jumped into his arms. Emma Oakes, a care manager, said: “Relief just poured over me. It was just absolutely fantastic to have her home. “Millie really likes food and she’ll eat anything you give her … raw carrots, cucumber – but she much prefers sausages. Meat is her favourite food, so dangling a sausage was probably the best thing they could lure her with. “Millie’s a rescue dog so she’s quite timid. She loves being at home more than anything and now she’s back all she’s doing is sleeping. She just sleeps and eats and looks at you as if to say: ‘I’m resting, leave me alone.’”On 30 May 2020, photographer Philip Montgomery captured a police charge during protests in Minneapolis against the killing of George Floyd. The cops look like giant metal insects, every human part of them hidden. You can’t see faces through the glinting visors, or flesh under their robotic armour as they approach with guns blazing through a pale mist of teargas smoke. Blown up to the size of a painting, Montgomery’s spooky monochrome news photo looks like a premonition of the future in the Saatchi Gallery’s engrossing, unsettling exhibition America in Crisis. These sci-fi American stormtroopers mirror the warnings, a year on from the attack on the Capitol by Trump supporters, that the world’s most powerful democracy is heading for a second civil war. Yet America in Crisis is not only about the future. It’s about how the present may be understood by the past. For this show juxtaposes photographs of the US’s current troubles with images of a divided country more than half a century ago. It takes its title from a project organised by the Magnum photographers’ agency in 1969. America in Crisis involved such renowned snappers as Bruce Davidson and Elliott Erwitt in an exhibition and book reporting the protests, assassinations and inequalities of the 1960s – a decade that seems in glowing retrospect almost incomparably more hopeful and joyous than today’s bitter times. Yet the 60s don’t look so optimistic in Erwitt’s devastating photograph of Jackie Kennedy at her husband’s funeral in 1963. Today the most famous images of her black-clad mourning are Andy Warhol’s silkscreen pantings but where they are ashen icons, Erwitt takes us closer, through her veil, to see every twitch of her breaking face. Where she takes the tragedy of a nation on herself, Paul Fusco’s colour pictures of the train that carried Bobby Kennedy’s coffin from New York to Washington in 1968, met by grieving crowds along the way, portray a great community of pain. Black and white Americans squeeze together along a platform to salute the passing train, from which Fusco was watching with his camera. In 2020 it was not the slaying of a famous politician that got people on the streets but the murder of a citizen, Floyd, during his arrest by Minneapolis police that united one half of America in tears of rage. One of the most convincing continuities in this exhibition is between images of the 60s civil rights movement and Black Lives Matter. Davidson’s photographs of the Selma freedom march in 1965 pick individuals out of the crowd whose faces make you wonder where they are now, what their later lives were like: a young Black marcher gazes at us over the American flag he’s carrying, asking a question America still hasn’t answered. Kris Graves’s picture of Robert E Lee’s equestrian statue in Richmond, Virginia in 2020, its colossal plinth completely covered with graffiti, points right past the 1960s to the never-healed wounds of slavery. The most startling images here from the original America in Crisis collection are portraits of Black sharecroppers in South Carolina in 1966. They seem still to be living in the Great Depression. Perhaps America is timeless in its wrongs, its founding sin, the hypocrisy of a nation based on the declaration that all people “are created equal” when southern states based their way of life on slavery, so endemic in its history that it cannot go on like this. Yet as you explore America in Crisis, the parallels between past and present fade. Things are clearly getting worse. There was hope and joy in 1969, after all. Protest, 60s style, seems innocent and childlike now. In Marc Riboud’s definitive image of the era, a young woman called Jane Rose Kasmir holds up a flower to the guns of National Guardsmen during an anti-war march in 1967. LOVE says the banner behind two protesters at the Democratic convention in 1968. The keyword now is HATE. One photograph says it all: the silhouette of Donald Trump at a rally. There was no one like Trump in 1969. A picture of Richard Nixon is offered by comparison but any similarities are superficial: yes, Nixon showed how Republicans could benefit from culture wars by marshalling a “silent majority” of middle Americans horrified by the perceived excesses of the flower children, but when Watergate was exposed he went quietly. Trump refused to accept the result of a fair election, a lie his supporters still believe, and so took the US into completely uncharted territory. You see this leap into chaos in photographs of the attack on the Capitol last January. Balasz Gardi photographed a man in 18th-century revolutionary garb waving the US flag with a gang of masked putschists on the Capitol steps. This character dressed for a far-right version of the musical Hamilton is claiming the heritage of the founding fathers for an act that spat on the democracy they created. At times of violent change, wrote Karl Marx, when people are “creating something previously non-existent, at just such epochs of … crisis they anxiously summon up the spirits of the past to their aid”. The Capitol rioters in their weird costumes from a half-forgotten American history opened a new age that nothing from the past can help us to understand. This absorbing exhibition leaves you stupefied by the crisis that’s beginning. America in Crisis is at the Saatchi Gallery, London, from 21 January to 3 April.Name: Lewdle. Age: Brand new. Appearance: A lot like Wordle, at first. Sorry, but I am absolutely determined never to find out what Wordle is. Wordle is a simple online word-guessing game that has taken the world by storm. Damn you. Carry on. Players get six goes to guess a five-letter word. Colour-coding tells you which letters you have got wrong, which are right and which are right but in the wrong position. Sounds like Mastermind – stupid. Nevertheless, millions of people play it every day. It rocketed in popularity when a feature was added that allows you to share your results on social media without revealing the answer. And this Lewdle? Lewdle is exactly the same, but a not-safe-for-work version. How can a nerdy word game be NSFW? All the answers are dirty. Don’t dirty words contain four-letters? There’s another version of Wordle, called Sweardle, that uses four-letter words, but for obvious reasons it’s a bit easier than this. Lewdle sounds pretty easy to me. The real challenge is that every guess must be a “valid 5 letter lewd word”, as determined by Lewdle. TITTY is one example offered for true beginners. BOOBS could also work. Still, how hard can it be? There aren’t that many dirty five-letter words. You’d be surprised. Would I? Let’s just say that some of them are quite specific and may oblige you to consult an online dictionary. But don’t do it at work, in case there are diagrams. What sort of person would create such a thing? The author and games writer Gary Whitta. Lewdle has only been up and running for a matter of days and it’s already attracting a lot of attention. I guess anything really successful will have its copycats. It’s true. The real Wordle – free to play and free from ads – has spawned a number of monetised knock-offs; Apple just removed a bunch of clones from its App store. But Lewdle is also ad-free and contains a link to the original. That’s nice. Lewdle is many things, but it’s not nice. Do say: “I always start with BONER – it’s got a lot of good letters.” Don’t say: “That’s what that means? I always thought it was something to do with corsets.”Thomas Bjørn can be forgiven Danish bias. “If they were British or American, there would be a lot more excitement around them,” he said. “But that might be a good thing for them. These guys have a level of ability that you don’t always see.” The subject matter is the 20-year-old Højgaard twins, Nicolai and Rasmus, about whom there was enthusiastic chatter long before they made impressive starts in esteemed company at the Abu Dhabi Championship. European golf, desperate for a good news tale after Ryder Cup humiliation in September, will place a lot of faith in the Højgaards. They created history last year by becoming the first brothers to win European Tour events in back-to-back weeks. Bjørn answered with a firm “yes” when asked whether we are correct to make a fuss about this duo. “They have everything,” said the 2018 Ryder Cup captain. “They have the game, the willingness to learn, they are hard workers and don’t get ahead of themselves. We should be excited. That doesn’t mean ‘it just happens’ but they have it all. They have great ears and good people around them. I was really happy to see their draws this week. These are the things they need, to learn to play with the big boys.” Those pairings cannot be classed as coincidental as the DP World Tour looks to accelerate the development of European players. Nicolai was alongside Adam Scott and Bernd Wiesberger during an opening round of 69. Rasmus had Ian Poulter and Shane Lowry for company before signing for a 70 at Yas Links. “I was really impressed,” said Scott, the 2013 Masters champion. “I was saying to my caddie, it’s been a while since I have played with a young kid who made me sit back and take notice. His speed is incredible. If he figures out a short game; obviously he has a pretty good one but if he takes it to top-of-the-world level, there’s nothing stopping a kid like that. It’s phenomenal to watch, his easy speed is amazing. I am surprised there hasn’t been more media or murmurings about him in the US. “He was 30 yards past me down the last. I look at a kid like that and hope he works on the right things, gets the right advice and can go on because he has incredible talent. “There’s nothing stopping him from being one of the best players in the world. He has all the attributes you would want aged 20. I would just tell him to become a great wedge player because he is never going to lose that hitting ability. Dustin Johnson worked really hard on his wedges and became a machine out on tour. It looks like Dustin playing, to me.” High praise indeed. There was more, this time from Poulter for Rasmus. The Englishman and Ryder Cup icon, though, warned that the twins must not be burdened by unreasonable expectation. Rasmus already has three tour titles to his name. “To have those wins at 20, try to get your head around that for a minute,” said Poulter. “The game is natural to him. It’s effortless power. “It would be unfair for us to load pressure on these kids. They need to grow into themselves and become consistent golfers. We are going to need them, America are younger than ever and the baton has been handed across. We need them to slowly find their feet properly and if they do that, they’ll be a backbone of the Ryder Cup team for a long time.” Nicolai was the European amateur champion in 2018, the same year he joined his brother in the successful Danish side at the Eisenhower Trophy, the world amateur team championship. Starting this season as 88th and 97th in the world respectively, Nicolai has more distance than his sibling but is also prone to being fierier. “Nicolai is extremely long but still in control,” says Bjørn. “Rasmus is not as long so they are a little bit different in how they play and in terms of personality but they possess great qualities.” Amid the other action on day one, Scott Jamieson’s 63 is a course record at Yas Links. The Florida-based Scot leads by a shot from Viktor Hovland. Rory McIlroy’s competitive year started with a level par 72. Collin Morikawa, the Open champion, produced a disappointing 73.An initial CIA investigation into the mysterious set of symptoms known as Havana syndrome has found that it is unlikely to be the result of a worldwide campaign of attacks by a foreign power against US diplomats and spies. However, two dozen cases, including some of those originally afflicted in Havana in 2016, could not be explained and would be further studied for evidence of a possible attack, according to a senior CIA official who briefed the US press. “While we have reached some significant interim findings, we are not done,” the CIA director, Williams Burns, said in a statement. “We will continue the mission to investigate these incidents and provide access to world-class care for those who need it.” Since the original outbreak of the symptoms, which include hearing strange sounds, dizziness, loss of balance, nausea and memory loss, more than 1,000 cases have been studied around the world. The interim findings of a CIA investigation have found that the majority of cases could probably be attributed to a pre-existing medical condition, or environmental factors, or stress, the senior official said. The defence department and an independent panel of experts are conducting their own investigations which have yet to publish reports. The CIA finding suggests that after the initial cases were reported, hundreds of US embassy and intelligence agency employees started to wonder whether their symptoms could be related. Government agencies asked for anyone who thought they might be affected to file a report. Marc Polymeropoulos, a former senior CIA official who has suffered severe symptoms since a visit to Moscow in 2017, said the interim findings did not resolve anything. “They seem to have solved a problem they created with their mass data call – but core cases remain. So [are] we back to square one?” he asked on Twitter. A Havana syndrome victims support group said in a statement: “The decision to release the report now and with this particular set of ‘findings’ seems a breach of faith, and an undermining of the intent of Congress and the president to stand with us and reach a government-wide consensus as to what is behind this,” a Havana syndrome victims group said in a statement. “This report was neither cleared nor coordinated through the interagency and must stand as the assessment of one agency [CIA] alone.” The secretary of state, Tony Blinken, said that investigations would continue. “We are going to continue to do everything we can, with all the resources we can bring to bear, to understand, again, what happened, why, and who might be responsible,” Blinken said at a press conference in Berlin. “And we are leaving no stone unturned.”Just one month into taking up her office as Germany’s new foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock has her work cut out. At stake: nothing less than the attempt to stop the outbreak of war between Russia and the west. The news outlet Der Spiegel called her meeting this week with her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, “a baptism of fire”; Die Zeit, her “first major test of character”. For the tabloid Bild, it was the equivalent of “entering the cave of a bear”. One left-leaning newspaper mischievously headlined a report about her mission “Baerbock tries to save the climate” – this time referring not to the leading Green’s efforts to tackle the climate crisis but to the considerable task she faces trying to foster dialogue between Europe and Russia to avoid a war involving nuclear powers. Few pleasantries were observed during her meeting with Lavrov, who has been in office for 17 years. Before and after a two-hour meeting on Wednesday, which took place behind closed doors in his gilded Moscow guesthouse, there was a distinct lack even of polite smiling, while eye contact was minimal. Footage of the opening minutes of the meeting, beamed to journalists in a neighbouring room, showed the two flanked by their aides, facing each other stony-faced across a long table conveniently divided down the middle by a neat row of hand-disinfectant bottles. The usual ritual of a closing photocall was ignored. Observed from Germany, as the world’s diplomats looked on, silent for now are conservative critics who have questioned whether as a mother of two young children, Baerbock is up to the task. Instead, the burning questions ahead of the encounter were: can she prevent a war? and another pressing domestic concern: is she able to ensure Russia does not cap energy supplies to Germany? The Russian view of Baerbock as an inexperienced stubborn misfit, out of her depth in her new role, was made clear last month after her appointment. “She is set on a confrontation course with Russia... behaving as if she was from the US Congress, not the Bundestag,” the state broadcaster Rossiya 1 declared. An expert from the Russian Academy of Sciences told the state-owned news agency Tass: “She is absolutely unsuited to the role. She is not a diplomat. She has no understanding [of] foreign policy and has a negative attitude towards Russia.” Not only is Baerbock new to the job: at 41, she also belongs to a fresh generation of German politicians. She is the country’s first female foreign minister. She had long since declared her desire to steer a hard course against what is unmistakably perceived, in Berlin and elsewhere, as Russian belligerence. As the counterparts emerged from their meeting to questions from German and Russian journalists, she told them: “I came here with a thick folder – thick due to the whole array of problems we have to discuss, about which our opinions differ hugely, in part fundamentally.” The most pressing issue: the threatening presence of 100,000 Russian soldiers posted close to Ukraine’s border. As Baerbock put it: “It’s hard not to see this as a threat.” The day before – the order of the visits was of symbolic importance, her aides stressed – while meeting Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, in Kyiv, Baerbock earned ridicule there after rejecting his request for weapons. Kuleba expressed his disappointment, but responded: “We know from where we can get the weapons.” She emphasised instead the need for dialogue, calling diplomacy “the only viable way to diffuse a highly dangerous situation”. Lavrov said he was “open” for talks to continue, accusing Ukraine of failing to cooperate. He described his discussion with Baerbock as having been “of use”. A war of words between the two had begun before the Moscow meeting with Baerbock issuing a statement before her visit, outlining Germany’s position and Lavrov shooting back with an essay-style response about five times longer. He said the Russian government was disappointed about the state of Russian-German relations, accusing Germany of participating in the Nato presence in eastern Europe, expelling diplomats on spurious grounds in relation to the case of the poisoned Russian opposition activist Alexei Navalny, and curtailing press freedom by putting pressure on Russian journalists working in Germany. Russia reserved the right to retaliate against German journalists, he said. Baerbock referred to the case of Navalny, imprisoned now for a year; to the recent disbandment of the human rights group NGO Memorial; to a murder in a central Berlin park for which a court said last month it suspected Russian intelligence was responsible. And she referred to what is probably the biggest elephant in the room: the controversial gas pipeline Nord Stream 2. Her opposition to it is longstanding – due not only to her green credentials but also to concern it will make Berlin dependent on Moscow. She said it could yet be stopped. “Should energy be used as a weapon this would have appropriate consequences in conjunction with this pipeline,” she said. Rieke Havertz, a political analyst at Die Zeit, concluded that Baerbock had “moved well within the narrow sequence of steps allowed to her in this, her first dance” on the stage of international diplomacy. It was not easy, Havertz added, for her to represent her Social Democratic boss, Olaf Scholz, whose party has a complicated Russian policy stance, not least due to its last chancellor, Gerhard Schröder’s close relationship with Vladimir Putin, from which the pipeline project was born and in which Schröder continues to be involved. Scholz, like his predecessor, the Christian Democrat Angela Merkel – and in contrast to Baerbock – would like to keep the pipeline separate from the politics and therefore out of the current conflict. For years, analysts have called this position naive. In its editorial on Thursday, the Süddeutsche Zeitung’s foreign editor, Stefan Kornelius, called it Germany’s “most important lever”, and said the impression Germany gave of being unprepared to abandon the pipeline was an “exploitable weakness”. Bild, not normally a supporter of Baerbock’s, called her visit “a successful debut in the cave of the bear”, praising her for “staying as stable as bamboo” and “not letting her eyelashes quiver”. It added: “She has earned our respect.” Still, a sober and ironic reality Baerbock now faces is that despite being in the heart of the German government, she has so far had few opportunities to talk about the issue at the heart of her own party’s raison d’etre: the environment. Except to announce in Kyiv that Germany would soon be opening a “bureau for hydrogen diplomacy”. Under the circumstances it sounded, remarked one commentator, “unintentionally funny, even though it was seriously meant”.Stephen Colbert Late-night hosts lapped up details of financial misconduct by the Trump family on Wednesday evening, a day after the office of the New York attorney general, Letitia James, told a court that its investigators uncovered a pattern of “fraudulent or misleading” business practices at the family company. “That’s believable,” said Stephen Colbert on The Late Show. “It’s certainly more believable than a pattern of business at the former president’s fraud.” James filed the motion in response to Donald Trump’s attempts to block her from questioning him and two of his children, Don Jr and Ivanka, under oath. “Lord, please make that happen,” said Colbert. “I don’t ask for much, and I don’t ask often. All I want before I die is to see Don Jr swear in on a jar of hair gel. It’s the only thing he believes in.” According to the filing, James’s team found significant evidence that Trump fraudulently valued multiple assets, including his private residence in Manhattan; Trump claimed the triplex apartment was 30,000 sq feet in size, when in fact the actual size was just under 11,000 sq feet. “Yeah, that’s not a surprise – he’s known for falsely tripling the size of his assets,” Colbert remarked. “He once told Stormy Daniels his penis was three inches.” Trevor Noah On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah also reacted to the allegation that Trump overstated the valuation of his New York apartment by over $200m. “No, Donald, no! You can’t exaggerate your apartment’s value by $200m!” Noah said, feigning concern. “I mean, I’d get it if it’s an NFT, but this is an apartment, my friend! “Donald Trump does not give a fuck, let’s be honest,” he continued. “This dude will brag about himself even if it gets him in trouble. I bet if a cop asks him how fast he was going, he was like, ‘yeah, I do 400bn miles a second, the fastest anyone has ever gone, I was so fast. So fast, you want to test it again?’” But though there’s plenty about the former president to mock, “I can’t get mad at him for this,” Noah conceded. “Because deep down, he’s just a landlord, and this is what every landlord in New York does. They’ll say an apartment has three bedrooms, then you get there and two of the bedrooms are somehow in the kitchen, but it’s still the best deal for your budget, so you sleep in your dishwasher. It is what it is.” Jimmy Kimmel “The walls appear to be closing in on Trump,” said Jimmy Kimmel. “Big, beautiful walls. Mexico’s like, ‘Let us know if you need us to chip in with that, muchachos.’ “Who could’ve ever predicted? I mean, of all things, fraud?” he joked, riffing through old news reports of the family’s numerous fraudulent schemes over decades, from Trump university to his father’s real estate business. “It’s a fairly straightforward case,” he concluded. “To find fraud in a business, you just have to look for the signs, particularly the signs at the top of the building that say Trump on them. And you will find it there. There is where you will find his male-pattern fraudness.” In other bad news for the the former president, the House select committee for the January 6 attack on the Capitol subpoenaed four of his former advisers this week, including his personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani. “Which is unnecessary – all they need to do is say his name three times in the mirror and he will appear,” Kimmel joked. “And even if he does show up to answer questions from the committee, he’s just going to lie. That’s just what he does. He’s a liar. He lies about things he doesn’t even need to lie about.” Seth Meyers And on Late Night, Seth Meyers tore into Giuliani’s subpoena for his role in spreading election lies and fomenting the January 6 insurrection. “I’ll never get over the fact that that guy, who sounds like the guy who sprays the shoes at the bowling alley … that guy was once crowned ‘America’s Mayor’ on magazine covers and became the personal attorney to the president of the United States,” Meyers mused. “Rudy is what happens when a scientist accidentally splices the DNA of a fruit bat and Mr Bean, and yet somehow he ended up working for the most powerful person in the world. “You imagine in your head that the president has all this power and information at their fingertips,” he continued. “They have 17 different intelligence agencies, the White House situation room, an army of government lawyers, and some of the richest, most powerful people in the world on their side, and yet Trump ended up with a Moleman who sweats like he’s the defendant. “Trump told the guy to hold a press conference at the Four Seasons Hotel, and he ended up at the Four Seasons Landscaping Company,” he added. “As a career comedy writer, I’ve got to tip my hat.”At the conclusion of the 1984 Democratic national convention, Jesse Jackson gathered his supporters and offered important perspective to those of us who had labored long and hard on his presidential campaign, telling us, “We’ve never gotten freedom at a convention. The convention is a comma, where you pause and go on. We’re going to keep fighting for freedom – at the polls, in the courts, in the streets.” And then he concluded by invoking the phrase made famous by Malcolm X – “Freedom, by any means necessary.” This week’s fight in the US Senate over the voting rights bill is a comma in a much, much longer story. It is a story that started in 1619 when Africans were brought in chains to America’s shores to do the work that created the wealth that made many white people rich. It is a story encapsulated in the country’s 1790 Naturalization Act, one of the nation’s very first pieces of legislation, which stated that citizenship is reserved to “free white person[s]” (a law that defined US immigration policy until 1965). It is a story that saw hundreds of thousands of Americans who wanted to be able to continue to buy and sell Black bodies go to war and kill hundreds of thousands of other Americans who sought to end slavery. At its core, it is the story of the centuries-long struggle over whether the United States of America should be a multiracial democracy, or whether it should be a white nationalist country. Reflecting on the defeat in the Senate, three dominant realities can help us make sense of what just happened and determine where we go from here. First, the cold, hard truth is that the majority of white politicians have always been reluctant to make America a multiracial democracy (between the House and Senate votes, 60% of the white members of Congress voted against the John Lewis Voting Rights Act). Passage of the 15th amendment itself, guaranteeing the right to vote, was a ferocious battle that raged over months and multiple votes in 1869. Nearly 100 years later, in 1965, it was only after Jimmie Lee Jackson, Viola Liuzzo and James Reeb lost their lives in the struggle for voting rights that Congress was finally moved to pass the current Voting Rights Act. None of this unwillingness to protect the right to vote is new, and we should be disappointed – but not surprised – at the conduct of the country’s elected officials during this week in which we supposedly honored Martin Luther King Jr. The second reality is that many top Democratic strategists and leaders are behind the times and bad at math. The fact that Democrats put their political capital behind an infrastructure bill before taking on the task of protecting democracy was a race-based political calculation. The infrastructure bill was an attempt by Democrats to woo the support of white swing voters by emphasizing bipartisanship and brick and mortar, race-neutral, projects. The scary policies associated with people of color – things like reimagining public safety, providing a pathway to citizenship for immigrants and combating aggressive voter suppression – were downplayed. The mathematical calculation in determining that sequence of priorities was off from the start. Beyond the morality of the matter, from a crass realpolitik point of view, voting rights protections and ending whites-first immigration practices bring more people of color into the electorate. And people of color vote Democratic. The third, and most hopeful, reality is that progressives can still win, and we need look no further than Georgia for inspiration and instruction about what is possible even in the face of opposition from the right and lack of conviction on the left. Stacey Abrams is very good at math, and she has been working for a decade to engage the 1.1 million people of color who were not voting in a state where elections were routinely decided by 230,000 votes. On the right, Republican Brian Kemp, who was secretary of state during his gubernatorial run against Abrams, improperly purged 340,000 people from the rolls in the 2018 election Abrams lost by 54,723 votes. Abrams did not treat her defeat as a fatal blow; she saw it as a comma, and she went on to continue organizing and building a statewide network of groups and activists who could turn out large numbers of voters of color. For a long time, the leaders in Georgia soldiered on without support from top Democrats who couldn’t calculate the advantage of focusing resources in a state where the strategy centered on expanding the number of people of color voting. By late summer 2020, for example, Senate Majority Pac had invested zero dollars in Georgia while spending $7m in 85% white Iowa. Biden himself expressed amazement at his victory there, saying on election night, “We’re still in the game in Georgia. That’s not one we expected.” The Georgia model elected Senators Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff and delivered the current Senate control to the Democrats. In 2022, it can expand that majority, dramatically decreasing the dependence on Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema. Massive investments in civic engagement organizations and voter mobilization efforts in Florida, North Carolina and Wisconsin can propel Val Demings, Cheri Beasley and Mandela Barnes to victories in their races against Republican incumbent senators. This week’s defeat of the Voting Rights Act is one chapter in a long story. While a sad chapter, it need not be the last chapter, and by applying the lessons from Georgia’s journey, we can actually write a happy ending over the next several years. Steve Phillips is host of Democracy in Color with Steve Phillips. His forthcoming book, How We End the Civil War, is due out this year. He is a Guardian US columnistBook now The pandemic has seen a dramatic shift to selling online, with platforms like Shopify, Squarespace and Woocommerce seeing dramatic increases in new business signups, whether from bricks and mortar retailers, or brand new businesses. But with increased advertising costs, ever growing customer expectations, and a greater focus on the sustainability of ecommerce delivery, the competitive landscape is becoming increasingly difficult to navigate. In this unmissable masterclass with Tom Szekeres, founder of the hyperlocal online delivery service Subship, you will discover the winning formula for growing a successful ecommerce business - whether you are a few years into your journey and want to develop, or you have recently built your store and hit a plateau. At the end of this workshop you will be able to confidently talk through the winning formula, will understand the full customer journey and get an understanding of where to improve the customer experience and increase retention, and will gain at least three concrete actions you can take to significantly boost business performance. Cut through the noise and get your business right in front of your target customer, with actionable steps, carefully considered and expert-led guidance, invaluable insights and interaction with a digital marketer and entrepreneur with more than a decade of experience to draw from. This course is for … Retailers who have moved online during the pandemic Startups with a desire to learn how to grow and scale their business Digital marketing professionals who want to learn more about ecommerce Course content The winning formula and how to improve your numbers Which parts of the formula you’re struggling with - and succeeding at The full customer journey: pitfalls and pain points Q&amp;A Tutor profile Tom Szekeres is the founder of Subship, a hyperlocal delivery service for South London, built on Shopify and featuring 40+ local businesses. With over 13 years of experience working in digital, Tom previously co-founded This Here, an award-winning social media agency, and works with a wide range of startup, non-profit, subscription, and ecommerce brands on marketing strategy and execution. He is a Fellow of the RSA, and teaches digital marketing and data science for General Assembly and Decoded. Details Book now Date: Tuesday 12 April 2022 Time: 6.30pm-8.30pm BST Price: £99 (plus £4.47 booking fee) Capacity: 60 6.30pm BST | 7.30pm CEST | 10.30am PST | 1.30pm EST This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible – but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.The US emerged as an early hotspot for the coronavirus and it continues to have some of the highest case and death rates in the world. It leads the world in both confirmed Covid-19 cases and deaths, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. It’s important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures. Map numbers shown below are from Johns Hopkins University. The spread of the Omicron variant at end of 2021 fueled a record wave of cases and hospitalizations in the US. However, deaths remain below the previous January 2021 and Delta waves. Here are the state-by-state breakdown of cases and deaths. Data is from Johns Hopkins University. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus pandemic, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as accurately as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.There is a lot of romance in the idea of Wayne Rooney returning to Everton to become manager – and I am in love with the thought – but it makes a lot of business sense, too. After Rafael Benítez’s brief, unhappy spell, the club need to reconnect with the fans, and the appointment of a hero is a good way of going about it. It is fair to say a lot of the fanbase were not enamoured of the appointment of a former Liverpool manager, so going in the opposite direction would be a smart move to get the supporters back on side. For me the dream would be Duncan Ferguson as assistant alongside Rooney. When Rooney came through at Everton, Ferguson was the one who looked after him; he would drive him to training, act as a protector on the pitch and also don boxing gloves – the pair would spar together in the club’s gym. Rooney idolised Ferguson growing up and they became good friends during their playing days, a bond that could help get Everton back to their best. Ferguson knows how to get the best out of Rooney – he knew his teammate was at his best on the pitch when angry, so would get him fired up before matches. Having an assistant who knows how a manager ticks is integral and this seems a perfect match. Although Rooney does not have a vast array of experience as a manager, he has shown some very promising signs at Derby. Despite all the struggles going on around the club, the performances and results have been impressive with a relatively young squad which he has galvanised in tough circumstances. Rooney has held his own in a storm, a good sign that he can deal with anything. There are never guarantees that a great player will become a good manager. Rooney, however, will have picked up plenty down the years playing for some of the most accomplished coaches in the game. He learned a lot from Sir Alex Ferguson and speaks glowingly about the man-management he and his Manchester United teammates received, and he will be looking to implement a similar style. Top players are always targets to be hunted but Rooney knew how to avoid the traps and stay at the highest level for a long time. He knows what it takes to win and is accustomed to diverse dressing rooms with big characters such as Cristiano Ronaldo, Carlos Tevez and Nemanja Vidic, so he knows how to cope with the elite. Those within the Everton dressing room will not want a constant churn of managers; what players desire is consistency to ensure high performance. Bringing in Rooney, who would command the respect of the squad immediately because of his achievements, would be a great boost to this group. When someone of his ilk speaks, everyone listens. When you have had such a successful and diverse career it is a great help. I would often ask Rachel Yankey a question and she would say, “I might not know the answer but I can only speak from my experience”, and she has had so much experience that you ended up getting the answer you needed every time. Any player going to Rooney will be able to get the answer in the same way – any given situation will have happened to him or someone around him in a dressing room, so he can give the best guidance. He knows how to manage a young squad and Everton have plenty of young talent emerging. To learn from a former Goodison Park prodigy would be perfect for them because he will understand everything the players are going through as they try to become Premier League regulars. Amid all the hype and narrative there are concerns for Rooney regarding a potential homecoming. There will be fears from some corners that, like Frank Lampard at Chelsea, the dream job has come too soon and if it goes wrong then it’s a long way back. Lampard’s situation, however, was very different to what Rooney would find at Goodison Park. He had to deal with the transfer ban but he had such a good squad and young players he was fully aware of from his assistant Jody Morris’s work in the academy that there was a bit more pressure on him. Rooney would be coming into a side in a really difficult situation and have greater time to grow and less of a fall if things go badly. Despite Everton’s issues there are plenty of positives within the squad. The players are struggling for confidence but Rooney has proved at Derby he can enthuse players. He has a striker in Dominic Calvert-Lewin who will score goals with the right assistance, they have decent wide players and a good goalkeeper in Jordan Pickford, and youngsters such as Jarrad Branthwaite are starting to emerge. Rooney would do well to bring in someone to help with recruitment, which is where Everton have fallen short in recent times. They have spent £500m on players since Farhad Moshiri bought into the club in February 2016 but their squad certainly does not reflect that. Getting the infrastructure of the club and having strong foundations will be key. Business is about maximising your resources and Rooney has shown he can do that at Derby, so stepping up to a better squad at Everton should not be a problem. Add a bit of romance into the mix and it could make the perfect marriage.The far-right activist Tommy Robinson is being pursued for an estimated £2m by creditors after he claimed bankruptcy during a high court libel trial. The English Defence League founder, whose real name is Stephen Christopher Yaxley-Lennon, declared himself bankrupt in a high court trial last year in which he was ordered to pay £100,000 in libel damages to a Syrian schoolboy he defamed online. In March Robinson will be officially discharged from bankruptcy, meaning he no longer has to pay back any debts covered by the filing – including the six-figure legal fees. It emerged on Thursday that creditors have asked an independent insolvency expert to investigate whether Robinson’s claim is genuine or whether he is “hiding” assets to avoid paying his debts. The campaign group Hope Not Hate said it believed Robinson had access to assets worth up to about £3m through property acquisitions, investments, donations and book sales. The group said it would supply a dossier of evidence to the new investigation. The Guardian has attempted to reach Robinson for comment. Nick Lowles, the chief executive of Hope Not Hate, said: “It is wholly unjust that while his victim’s life has been turned upside down, Tommy Robinson carries on his life as before.” Robinson claimed bankruptcy in March last year during a high court libel trial brought by Jamal Hijazi, a schoolboy from Syria who was filmed being attacked at school. Shortly after the video of the incident went viral, Robinson falsely claimed in Facebook videos viewed by nearly 1 million people that Hijazi was “not innocent and he violently attacks young English girls in his school”. The judge, Mr Justice Nicklin, said the consequences of Robinson’s falsehoods had been “particularly severe” for Hijazi and the scars would “likely last for many years, if not a lifetime”. He ordered Robinson to pay Hijazi £100,000 in damages plus his legal costs, although the teenager has not yet seen a penny due to Robinson’s bankruptcy claim. Hope Not Hate said it was raising funds in order to compile a dossier for investigators about Robinson’s finances. Lowles said: “Tommy Robinson has to understand that there are real consequences to his hate. It is time to make him pay up and ensure that his victims get proper justice.” The insolvency investigator has a number of powers at his disposal including accessing Robinson’s bank and company records, interviewing witnesses under oath and – if necessary – applying to court for search and arrest warrants. The Guardian has revealed previously how Robinson had an international network of wealthy backers and received donations and other support from across the globe. Such was the influence of Robinson’s supporters that they asked advisers to the Republican former US presidential candidate Ted Cruz for legal advice on securing an extended visa for “someone who needs protection”.MEET THE NEW SPURS, NOT THE SAME AS THE OLD SPURS A different referee, less out of puff, might have sent off Steven Bergwijn for shoving Caglar Soyuncu in the chest after play-acting for a penalty towards the end of the match between Leicester and Spurs on Wednesday night. But thankfully – although Foxes fans are permitted to demur – Jon Moss, blowing hard after 93 minutes of non-stop action, had little appetite or energy for digging deep into his pocket for the red card, and merely brandished yellow instead. Cue the most preposterous stoppage-time turnaround since Mario Balotelli teed one up for Agüeroooooooo. If only Martin Tyler had been commentating. Bergwijn, off the hook, went on to score a 95th-minute equaliser, then 80 seconds later – which is not a lot of time when you factor in relieved celebrations and other associated fannying around before the restart – rounded Kasper Schmeichel, who had already started moaning at possession-shedder Youri Tielemans, and slotted home the winner. A comeback that was nothing short of heroic, although Leicester’s collapse was, how shall we say, a little Spursy. Mind you, there was plenty of BrenDNA in there too, when you consider Liverpool’s 2014 title challenge, Leicester’s attempts to qualify for Big Cup, and everything the Queen’s Celtic achieved under the master toast-and-tea-fuelled tactician in Europe. It’s almost as if a pattern is emerging. So with the concept of Spursiness having finally been consigned to history, surely to be replaced in the vernacular by Rodgersesque, it was an almost perfect night for Antonio Conte. He maintained his unbeaten Premier League record as Spurs boss, saw his team leapfrog arch-rivals Arsenal in the table, and despite some understandably wild touchline celebrations, his new lid – a centre parting with subtle quiff that replaces that trademark Beatles ’63 fringe – stayed resolutely in place. The Conte revolution continues to gather momentum, then. Failure to build on this astonishing never-say-die result would be, how shall we say, Brendandelic. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Tom Davies from 4pm GMT for hot Afcon MBM coverage of Ivory Coast 1-1 Algeria, before Scott Murray is on hand for Arsenal 1-3 Liverpool (agg: 1-3) in the Carling Cup at 7.45pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Nobody can come away thinking that Shaun Harvey runs the club. Shaun Harvey has got a very big part to play in a lot of the significant decisions that are made, that is my role looking after Rob and Ryan’s investment into the club and trying to deliver for them against their mission statement” – look who’s getting his third-person on. Yes, the former Leeds and Football League chief suit is working as strategic advisor to Ryan Reynolds and Rob McElhenney at Wrexham, and wants you to know that he’s not looking to undermine current chief suit, Fleur Robinson. FIVER LETTERS “I had not known about Frank Worthington’s signing for Liverpool (picture caption in yesterday’s Fiver), and looked it up. And what an astounding story. After Worthington failed a medical for high blood pressure (which he attributed to anxiety following the death of his father), Liverpool sent him away for a week of relaxation in Majorca before retaking his medical. The Huddersfield Examiner reported that the trip consisted of, after Worthington died: ‘Seven days of carousing, which involved two Swedish blondes, a night with Miss Great Britain, a casual encounter at the airport with a woman whose name he didn’t catch and a night with a young Belgian beauty. He retook the medical. His blood pressure was even higher. A bemused Shankly cancelled the deal and sent his mother some flowers.’ Different times” – Michael Hann (and 1,056 others). “Following on from yesterday’s Fiver about Comoros, did you realise that a lot of very poor Africans across the continent cannot watch Afcon or World Cups (nor qualifiers for both and CAF club competitions) on their local TV channels but only through very expensive paywalls, often from Qatar. Many go and watch in cafes or through pirate online sites, but a lot more people just don’t watch any of it. When football is your only way of escapism, this really and truly sucks. That just doesn’t make any sense to me. Where people hardly earn enough to eat and educate their kids, no one will pay so much to watch football. I am pretty sure the broadcasters don’t need so much money from African audiences to watch their national teams play on an international stage, it really should be free” – Slim Chaabane. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Slim Chaabane. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your listening gear around the latest Football Weekly Extra podcast. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Former Brazil forward Robinho has had a nine-year sentence for the rape of a young woman upheld by Italy’s top court. Player-hoarding establishments will have to tweak their strategy once regulations capping the number of international loans in and out at one club come into force in July. Speaking of Chelsea … they may be forced to leave at home any players not vaccinated against Covid-19 for the second leg of their Big Cup last-16 tie at Lille in March. Brentford’s Thomas Frank is feeling funky after their 3-1 home defeat against Manchester United. “If you look at the overall performance over 90 minutes there was only one winner, and that was us,” he fumed. “It’s a miracle they were not 2-0 down at half-time.” Egypt are into the Afcon last 16 after beating Sudan 1-0, while Guinea-Bissau’s hopes are over after losing 2-0 to Nigeria. Barcelona want rid of Ousmane Dembélé before the end of January. “It is obvious the player does not want to continue and is not committed to our future,” sniffed club suit Mateu Alemany. “In that scenario, he and his [Mr 15%s] have been informed that he should leave immediately.” Norwich keeper Tim Krul faces a spell on the sidelines with shoulder-gah, with Angus Gunn to start in Friday’s relegation showdown with Watford. Leeds striker Patrick Bamford has also suffered a fresh foot-knack setback. Caretaker Everton boss Duncan Ferguson is demanding full commitment from his players after Rafa Benítez’s sacking. They would do well to give it to him. “I am getting among the players and telling a few home truths because the past has not been good enough,” he roared. “They should run themselves into the ground.” And Bristol Manor Farm manager Lee Lashenko has been banned for 12 matches by the FA for confronting and abusing a referee after their FA Trophy loss to Paulton Rovers. STILL WANT MORE? Enter the Ralf-shaped universe at Manchester United. By Barney Ronay. All the latest men’s and women’s moves in our rebooted transfer interactives. Where will Ben Brereton Díaz rock up next? The Mill has the latest. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! SIGHA leading Unilever shareholder has called the company’s failed £50bn offer for GSK’s consumer healthcare division a “near-death experience” and said management should focus on improving its core business – or step down. Terry Smith, the founder of Fundsmith, lambasted Unilever in a “postmortem” letter to investors in his £29bn asset management business. The letter comes a day after Unilever said it would not increase its bid for a fourth time, leaving GSK free to float its consumer arm as planned this summer. “[This is] about a near death experience as it now appears that Unilever’s attempt to purchase the GSK consumer business is now thankfully dead rather than the value of our investment in Unilever,” said the letter, which was co-written by Fundsmith’s head of research, Julian Robins. Fundsmith is the seventh largest active shareholder in Unilever, the owner of numerous household brands, including Marmite and Dove soap. In a wide-ranging critique of Unilever and its management, Smith and Robins attacked the company’s long-term performance, accused it of not engaging with shareholders, having a flawed mergers and acquisitions strategy, as well as a “penchant for corporate gobbledegook”. “Unilever’s performance has been poor,” the letter said. “It is the worst performer by a considerable margin amongst the multinational FMCG [fast-moving consumer goods] companies we have owned and not just in terms of share price but also in terms of sales growth.” The credit rating agency Fitch on Tuesday said a debt-fuelled purchase of the GSK consumer healthcare division could trigger a “multi-notch downgrade” of Unilever’s rating, which could make it more expensive for the company to borrow and force some investors to dump the shares. Unilever’s share price has lagged rivals in recent years and are down 30% since 2019, when Alan Jope took over as chief executive. Its market value has fallen by a fifth during the last 12 months, even as the FTSE 100 has gained 13%. “It seems to us that Unilever management’s response to its poor performance has been to utter meaningless platitudes to which it has now attempted to add major M&amp;A activity,” the letter said. “What could possibly go wrong.” Last week, Smith, whose fund holds a position worth more than £800m in Unilever, used his annual letter to clients to attack the Jope’s strategy of boosting the environmental, social and governance credentials of the company rather than focusing on core business performance. Smith said on Thursday: “We believe Unilever management – or someone else if they don’t want the job – should surely focus on getting the operating performance of the existing business to the level it should before taking on anymore challenges.” Fundsmith said Unilever investors should just wait to buy a piece of GSK Consumer Healthcare when it floats, rather than own the business outright by paying a higher price through a takeover.André Leon Talley loved the surprisingly similar rituals of two ways of life he knew well: the black community of his childhood in North Carolina, and French couture, with its historical and literary associations. His remarkable persona and work as fashion editor, adviser and seer were founded on church ladies in their Sunday best, and an encyclopedic knowledge of the history of clothes. Few couturiers knew a fraction of what he did, and the US Vogue editor Anna Wintour, who appointed him her shield – even in heels she stood small beside his 6ft 6in – admitted that he had what she lacked, a deep apprehension of fashion. Talley, who has died aged 73 of a heart attack, was in the front row of the Paris, and most other, shows for more than four decades, an enthusiastic warm island in an ocean of cool, as well as often the sole black presence. He could photograph, write, arrange shoots, broker ungettable interviews and covers, notably Michelle Obama as first lady, and, most importantly, predict the future based on his passion for the past. Talley’s lofty standards matched Wintour’s own when the Condé Nast empire was at its height in the late 1980s. Although Wintour said Talley sent her handwritten notes about his experiences with race, so “it was always bubbling under the surface”, he avoided the subject publicly, concentrating on his unique personal status in fashion. Only in interviews publicising his second memoir, The Chiffon Trenches (2020), written after Wintour had discarded him from Vogue without a word, did he describe her as “a colonial broad”, on whose watch Condé Nast had remained undiversified into the 21st century. He felt he had been exploited as an exotic, and sometimes as ambassador for a black milieu; always the first to be bumped from a guest list. The released anger energised his last years. He had been creating identity and an unrepeatable career path since his childhood in Durham, North Carolina. Born in Washington to Alma (nee Davis) and William Talley, who had gone there to work as government clerks, from the age of two months he grew up in the Durham house of his grandmother Bennie Davis, for 50 years a cleaner at nearby Duke University. She encouraged the boy to read and gave him his own shocking-pink painted study, while his father sent a set of encyclopedias. At nine he discovered Vogue in the public library and later walked to a newsstand on the white side of town after Sunday church to buy it. After Diana Vreeland arrived as editor in 1963, Vogue became Talley’s portal to a better planet. He read every caption, recognised the Beautiful People’s names, especially the French ones: he had been a Francophile since hearing Julia Child say “Bon appetit!” on her TV cooking show. He and Bennie took pleasure in clothes, and yearly boarded a bus to Washington or New York to buy the best that could be afforded. He read Flaubert’s Madame Bovary on one trip, intending to teach French in high school. But his world widened, as he went on from North Carolina Central University on a scholarship to Brown University, Rhode Island, where he wrote a master’s thesis about black women in 19th-century French art and literature, and was picked up socially by wealthy white students from Rhode Island School of Design; he wrote for their college mag. They were his entree to New York, and, with a letter of introduction from one of their parents, to an unpaid internship in 1974 at the Metropolitan Museum Costume Institute, where Vreeland curated extraordinary exhibitions. She noticed his creative input, summoned him to her office, wrote “ANDRE – THE HELPER” on her pad, and ordered him to stay by her side to show’s end. He recognised her resemblance to Bennie, the same perfect clothes ritually maintained and tissue-paper-packed, the gloves, hard work and discipline. Vreeland found him a receptionist job on Andy Warhol’s Interview magazine, where he was taken out on the town by the Factory entourage, and did thorough research before talking to Karl Lagerfeld. The designer was the first of many to dress Talley, tossing him custom-made shirts with matching mufflers at the end of the interview. Another Talley teen hero, John Fairfield of Women’s Wear Daily, recruited him and in 1978 sent him as bureau chief to Paris. The French could be hostile – a PR executive mocked him as “Queen Kong” – and there were imbroglios over favoured couturiers. Talley eventually left to freelance. In 1983, he moved in as news editor at US Vogue, under the command of Grace Mirabella, just as Wintour became its creative editor. When she was anointed editor in 1988, Talley took her old job, both a novelty – male, gay, African American – and a link with Vreeland. In 1998, he was appointed editor-at-large. That title was somewhat unfortunate: after Bennie’s death, Talley comfort-ate the food he associated with her kitchen, and his tall slenderness consolidated into girth beneath wonderful robes and capes sewn for him by major designers. Wintour and his pastor at the Abyssinian Baptist Church of Harlem persuaded Talley to book in for repeated clinic stays, but the struggle with weight never abated. His belief in the power of pageantry to elevate lives, in careful selection, upkeep, and tissue paper, had fallen out of fashion, and in 2013, Vogue discarded him. There was no personal life to return to in his borrowed home in unchic White Plains, New York, nor had he got much money. Many fashion-world friendships ended in silence. He confessed that, though proudly gay, he had avoided sex since childhood abuse. As a true dandy, like those in favourite novels by Balzac and Baudelaire, his real romance had always been with the clothes. • André Leon Talley, fashion editor, born 16 October 1948; died 18 January 2022A group of international bondholders in the embattled Chinese property developer Evergrande have hired an offshore law firm and warned of legal action if the company continues to refuse “substantive engagement” over its finances and restructuring plans. The group of unnamed bondholders, who describe themselves in a statement as “large and reputable international investors with deep experience and high standing in the international capital markets”, said they had been forced to consider legal action after repeatedly receiving “little more than vague assurances of intent, lacking in both detail and substance”. Operating under the acronym AHG, the group has added the offshore law firm Harneys to its roster of advisers, which includes the law firm Kirkland &amp; Ellis and tje investment bank Moelis, who have been working with the bondholders since September. China’s second-biggest property developer, Evergrande has nearly $20bn (£14.7bn) of international market bonds that have been deemed to be in cross-default by ratings firms after missed payments, and has more than $300bn in total liabilities. “The AHG believes it has been left with no option but to seriously consider enforcement actions,” the bondholders said in a statement released on Thursday. “The AHG is prepared to take all necessary actions to vehemently defend its legal rights and protect its legitimate interests.” The bondholder group complained in October of a lack of engagement from Evergrande, which in December set up a risk management committee and repeatedly promised to engage with all stakeholders. Evergrande, which is embarking on one of China’s biggest ever restructuring processes, has now resumed work at more than 90% of its projects. However, the bondholder group said it needed full transparency on the company’s plans and wanted it to halt more asset sales unless the AHG was consulted. “The AHG recognises the group’s recent efforts in resuming over 90% of its construction projects, and want to be a part of a solution to help the group during these hard times,” the letter said. “In this respect, the AHG requests the group to promptly engage with the AHG, provide full transparency in relation to the group’s financial position and liabilities and refrain from making any further asset disposals without consulting the AHG.” The bondholder group said it hoped that by making a public statement, and threatening legal action, it would “prompt immediate, meaningful and substantive actions and not just words” from Evergrande.When Mani and Amy Baker-Floyd moved from London to Toronto with their toddler Zoe in September 2019, Mani didn’t expect to find it as thrilling a place to live as the British capital. “London is hard to compete with,” says Mani, a teacher. “It’s on the cutting edge of everything.” The couple had decided to give life in Canada a go because marketing expert Amy – who was born in Ontario but had lived in the UK for nearly a decade – felt ready to return to her roots. At the time, Mani, a keen outdoorsman who originates from Brighton, had no idea of the adventures that lay in store. The family take the ferry to, and explore, the Toronto Islands “People never believe you can surf in Toronto, but it’s surprisingly good, with consistent waves for both beginners and more experienced surfers,” says Mani, about one of his most unexpected discoveries. The city, set on magnificent Lake Ontario, is home to a sport more often associated with tropical climates, and at Bluffer’s park in Toronto’s east, surfers from around the world converge in what Mani calls a “friendly, typically Canadian scene with plenty of camaraderie”. Mani surfing in Ashbridges Bay Of course, with Zoe, now four, to think of – and new arrival Noah, who’s not yet one – there’s only so much time for surfing. Thankfully, close to their home in the heart of the city, the Baker-Floyds have found plenty of family friendly adventures to keep them busy. The dinosaurs at the Royal Ontario Museum are a favourite of Zoe’s “We can be almost anywhere in about 30 minutes on the subway,” says Amy, who highlights the Royal Ontario Museum, the most visited in Canada, as a firm favourite with Zoe thanks to its gemstone gallery, dinosaur skeletons and tempting gift shop (she always manages to leave with a treat). Because the museum is so easy to get to, the family will often visit just one or two exhibits at a time, keeping things manageable for the kids. Another family favourite is the Ontario Science Centre, with its KidSpark packed full of child-friendly science fun. Around 20 minutes on the subway brings the family to Ripley’s Aquarium of Canada, home to all-ages sea life exhibits, while the McMichael Canadian Art Collection – where Zoe likes running around the outdoor sculptures – is a half-hour drive north of Toronto, in the village of Kleinburg. Clockwise from top left: the Royal Ontario Museum, the McMichael Canadian Art Collection and Ripley’s Aquarium of Canada are all within easy reach of Toronto Outdoor life shapes many of the family’s Toronto experiences because nature is never far away. Every weekend they head to High Park, which at 162 hectares (400 acres) is larger than London’s Hyde Park, for its playground, outdoor swimming pool, ice-cream shop and ice-skating rink. And, especially in summer, the family pays regular visits to the Toronto Islands, an exciting (but handily brief) boat ride from downtown. This chain of 15 small islands is home to restaurants, gardens, picnic sites and several beaches. High Park, visited by the family every weekend “People don’t realise Toronto has a beach scene,” says Amy, who points out that there is an abundance of swimming spots, even downtown. Mani, unsurprisingly for a Brit, loves the reliability of the Ontario summer weather: “Unlike in the UK, if you make a plan to visit the island on the weekend, you know it’s probably going to be sunny, hot and dry.” Beach breaks are a theme when it comes to the family’s Ontario explorations because there are so many within an hour or two’s drive of the city centre. Sandbanks’ white beach is the ideal spot for a quick dip Sandbanks, a two-and-a-half hour drive east of Toronto in Prince Edward County, is one such place. The soft white beach is not the only attraction – there’s a thriving wine region, trendy restaurants and smart hotels, such as the Drake Devonshire, a 30-minute drive away in Wellington. For a future visit, the family has the Mustang Drive-in movie theatre, in Bloomfield, six miles (10km) from the hotel, on its to-do list. As far as Amy is concerned, however, beach breaks don’t get better than Tiny Township in the southern Georgian Bay area, known for its beautiful beaches. “When I show friends photos of Balm beach, with its crystal blue waters and light sands, they always say, are you sure you’re not in the Bahamas?” she laughs. The warm, shallow waters, neighbouring ice-cream shop and on-tap mini golf mean that the family can laze by the beachfront all day. But there’s plenty else in the area to entice active types. Nearby Awenda provincial park, for example, has forest hiking trails plus campsites for pitching tents and roasting marshmallows. Tubing at Elora Gorge; Old Elora Mill Whether the Baker-Floyds are heading to Georgian Bay or to one of their other favourite Ontario getaways – including the Elora Gorge conservation area or Blue Mountain Resort’s hiking trails or approachable ski runs – the journey is always part of the fun. Passing through the typical Ontario towns, stuffed with farms and red-brick homes, provides real contrast to modern Toronto. “As a Brit, to me they feel straight out of the movies,” says Mani. “General store, cafe, cherry pie …” The couples’ top picks include Belfountain and Creemore, where they might stop off to buy butter tarts, an Ontarian flaky pastry with a gooey, sweet filling. Summer brings trips to the area’s pick-your-own farms (top) while autumn is the time to enjoy the changing colours of Forks of the Credit provincial park (below) Depending on the season, the Baker-Floyds will change up the particulars of their adventures. In summer, they might visit one of the dozens of pick-your-own farms, harvesting fresh strawberries, blueberries or peaches to show the children where fruit comes from. In autumn, they might drive under a “canopy of reds, yellows and oranges” in Forks of the Credit provincial park, a prime leaf-peeping spot. In winter, you might find them at Evergreen Brick Works, in Toronto, enjoying the holiday market or skating rink. Or popping to small child-friendly ski hills, just 45 minutes from Toronto’s centre. And that’s a key part of what they love about exploring Ontario as a family. “There’s something for every time of year,” says Amy. “Whether it’s walks in autumn, snowman-making in winter, swimming in summer, Ontario is an all-season place. And that affords you so many different opportunities.” To discover more about enjoying everything Ontario has to offer, head to destinationontario.com/uk“I never realised how famous a simple bacon sandwich could be,” says Gavan Knox, a self-described foodie who moved to Toronto from London in 2016. “The bakery I get them from has pictures on the wall of celebrities trying them out.” Speaking from his home in Scarborough, a community on the eastern edge of Toronto, you can hear Gavan’s love for Carousel Bakery’s carnivorous snack radiating through the screen. The sandwich is scrumptious in its simplicity. “It’s a bread roll with several slices of perfect peameal bacon, and a fried egg if you like. It’s absolutely irresistible,” he says. Run by brothers Maurice and Robert Biancolin, Carousel Bakery is an institution at Toronto’s St Lawrence Market, and its bacon, like any sought-after treat worth its salt, is made by a “secret producer”. Peameal bacon, by the way, is an Ontario speciality and owes its name to the ground dried peas that it used to be rolled in before producers switched to cornmeal. Carousel Bakery in St Lawrence Market is renowned for its bacon buns For Gavan and his partner Scott Knox, there isn’t a much better way to spend a morning than at St Lawrence Market. “Seeing the butchers, fishmongers and bakers at work, it’s just got this ambience that I love,” he enthuses. “There’s an awesome cheese store there too, Olympic Cheese, which is said to have 800 kinds of cheese. Scott loves it, so I can leave him there and do a circuit of the market. Guaranteed he’ll have a few bags full by the time I get back.” The market is home to butchers, bakers, cheesemongers and world-food stores As a keen cook and baker, Gavan knows the market is a place where he can track down hard-to-find items. “There are a couple of world food stores, which I love, because if I’m looking for a certain ingredient to make, say, Thai or Ghanaian food, I can go there and the chances are, I’ll find it.” Scott and Gavan sound like Toronto natives, the way they know the city’s food scene like their own backyard – you’d never think they’d only lived there for a few years. The pair met in 2003 in Manchester and moved in together in London a few months later. But in 2016, Canada came knocking. They had taken a holiday to Toronto in 2015 and Scott, who at the time was managing director of the Marketing Agencies Association in the UK, had lunch with the president of the Institute of Communication Agencies (ICA), an association that represents Canadian advertising, marketing, media and public relations agencies. “A year later, she called me and said: ‘I’m retiring, have you ever thought about moving to Canada?’ So we took the decision to go – and now I’m president and CEO of the ICA. We gave ourselves two years, and said that if we didn’t like it, we’d return to the UK. Five years later, we’ve bought the house we now live in, and love it here.” For Gavan, the move was made easier by the fact he felt right at home among the foodie crowd in Ontario’s capital. He had made a name for himself in the UK through his baking business, Mr Mom’s Kitchen, gaining further recognition, and making a TV appearance, after winning an award for one of his recipes through Observer Food Monthly. He soon found foodie friends aplenty in his new home town. “On occasion it’s been a little disconcerting,” laughs Scott. “We’d go into a restaurant and the owner or the chef comes out and starts talking to Gavan. And I’m thinking, how do you know each other!” Japanese restaurant Akira Back is a firm favourite of the couple On the whole, the couple find the restaurant scene in the city friendly and “democratic”, whereas in London, they feel, high-end places can tend to verge on the elitist. They rave about Akira Back, a luxury Japanese restaurant in the Bisha Hotel, where the eponymous chef creates modern Japanese dishes with Korean flavours. “The food is just outstanding,” says Scott. “They do this thing called a mushroom and salmon pizza, which is one of their starter dishes. Honestly, it is just heavenly.” The couple have no end of places to recommend for anyone new to the city. Si Lom Thai is a favourite, located on Church St in the gay village. “It’s the best Thai we’ve had in Toronto,” says Gavan, adding that they like it also because it’s so family friendly. The couple have two adopted children, age 13 and 14. “One of the things that I love about Si Lom is that it’s fully authentic. They even come up with these crazy delicious Thai cocktails.” Si Lom Thai is a family favourite And, of course, no visit to Canada is complete without brunch. “I was astounded by how big brunch is in Canada compared to the UK,” says Gavan, mentioning Smith, a French restaurant, also in the village, as their ultimate, top choice for a mid-morning stop. “If you’re in Toronto, it’s a great go-to for brunch,” he says, although due to Covid-19, it’s now only open on the weekend. Diners can tuck into classic dishes such as eggs benedict, croque madame and the Smith ruben, that’s corned beef, sauerkraut and pickles on rye, but Gavan’s particular favourite is chicken and waffles served with greens and a bourbon chilli syrup. Brunch is a Canadian staple at Smith (top) and Butchie’s (below) If you’re looking to get out of town (and are a fried chicken lover like Gavan), the pair suggest heading to Butchie’s, located on Dundas Street West in Whitby. It’s about an hour’s drive from downtown Toronto, and Gavan and Scott say it’s well worth a pit stop for its smoked meats and fried chicken. Alongside the pub-style fare, its atmosphere is part of the appeal. “You walk in and the staff are really friendly. Even now with Covid protocols and precautions, they still have time to have a conversation with you,” says Gavan. Friendliness seems to be a theme running through the couple’s experience of the Ontario food scene, as well as the quality of the dishes served up. And it’s not just at restaurants that this friendly vibe comes through. Scott occasionally attends business functions through his work, and notes that even within the catering industry, a can-do attitude and welcoming spirit shines through. One of his favourite places for corporate events is the Westin Trillium at Blue Mountain, a luxury hotel nestled on Georgian Bay, two hours northwest of Toronto. “There’s nothing too difficult to get done there,” he says, even for events of 150-200 people. If you are there in winter, whether for work or pleasure, the hotel’s O&amp;B cafe offers superb dining in a relaxed atmosphere where skiers can come in off the slopes and eat in their gear before heading out again, suitably replenished. Tuck in to the wonderfully named chicken and leek potstickers (dumplings) or a bee sting pizza with a side of grilled cornbread and maple butter. If you feel like venturing farther afield, Blue Mountain resort is home to small town cafes and restaurants offering a warm welcome, steaming mugs of hot chocolate and cakes that you won’t be able to resist, especially after a day outdoors The Westin Trillium at Blue Mountain Gavan and Scott value the friendly welcomes wherever they go, and the multiculturalism that is ever present too: “I love the fact that Canada’s food scene embraces many cultures, making them as accessible as possible,” says Gavan, adding that it’s on his bucket list to try more restaurants that specialise in First Nations food. Drinks-wise, he highlights Red Tape Brewery, and its beers influenced by Inuit culture. He says that the Paunnat Saison beer is brewed with paunnat flowers that are native to Nunavut, Canada’s northernmost territory, and home mainly to Inuit people. Red Tape Brewery’s beers are influenced by Inuit culture Whether it’s rhapsodising over the perfect Japanese starter or explaining the uncomplicated satisfaction of four slices of bacon in a roll, chatting to Gavan and Scott Knox is enough to make anyone feel peckish. And it’s clear there is something for every budget in Toronto and the surrounding areas, be it authentic Thai food, pub-style grub, or a classic brunch, Canadian-style. To discover more about Ontario’s fabulous food culture, head to destinationontario.com/ukThe Omicron outbreak of Covid cases appears to have peaked in New South Wales, Victoria and other parts of Australia, epidemiologists believe. Prof Adrian Esterman, an epidemiologist and biostatistician at the University of South Australia, said the Omicron wave had “absolutely certainly” peaked in NSW and Victoria. The Reff – the effective reproduction number, which measures how many other people someone with Covid will infect, on average – had dropped below 1 in both states, Esterman said. “We know that the peak has been reached when the Reff gets below 1.” On Thursday, Esterman calculated the Reff to be 0.83 in NSW and 0.8 in Victoria. “You can’t really interpret the daily cases very well because of huge fluctuations and large of numbers of rapid antigen tests coming through on a given day but being distributed over previous days,” Esterman said. “The Reff is still reasonably stable despite the daily fluctuation in case numbers.” Victoria’s chief health officer, Brett Sutton, said on Monday he believed the state’s case numbers were close to peaking, but expected the number of people in hospital would continue to increase. The number of people in hospital with Covid in NSW dropped on Thursday to 2,781, the first time the figure has fallen in the state since 18 December. The state’s health authorities had previously predicted that hospitalisation figures – which typically lag reported case numbers by seven to 14 days – would begin to plateau this week. “I would expect to see hospitalisations starting to come down now,” Esterman said. Other experts were more cautious. Dr Michael Lydeamore, an infectious disease modeller at Monash University, said NSW was “probably through the worst” and that Victorian cases looked to be “levelling off”, but that it would take another week before experts could be certain both states had reached a peak. “NSW looks more like it’s peaked than Victoria, but in both states we’re still not really sure how many infections we’re detecting. It’s that separation between infections going on and cases, which is what’s reported,” he said. Prof Alexandra Martiniuk, an epidemiologist at the University of Sydney agreed that while cases seemed to be dropping in NSW, “the lack of good data is making this hard”. Despite the welcome inclusion of positive RATs in official case figures, “we don’t have an accurate sense of the number of cases in the community”, she said. Experts agree that population-wide surveys are needed to accurately estimate levels of Covid infection in Australia. Esterman said Covid spread was showing “a very similar pattern across all states and territories” except Western Australia, “likely peaking at the moment and almost certainly going to be coming down shortly”. Lydeamore anticipated a “bumpy road” ahead for the Northern Territory over the next few weeks, due to lower vaccination rates in some regions, high rates of pre-existing health conditions, and challenges posed by geographical remoteness. “That’s going to make it very tough,” he said. Though Omicron cases have risen steeply, experts said the decrease in cases was likely to occur more slowly. “We could be having high cases for a while as it drops slowly down, and it could also plateau at a level that is not necessarily low,” Martiniuk said. Other countries, such as Canada, experienced a slight uptick in Covid cases when students returned to school, she said. Esterman anticipated a “slow decline in case numbers with an occasional blip upwards when things happen, like schools reopening”. Lydeamore said while school-related outbreaks and infections among teaching staff were likely, the return to school was “probably not going to massively blow up the cases again”. Martiniuk emphasised the importance of getting boosters, wearing masks and outdoor socialising “while we’re dropping down the curve”. “Sadly, this isn’t the end of Covid, probably.”After many years I have finally got my “dream” job – it’s perfect for me, the work is meaningful and genuinely interesting. However, a new problem has reared its head that I was not expecting – while I love my job, I resent having to work at all. I have become irrationally angry at the amount of time work takes up, that its schedule dictates most of my days, decisions on where I can live, that I have to request days off. What I do is important to me, but I cannot fathom that this is what my life will be for maybe the next 40 years – wearing dress code-appropriate clothing, wolfing down sandwiches in my 30-minute lunch break, then puttering back to my home to get a good eight hours so I can do it all again. The dream job did not exactly come with a dream salary, so shorter hours are out of the question, and I honestly don’t think that would solve the underlying issue. While I wait for automation to take away the need for humans to work at all, any advice? First, let me warn you that many people who hear this may bristle and start telling you about the noble value of a job. “It’s character building; you should be grateful you even have one.” Don’t listen. While it’s true that some people find meaning in their career or use it to forge an identity they’re proud of, the fact that’s true for them doesn’t mean it should be for you. You’re not deviant for feeling this way – I’ve said elsewhere that the idea that work has moral value unto itself is a myth we pay for with the one resource we can never replenish: our time. But that doesn’t soften the brute reality that we have to get money somehow. I think a lot of the resentment we can feel at work comes from knowing quite how brute that reality is: it’s not just that the tasks grate, whether we’re sending emails or stacking shelves. It’s the feeling that there’s no choice about it. That can make us feel hollowed of agency, conveyor-belted into a life we don’t recognise – you capture it when you talk about wolfing meals, dressing for others, constantly needing permission. No one likes to feel they’re not the author of their own life. The task in front of you, I think, is to restore a sense of agency. Start with the parts of life that aren’t work. It’s perilously easy to commute home, mush-brained and worn through, and collapse into screens until bedtime. Try very hard not to do that. Find whatever it is that restores your energy and identity after work and insist on doing it. Cycle home; dance to loud music when you get there; join a community group that will expect you at a certain time; put cold pickles on your eyes if you need to – anything that will wash the work torpor off you so can insist your leisure time will be spent on your joys and projects, not just the absence of work. The more you can populate life with things you recognise as yours, the less it will feel like work is swallowing you whole. Then think about work itself. What can you do that will make your relationship to your job feel more deliberate, more inhabited? Is it being a workplace organiser for something you care about; resolving you don’t answer emails after a certain time? Is it making a passion project of the history of work, so time spent at work feels like field notes rather than drudgery? You could even sit down and work out exactly how much money you need to live the life you want, and ask whether this job is the best way to make that money. You can answer either way, as long as you answer – as long as it feels like a decision. You aren’t alone in feeling this way. But the world does constrain our choices – every day we have to make decisions about what we’ll sacrifice in exchange for something else. The key to not letting that fact erode you is being able to recognise yourself in what is decided. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereSkilled migrants and graduates still trapped by border restrictions for bridging visa holders have condemned their “brutally unfair” treatment by the Australian government, saying it will drive away workers at a time of dire labour shortages. The federal government has announced eased travel restrictions for the vast majority of temporary visa holders, allowing them to leave and enter Australia after being trapped amid the pandemic. But travel restrictions remain for those who hold bridging visa B (BVB), which usually allows holders to live in Australia and travel abroad while they await government decisions on more permanent visas. BVB holders have found themselves stuck in Australia due to a combination of blowouts in visa processing times and the border restrictions, which make it near impossible for them to enter the country or to re-enter after leaving. That has left many, including skilled migrants waiting for permanent residency, in despair. Unable to see their families for years, and with no end in sight, many are considering leaving Australia permanently. Muhammad, who was raised in the United Arab Emirates, was invited to Australia on the promise of a regional work visa as an engineer in the construction sector. But he has been unable to leave Australia since the pandemic began, initially because he was on a temporary visa, and now because he is on a bridging visa, still awaiting the government’s final decision on his status. Muhammad has not seen his family for three-and-a-half years, and was meant to get married abroad this year, but has been separated from his fiancee by the border restrictions. His skills are crucial to a booming sector already short of skilled workers. But Muhammad said his mental health was seriously suffering and he was considering leaving the country for good. “The very first reason why my parents moved to Australia … is they were moving to a better place for their family,” he said. “But it’s not a better place if you are not even getting your basic rights to see your family.” Morrison announced this week the government was making it easier for working holidaymakers and students to come to Australia, in an effort to relieve workforce shortages caused by the pandemic. No change was announced for bridging visa holders. Morrison’s comments infuriated Emma Cochrane, who has been trapped in Australia since the start of the pandemic. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It made me cry, because I’ve tried every resource to make them aware of our plight,” she said. Cochrane moved with her family from the UK to Perth in August 2018 on a skilled regional visa, which allowed her to apply for permanent residency after living and working in a regional area for two years. But the skilled regional visa expired as the family waited for a decision on their permanent residency – a process that has taken 17 months so far – meaning they had to be placed on a bridging visa. The bridging visa means Cochrane, an education assistant, is still stuck and unable to see her family in the UK. If she were to leave, she would need an exemption to get back in to Australia. Cochrane has applied 14 times for an exemption. Each application was denied. “We’re literally stuck in this limbo-land,” she said. “We can’t risk taking my girls out.” BVB holders have started a petition, which now has 15,000 signatures, calling for the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to ease restrictions. “We pay our taxes, we provide essential skills, received double vaccinations and contribute to the economy,” the petition says. “It’s discriminatory to stop us from visiting our friends and families while others can.” The independent MP Zali Steggall and Greens senator Nick McKim have both lobbied Hawke to address the issue, but to no avail. McKim told Hawke in a letter that the restrictions for bridging visa holders were causing “immeasurable pain to thousands of people”. “With global visa processing times blowing out significantly across a number of visa classes due to Covid-19, people that are offshore on both expired and valid BVBs are still not able to return to Australia while their substantive visas are being processed,” he said. “This group of visa holders have been waiting for more than 20 months for clarity around their future in Australia.” Another bridging visa holder, who asked not to be named, is stuck in Nepal, desperate to come back to Australia to work. She graduated and had applied for a recent graduate visa, before being put on a bridging visa. She described the restrictions as “brutally unfair”. “I have lived in Adelaide for four years, completed my degree and got a professional job for myself,” she said. “This is hindering my professional growth and the career plans I have set for myself. “Amid all this, it is funny to see government luring student and working holiday visa holders to come and fill the gap of workforce.” Hawke’s office was approached for comment.A competition to find Australia’s finest drop of water has announced the Richmond valley council water plant in NSW as its winner. The 2021 Best Tasting Tap Water competition, hosted by the Water Industry Operators Association of Australia (WIOA), pitted water authority state winners from metropolitan and regional areas around the country against each other. Taking home the national title, the Richmond Valley Council Casino Water Treatment Plant will go on to represent Australia at the 32nd annual Berkeley Springs International Water Tasting Competition, held in West Virginia, United States. David Timms, representative of the Richmond valley council plant, said: “I’m a little bit shocked to be honest.” “We were absolutely rapt just to have won the NSW competition, let alone to win the Australian one.” Judged on clarity, smell, taste and “feeling in the mouth”, Craig Mathisen, WIOA chief operations officer, explained each water sample is judged on particular criteria. “We make sure it is translucent, then we smell the sample, because odour is important,” he said. “But ultimately, it is a test of one’s palate.” Judging today’s event, which was livestreamed on Facebook from Risdon Brook dam in Hobart, were TasWater CEO Mike Brewster, Derwent Estuary Program CEO Ursula Taylor, and guest judge George Bailey, who is the national chairman of selectors for the Australian Men’s International Cricket Team. “It is like tasting wines,” Taylor said. Bailey shared that he could not pick much difference between the six samples’ clarity or colour, suspecting the glasses were too clean. Brewster added that the difference between taste is also “very fine”. The judges’ rankings of each sample were then aggregated, and the winner announced. Mathisen explained that different treatment processes and sources of water can vary taste, “and some facilities have unique processes”. Victoria’s Rossarden water, international winner of 2020, for example, comes from a “stream off the back of a mountain environment”. In Marian, Queensland, a newer site established in 2014 uses “clarification filtration and chlorine disinfection”. Their water won silver at the 2019 international competition. On the other side of the country, Western Australia water facilities include a “cocktail mix” of sources and technologies, including “groundwater and desalination”. And in South Australia, water from the Murray River “gets pushed” across the state, and “will sometimes travel 600km before getting to its destination”. “There’s a whole range of different processes,” Mathisen said. “We are the driest country, with some of the greatest water, but a lot of people don’t give the water industry much thought.” The national competition “is about raising awareness of the industry, and the work people do, that often goes unnoticed,” he said. The line up of state finalists included SA Water’s Anstey Hill Water Treatment Plant; WA Water Corporation’s Wyndham Water Treatment Plant; Westernport Water’s Ian Bartlett Water Purification Plant in Victoria; Tasmania’s TasWater Rocky Creek Water Treatment Plant and Queensland’s Mackay regional council Marian Water Treatment Plant. Timms, of the winning Richmond valley council plant, said that the crew “out at the water treatment plants [have had] a lot of challenges over the last two years. But we’ve got a great bunch out there who have persevered.” Mathisen said workers in the industry are “working in public health, removing contaminants, making sure we have safe drinking water, ensuring sewage is distributed back to the environment in a kind way”. “Australia is a hard country,” he said. “They’re doing their job all of the time. Battling through floods and fires and the millennium drought.” “And at the end of the day, we turn on the tap and expect water to be there.”It’s 9pm the night before you are due to meet friends for a long-awaited catch-up, and a tentative message appears in the group chat: So, uh, what are we supposed to be wearing now? Two years spent mostly indoors has killed the art of dressing. My style references since March 2020 have been hip teens on TikTok, who lately are looking like they just walked off the set of underrated 2000 teen classic Whatever It Takes, and the five-pack of men’s flannelette shirts I got on sale. No one knows what we are supposed to wear. What we used to wear, as adults with professional jobs, is both uncomfortable – so many waistbands! Such narrow heels! – and, at this point, not even cool. But before you go out to buy an entirely new wardrobe of elastic-backed slacks in some kind of classic bone to pair with an oversized blazer in an attempt at post-Covid office casual, consider this: don’t. Instead, try dressing in the clothes you really enjoy. This does not have to mean embarking on the introspective and often fraught process to determine your personal style, which can be great fun if you are into clothes and up for being negged about your proportions by a New York style consultant, but can also be quite stressful. What if, after your serious consideration, you discover that your personal style is deeply boring? Best not to risk it. The easiest way to determine what clothes you actually like wearing is to think back to a time when you had the highest level of personal choice over your outfits relative to your awareness of outside opinions. For me, this was about age seven. When I was seven, I wore elastic-sided jodhpur boots with all outfits at all times. I liked stripes. I liked orange and acid green. I did not care whether things were flattering to my body shape because I did not have a shape. Now, at 34, I have four different pairs of elastic-sided boots and am considering getting a fifth. No one has questioned whether this is appropriate. We are living through a traumatic, world-shaping event. We should be able to do so wearing overalls if we wish. Old friends may do a double take when you turn up to brunch dressing confidently like your seven-year-old self. But then they’ll lean forward and ask: “Is that what we’re wearing now?”Muster Dogs begins as all TV shows should – with a basketful of wriggling, squirming, squeaking newborn puppies. This particular litter of kelpies has been bred by Joe Spicer, a champion breeder whose dogs are in high demand across the country – a testament to his skill, at a time when the traditional Australian working dog doesn’t occupy the place it once did. Hence Muster Dogs, the ABC’s new reality miniseries where five stock handlers around the country attempt to turn Spicer’s pups into fully-fledged working dogs in just 12 months. The five farmers – West Pilbara cattle station owner Aticia Grey, Victorian tree-changer Rob Tuncks, Top End cattle musterer Joni Hall, Northern Territory horse trainer CJ Scotney and third-generation Queensland farmer Frank Finger – put the puppies through a series of trials and challenges designed to assess their progress as they work towards full working-dog status one year later. When we meet Finger in Muster Dogs, he’s bonding with his pup, Annie, by holding her in front of his face and letting her lick his nose. Besides running his property – west of Clermont in central Queensland – Finger has decades of experience raising and training working dogs. He started a dog training school in 1995, which his sons and daughters now run. “The bonding with your pup is the key to success,” he tells Guardian Australia. “Right from when I got her, she came everywhere with me. She sat in the passenger seat and if we saw cattle, I would just say ‘look!’ or ‘looky-look!’ to familiarise her with them. So now when she sees them, she knows what to do. It’s all about bonding and giving them a pat so they learn what to do and what not to do. It’s very much the same as raising a family.” In recent decades, the image of the farmer or stockman with working dogs at their side has begun to fade as quad bikes, dirtbikes, old utes and even helicopters have taken the role that dogs once filled. Training a working dog typically takes up to three years, which is one reason many farmers now prefer vehicles for mustering; sinking so much time into training a dog that may get injured or turn out to be unsuited to the work is an investment many farmers just can’t afford. And as farming practices change, the knowledge required to breed working dogs is in danger of being lost with each generation. But a good working dog is a valuable thing. Dogs can go many places wheeled vehicles can’t, and aren’t as hard on the land. Unlike noisy quad bikes and deafening helicopters, dogs can also keep cows and sheep calm; as Finger says: “Dogs take the rattle out of the cattle.” While the pups are the real drawcard, the best moments in Muster Dogs involve their human trainers. Each farmer needs very different things from their dogs, and are paired with their pups based on environment and temperament. All face their own unique problems and setbacks, from long-term drought in the Pilbara to the solitude and loneliness on long muster routes in the Territory. Watching their bonds take hold over the four episodes is fascinating. The way the trainers and dogs work together is almost symbiotic. It’s far more subtle than the human just telling the dog what to do and where to go – it’s about harnessing the dog’s bred instincts and intelligence to their best effect. Some of the best scenes in Muster Dogs are drone’s-eye shots of a dog and trainer working a herd. Directed one way and another, the herd moves like water as the dog scoots around and behind it, stopping and starting at a whistle, a word or just a look from the trainer. That kind of cohesiveness, Finger says, takes decades – or longer – to achieve. “It takes a lifetime to learn about dogs, I think. You have to train about 100 pups to really have it down pat,” he says. The opportunity to bond is one of the biggest appeals for the farmers. Besides having an endlessly eager and energetic work assistant, the love and loyalty the dogs give back is enormous. As they grow from chaotic bundles of fur and teeth into thriving working dogs, the kelpies of Muster Dogs effortlessly become media darlings. Expect large and active fan clubs for each of them. Muster Dogs premieres at 7.40pm on Sunday 23 January on ABCTVThere have been so many remakes and reimaginings of franchises in recent years that I have found myself genuinely fearful my dying words will be “no more reboots” instead of “tell my houseplant I’m sorry”. Generally, I’m of the view that money could be better spent investing in new stories than either using existing characters for seemingly no reason (Riverdale) or retelling the same story from a “gritty” lens (Bel-Air). So I was very surprised by how much I loved the new Saved by the Bell. I grew up watching reruns of the original series (1989-1992), which followed the escapades of a group of teenagers attending high school in California. The show introduced me to neon bike shorts, practical jokes and added “bodacious babe” to my vocabulary, an odd phrase for a seven-year-old girl to include in a school report. The reboot follows a new group of young people. All the main actors (aside from the late Dustin Diamond) from the original series appear as adult versions of their characters, three in main roles: AC Slater (Mario Lopez) is now a gym teacher, Jessie Spano (Elizabeth Berkley Lauren) is a guidance counsellor and Zack Morris (Mark-Paul Gosselaar) is city mayor. I’ll admit to a mild nostalgic glee at seeing those faces again – but it’s not nostalgia that makes this show great. It’s still a comedy, with the occasional earnest message. This time, though, satire reigns supreme. The former school prankster has become mayor, full of hot air and completely lacking in self-awareness. He’s the butt of the joke now. The reboot story begins with a public school having their funding slashed, and having to merge with the privileged kids and families of Bayside High. We follow new students Daisy, Aisha and Devante, who meet Bayside kids Lexi, Mac (Zack’s son), and Jamie (Jessie’s son). It doesn’t seem entirely fair that when a series employs satire or simply depicts diversity of any kind, it becomes criticised for trying to be “woke”. Having binged both seasons back-to-back recently, my takeaway feeling is one of pure joy at silly jokes, whether these are derived from irony or absurdity. Also, nothing sucks joy out of comedy like analysing it. The narrative works because at its heart the show makes you laugh. They’ve turned the comedy up to 100. They’ve taken the baton and sprinted. This isn’t surprising as the reboot’s showrunner is Tracey Wigfield, who has written for shows like 30 Rock and is a former member of Chicago’s famous improv group Upright Citizens Brigade. While maintaining a narrative structure, the comedy is quick, constant and, in season two in particular, goofy and surreal. (Zack and Mac’s “cool guy” musical montage set to a very obvious green-screen is a highlight.) The reboot depicts social issues in a way that feels authentic and in line with the show’s tone. Where the original series had sudden gear shifts into earnest “after school special”-esque lectures (for example, Jessie becoming addicted to caffeine pills), the new writers weave realistic experiences into episodes that don’t feel clunky or tokenistic. Devante, for example, can’t afford a car like some of his new peers, so takes a three-hour long bus journey to his girlfriend’s house. Comedian and writer Alistair Baldwin tweeted his praise for the show, also noting it has a trans lead actor and quoting a line from the script: “Queer and trans joy are a form of resistance.” I would have loved to have seen this show as a young person, both closeted in my sexuality and love for comedy. Eighteen-year-old Josie Totah is a standout playing Lexi, giving me a huge laugh when she complains about the discomfort of wearing a bra, followed by: “Just kidding! What am I, a 30-year-old loser?” The show also manages to mention the pandemic in a way that I wish other shows did (if they simply must address it at all): very briefly, in context, and as a springboard for humour. A group Zoom call shows Mac attending Kim Kardashian’s 40th birthday party during lockdown, with his classmates asking, “aren’t you scared?!”. He replies, “Yes, 40 is very old for a woman, but I do not fear her.” This show is not pretending to be a gritty drama or Degrassi; sometimes we need a silly laugh without much afterthought. Maybe it’s because I’m closer in age to the original cast but John Michael Higgins as Principal Toddman is in fine form every episode. Sometimes you just want to see a principal dangling from a flagpole lamenting, “My doctor says if I get one more wedgie, I’ll die!” Stream both seasons of the new Saved by the Bell on Stan.Catching up with old friends this week and talk turned to a party we had between 2020 lockdowns. In the rented beach house there was dancing on tables, jugs of cocktails, late-night swims and lots of singing. “How about you?” said my friend Oli, turning and pointing at me. “How about your form?” There was an accusatory edge to her voice. I tried to remember what I had done – something disgraceful? Did I break something while dancing? Say something off? Throw up in the shower? “You went to bed early on the first night and then texted us from upstairs telling us to turn the music down!” The others corroborated this. Someone even put on a baby voice: “Turn it down, turn it down – I’m trying to sleep.” “I was tired,” I said defensively. “It was a Friday and I’d had a long week.” “It was 9.30pm!” said my friends. “You were pissy.” “You sent a text,” said Oli. “You didn’t even tell us to shut up, you texted us!” The next night I had dinner with my friend Jo and her dad. After dinner the tennis was on, a postprandial G&amp;T was offered, there was a bowl of Haigh’s chocolate aniseed rings on the table and I was given the good chair – one that reclined and felt like lying in a giant baseball mitt. The household settled in for a night of tennis, but I couldn’t relax. It was only 7.30pm and still high light outside – but I wanted to go to bed. The chair was like a bed … but still, it wasn’t the same. I waited until 7:45pm before announcing that it was time to go back to my motel. “So you can go to sleep?” asked Jo. “It’s not even dark yet.” On Jo’s 40th, she rented a house in Port Fairy and we had a big party. I snuck off – I’m not sure what time – and found a bunk bed in a dark corner of the house and tried to sleep. A few hours later I was discovered by some of the guests – outraged that I would go to sleep in the middle of a party. They turned on all the lights and grabbed each end of the bedding, picking me up like I was a possum in a hammock and swinging me round in the sheet for a terrifying 15 minutes. After I untwisted myself, I went back to the party and danced wearily until it was safe to slink back to bed unnoticed. But I was beginning to make a name for myself. This Christmas night, I told my brother that after dinner we should watch something on Netflix and he just laughed and said: “But isn’t after dinner your bedtime?” Catching up with friends before Christmas, they compared notes on how much I slept when I came to stay. One lot of friends had a particularly comfortable foldout couch that they kept in their kitchen/lounge. It was the only other room in their place beside their bedroom – and so when I stayed and wanted to go to sleep early, it meant they also had to go to bed. Sometimes, they found it to be painfully early – sent to their rooms before 8pm because their guest was tired. There is something shameful in this – not the going to bed early part, but the forcing others to go to bed early too, in their own house. I had become a tyrant guest – demanding that not only I sleep nursery hours, but that everybody sleeps. In 2012, I wrote an essay for a magazine about being a hedonist. I was living in New York at the time and went out a lot. But my favourite thing to do was go to a dance party each Sunday in Brooklyn called Mister Sunday. It was fun – there were DJs, a dancefloor set up in a disused lot near Gowanus Canal, coloured lights strung across the trees and pop-up bars selling cocktails and $1 Pabst Blue Ribbons. Now it strikes me that going to Mister Sunday each week and partying during the day didn’t make me a hedonist. It made me someone who wanted to be home by 9pm so she could go to sleep. Kurt Vonnegut said, “We are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful about what we pretend to be.” I was pretending to be a hedonist – but perhaps it was time to confront the fact that I was actually the opposite and had been for some time. In my head I was the last to go to bed. I knew all the places with the late licences, was active between the hours of 3am and 5am, and photographed dawns on the way home – not on a morning run. But just as people keep a wardrobe full of clothes that no longer fit, that they haven’t worn since their 20s, we keep an idea of ourselves that is from the past. Everyone else can see you’ve changed but you think you’ve stayed the same. Maybe this takes the form of thinking you are progressive, even radical, politically – but then find yourself agreeing with editorials in the Australian, or arguing with your friends about the need for personal responsibility or judging people who receive Centrelink. Or maybe you think you’re the type of person who knows all the good bands before they become mainstream but then listen to the Hottest 100 and don’t recognise a single song. Or maybe you thought you were a night owl, but in actual fact you are a sloth. After being mocked this week for going to bed early, I could no longer ignore the mounting evidence that I was not who I pretended to be. Brigid Delaney is a columnist for Guardian AustraliaA Canadian high school named after the Duke of York has announced plans to rename itself, in an attempt to distance itself from the growing controversy surrounding the Queen’s second son. The principal of Prince Andrew high school in the province of Nova Scotia told families on Wednesday to expect the change as the school looks for a name that “upholds our values as a safe and inclusive” space. “The name of a school should be reflective of our school community … Our hope is to continue to build our identity as a positive, supportive and respectful community, with a name to match,” principal Craig Campbell wrote in an email. The high school of nearly 800 students was named in 1960 to commemorate the birth of Prince Andrew. While most students call the school “PA”, the recent accusations against the Duke of York mean the name is no longer tenable, the school said. Community members initially raised concerns over the name in 2019, but efforts to rename the school faced opposition from alumni and residents concerned over the loss of a historical connection. Andrew is facing a possible lawsuit in the United States amid accusations he assaulted Virginia Giuffre when she was a teenager. She alleges she was trafficked by the Duke’s friend, Jeffrey Epstein, the convicted sex offender, and was compelled to have sex with Andrew when she was 17. Andrew has repeatedly denied both the allegations and ever meeting Giuffre, despite a photograph of the two together. Last week the Queen stripped her second son of his honorary military affiliations, leaving three Canadian regiments without a royal patron. His official Twitter account, TheDukeOfYork, no longer exists and his YouTube account is no longer accessible. The Canadian high school’s decision to sever any association with Andrew comes more than two years after the SickKids Foundation in Toronto, the country’s largest children’s hospital, terminated Prince Andrew’s role as patron. Ontario’s Lakefield College school, which Andrew attended for a brief stint in his youth, ended the Duke’s term as honorary chairman of the school’s foundation board. The school has formed a six-person committee, comprising students, staff and community members as it begins the search for a new name. A local paper suggested Black civil rights leaders, trailblazing politicians, a slain police officer or the Indigenous name for the region as possible contenders for the rebranded school.The billionaire entrepreneur Elon Musk’s brain chip startup is preparing to launch clinical trials in humans. Musk, who co-founded Neuralink in 2016, has promised that the technology “will enable someone with paralysis to use a smartphone with their mind faster than someone using thumbs”. The Silicon Valley company, which has already successfully implanted artificial intelligence microchips in the brains of a macaque monkey named Pager and a pig named Gertrude, is now recruiting for a “clinical trial director” to run tests of the technology in humans. “As the clinical trial director, you’ll work closely with some of the most innovative doctors and top engineers, as well as working with Neuralink’s first clinical trial participants,” the advert for the role in Fremont, California, says. “You will lead and help build the team responsible for enabling Neuralink’s clinical research activities and developing the regulatory interactions that come with a fast-paced and ever-evolving environment.” Musk, the world’s richest person with an estimated $256bn fortune, said last month he was cautiously optimistic that the implants could allow tetraplegic people to walk. “We hope to have this in our first humans, which will be people that have severe spinal cord injuries like tetraplegics, quadriplegics, next year, pending FDA [Food and Drug Administration] approval,” he told the Wall Street Journal’s CEO Council summit. “I think we have a chance with Neuralink to restore full-body functionality to someone who has a spinal cord injury. Neuralink’s working well in monkeys, and we’re actually doing just a lot of testing and just confirming that it’s very safe and reliable and the Neuralink device can be removed safely.” However, Musk has a history of overpromising about the speed of the company’s development. In 2019 he predicted that the device would be implanted into a human skull by 2020. Musk said the device would be “implanted flush with skull &amp; charges wirelessly, so you look and feel totally normal”. He said people should think of the technology as similar to “replacing faulty/missing neurons with circuits”. “Progress will accelerate when we have devices in humans (hard to have nuanced conversations with monkeys) next year,” he said. Neuralink has previously released a video of a monkey that had been implanted with the chip playing the video game Pong using only its mind. The company, which counts Google’s parent company Alphabet among a series of well-known Silicon Valley backers, is also recruiting for a “clinical trial coordinator” to help build a team of people to run the trial and liaise with regulators. Applicants are told they have the “opportunity to change the world and work with some of the smartest and the most talented experts from different fields”.In terms of quality, the 1950s was a poor period for West German cinema, still recovering from the second world war, but it was also the time when a number of German actors became known internationally – among them Curt Jürgens, Romy Schneider, Horst Buchholz, Maria Schell, and Hardy Krüger, who has died aged 93. They often played “good Germans” to counterbalance the Nazi stereotypes in the allied films of the 1940s. The good-looking, boyish blond Krüger, having played romantic leads in lightweight films in his homeland, became the face of the new Germany most significantly in The One That Got Away (1957). This British film for J Arthur Rank, directed by Roy Ward Baker, and based on the true story of Franz von Werra, who escaped from an allied PoW camp, was one of the first to depict a sympathetic German character. Made only 12 years after the end of the war, the film forces the audience to identify with the German pilot, whose ambition is to get back to his squadron and cause more damage to Britain. This effect was achieved mainly through Krüger’s charismatic performance, both charming and cocky. After this great success, Krüger was cast in two more British films for Rank, Bachelor of Hearts (1958) and Blind Date (released in the US as Chance Meeting, 1959). The former was a likable romantic comedy set in Cambridge, where Krüger, convincingly naive, is a German exchange student trying to understand the strange rituals of the university. Blind Date, in contrast, was a gritty thriller, directed by Joseph Losey, in which Krüger is a Dutch painter in London who becomes embroiled in a political scandal. It is striking that in all three of the Rank movies audiences were asked to sympathise with the foreign character against the British. Krüger’s international career now truly launched, the next two decades saw him in American, British, French, Italian and Spanish productions. In 1962, he made his Hollywood debut in Howard Hawks’s Hatari!, shot in east Africa, which gave Krüger second billing under John Wayne. Wayne heads an international team of hunters, with Krüger as the crack shot and rival of Gérard Blain for the attentions of Michèle Girardon. Krüger was so taken with Tanganyika (now Tanzania) that he built a small bungalow hotel on the site of the film’s location to which he could escape from time to time and where tourists could see the animals. He sold it in 1979 because of political unrest. In Sundays and Cybèle (1962), the surprise winner of the foreign language film Oscar, Krüger played a former pilot suffering from amnesia who forges a friendship with a young orphan girl (Patricia Gozzi) in a small town near Paris. But when they innocently spend Christmas together in the woods, he is suspected of assaulting her. The warm playing of Krüger and Gozzi as the odd couple helped counteract some of the self-conscious charm and aesthetics of Serge Bourguignon’s direction. In Robert Aldrich’s The Flight of the Phoenix (1965), Krüger was outstanding in a cast that included James Stewart, Peter Finch and Richard Attenborough. As one of the survivors of a plane that crash-lands in the Sahara, he convinces the others that he can build a single-engine plane from the wreckage. Krüger’s cool East German spy created a fine contrast to the nervous performance of Montgomery Clift (in his last role) as a CIA agent in the murky cold war thriller The Defector (1966). As a German captain in Stanley Kramer’s raucous comedy The Secret of Santa Vittoria (1969), set in an Italian village under German occupation, Krüger brought a lightness of touch missing from the other characterisations, especially the two leads, Anthony Quinn and Anna Magnani. Other notable appearances came in The Red Tent (1971), Paper Tiger (1975), Barry Lyndon (1975), A Bridge Too Far (1977) and The Wild Geese (1978), in the last of which Krüger played Pieter Coetzee, an Afrikaner mercenary. He was back in German uniform for one of his last roles, as Field Marshal Erwin Rommel in the US miniseries War and Remembrance (1988), based on Herman Wouk’s novel. Krüger was born in Berlin. His parents, Max Krüger, an engineer, and Auguste (nee Meier), were ardent supporters of Hitler and sent their son to an elite Nazi school. Like a majority of young German boys, he became a member of the Hitler Youth movement. “The scars on my soul survive,” Krüger said later. “An almost exaggerated desire for justice arose in me since that time.” Billed as Eberhard Krüger, he made his film debut in The Young Eagles (1944), one of the last films made in Nazi Germany, set mainly at an aircraft factory. Krüger played a young apprentice working overtime to help build planes for the war effort. On set, Krüger learned from older actors more about the horrors of Nazi rule. While still a teenager, in 1945 he was drafted into the SS “Nibelungen” Division. “I knew the war was lost,” he told the Bild newspaper in 2006. “I knew that there were concentration camps and that the Nazis were a bunch of criminals.” He deserted and was captured by American forces. Many years later, during the filming of the war epic A Bridge Too Far, in which he portrayed a Nazi general, Krüger wore a topcoat over his SS uniform between takes because he “hated that Nazi uniform” and so as “not to remind myself of my childhood in Germany”. From the early 1950s, Krüger appeared in two to three films a year, mainly escapist stuff strictly for home consumption – his sincere charm pervading them all. In 1953, the director Otto Preminger decided to make both an English and a German language version of the romantic comedy The Moon Is Blue. The German version, Die Jungfrau auf dem Dach, starred Krüger and Johanna Matz in the roles originally taken by William Holden and Maggie McNamara, and each couple made cameo appearances in the other film. Krüger thereafter increasingly pursued international roles. He had a second career as a writer of novels, short stories and memoirs. He also became a campaigner against rightwing violence. In 2001, Krüger was made an officer of the Légion d’honneur, one of the few German actors to have received the French decoration. Two marriages ended in divorce. He is survived by his third wife, Anita Park, by a daughter, Christiane, from his first marriage, to Renate Densow, and by two children, Malaika and Hardy Jr, from his second marriage, to Francesca Marazzi. • Hardy (Eberhard August Franz Ewald) Krüger, actor, born 12 April 1928; died 19 January 2022 • Ronald Bergan died in 2020Time to wrap up... here’s today’s main stories: US jobless claims has risen to a three-month high, after the Omicron variant hit the US economy. A majority of UK firms have reported that turnover dropped in December as Plan B restrictions kept customers away... ...while households have reported that the cost of living has pushed up, led by pricier food, energy and fuel. The government has been urged to provide “helicopter money” to support households hit by escalating energy bills, as inflation hits the economy. Expectations of higher UK interest rates have pushed the pound to a 23-month high against the euro. Companies, such as Citi, have started calling staff back to the office now that pandemic restrictions are being lifted, leading to busier public transport. And there could be a rush of delayed Christmas parties in the next few months, after corporate clients rebook events cancelled in December. European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen has warned the World Economic Forum that Russia will face massive economic and financial sanctions if it attacks Ukraine. Grocery, retail and food ingredients business Associated British Foods said inflationary pressures are intensifying. The firm is facing higher raw material costs, supply chain challenges and steeper energy bills, which will be passed onto customers. ABF is also cutting hundreds of jobs at Primark, where the Omicron variant disturbed its recovery. Aldi is ditching grocery deliveries via Deliveroo to focus on its own home shopping service as consumers return to stores in greater numbers.... while Deliveroo reported sales growth again in the last quarter. Almost £1.2bn worth of fruit, veg and bread is binned in the UK every year, with one in five consumers stating the reason they waste so much is they “don’t know what to cook”. Unilever continued to face criticism over its £50bn attempt to buy GSK’s consumer healthcare arm, with a top shareholder calling it a “near-death experience”. China cut mortgage rates in a new effort to prop up its economy, and bolster the property sector..... ... while a group of international bondholders in the embattled Chinese property developer Evergrande have hired an offshore law firm and warned of legal action if the company continues to refuse “substantive engagement” over its finances and restructuring plans. Goodnight. GW The billionaire entrepreneur Elon Musk’s brain chip startup is preparing to launch clinical trials in humans. Musk, who co-founded Neuralink in 2016, has promised that the technology “will enable someone with paralysis to use a smartphone with their mind faster than someone using thumbs”. The Silicon Valley company, which has already successfully implanted artificial intelligence microchips in the brains of a macaque monkey named Pager and a pig named Gertrude, is now recruiting for a “clinical trial director” to run tests of the technology in humans. European stock markets have closed, with the UK lagging behind other major bourses today. The FTSE 100 has closed 5 points lower at 7595. Associated British Foods was the top faller, down 4%, after reporting that inflationary pressures were rising, and that omicron had disrupted the recovery at its Primark retail arm. Banks and oil companies also dipped. GSK fell 1.8% after Unilever said it wouldn’t raise its £50bn offer for its consumer healthcare division, following criticism from some shareholders. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: We could be seeing an element of profit taking on the likes of Royal Dutch Shell and BP after a decent run of gains and a solid start to the year. Even with today’s declines BP is still up over 17% year to date, and Shell is up 12%. Lloyds and NatWest group are also softer as well. Also weighing on the UK benchmark is GlaxoSmithKline after Unilever said it wouldn’t be raising its £50bn bid for the company’s consumer healthcare division. Unilever shares initially bounced higher, after confirming that they wouldn’t be raising their offer for GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer business, drawing a sigh of relief from their shareholders over a concern that they might have been saddled with high levels of debt, or be diluted by a possible fundraising. Even so this morning’s early gains were short-lived, with shareholders entitled to ask how an attempt to try and boost the profitability of a business that is struggling to boost its margins, has resulted in the shares falling to their worst weekly decline since July last year. Across Europe, the Stoxx 600 index gained 0.5% today, with Germany’s DAX (+0.6) and France’s CAC (+0.3%) picking up. Global trade policy makers should try to build a more resilient and sustainable trading system that supports higher living standards, rather than recreating the pre-pandemic set-up. So argued U.S. Trade Representative Katherine Tai on a virtual panel held by the World Economic Forum today. Tai cautioned against a backward-looking “return to normalcy” after two years of COVID-19-induced disruptions, saying: “I think that it is time for us to acknowledge that our goal really shouldn’t be to try to go back to the way the world was, say in 2019, but to take lessons, very hard earned lessons, very painful lessons that we have experienced over the past two years and take this opportunity to build toward something that is different and better. The government should adopt a programme of “helicopter money” to support households hit by escalating energy bills, according to a leading thinktank with Labour and Tory MPs on its advisory board. The Social Market Foundation (SMF) said the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, should support millions of low- and middle-income households through the cost of living crisis with a simple programme of US-style one-off cash payments worth £8.5bn. The proposal comes two weeks before the energy regulator, Ofgem, announces a rise of as much as £500 on the annual price cap on energy bills from April. In a blog written by the SMF chief economist, Dr Aveek Bhattacharya, the thinktank urged Sunak to reject the overcomplicated solutions being put forward by the energy industry that would encourage people to use more energy and prop up ailing suppliers. Bhattacharya said a cheque for £300 should be sent to households that did not have a higher rate taxpayer, with an additional £200 for those on universal credit or legacy benefits, helping those who rely on the basic state pension or disability benefits. He said: “An emergency cash payment would also have the benefit of being a clear one-off intervention, whereas other proposals would risk committing the government to costly ongoing subsidies, that it would find politically difficult to end.” It’s a timely intervention, with two-thirds of households reporting the cost of living squeeze tightened in the last month. A leading Unilever shareholder has called the company’s failed £50bn offer for GSK’s consumer healthcare division a “near-death experience” and said management should focus on improving its core business – or step down. Terry Smith, the founder of Fundsmith, lambasted Unilever in a “postmortem” letter to investors in his £29bn asset management business. The letter comes a day after Unilever said it would not increase its bid for a fourth time, leaving GSK free to float its consumer arm as planned this summer. The letter, which was co-written by Fundsmith’s head of research, Julian Robins, said: “[This is] about a near death experience as it now appears that Unilever’s attempt to purchase the GSK consumer business is now thankfully dead rather than the value of our investment in Unilever.” Existing homes sales in the US dropped in December for the first time in four months. Sales of previously-owned homes fell by 4.6% last month, to an annualised rate of 6.18m units. With inventories of unsold homes at record lows, shortages of property are keeping some buyers out of the market. Sterling has hit its highest level against the euro in almost two years. Expectations that the Bank of England will raise interest rates this year to combat inflation pushed the pound up to €1.2030 against the euro, the highest since February 2020. Matthew Ryan, CFA, senior market analyst at Ebury, says yesterday’s rise in UK inflation to 5.4% makes a February interest rate rise very likely. “The reaction among currency traders has been to send sterling higher against its peers. All yesterday’s data has done is confirm the market’s suspicion that the Bank of England will need to raise interest rates at a rather aggressive pace this year. Futures are now placing a near certainty of a hike in February, with 110 basis points priced in before the end of the year. BoE governor Andrew Bailey continued to stubbornly call some of the aspects of inflation ‘transitory’ during his speech yesterday, although he did raise concerns about tightness in the UK labour market and warn that the bank will do everything it can to control inflation. While Bailey has already proved himself to be a worthy successor to Mark Carney ‘unreliable boyfriend’ mantra, this rhetoric ought to all but confirm that another hike is on the way when the monetary policy committee next convenes early next month. Back in the UK, there are signs of a growing return to office working in London, with 8% more journeys recorded on the London underground network compared with a week ago. The increase came after the government ended work-from-home guidance immediately on Wednesday afternoon, with Sajid Javid claiming the Omicron coronavirus variant was “in retreat”, despite the number of new infections running at more than 100,000 a day. Transport for London said 1.09m entry and exit “taps” with contactless cards or Oyster were recorded up to 10am on Thursday on the tube – about 80,000 more than last Thursday’s morning peak. Bus journeys were up 3% week on week, with 1.19m boarding taps recorded this morning. Stocks in New York have made a brisk start to trading. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 major US companies has risen 355 points, or 1%, to 35,384 points. The technology-focused Nasdaq has jumped by 1.5% to 14,563 points, having sunk into correction territory earlier this month. After struggling in the last few weeks due to anxiety over looming interest rate rises, markets may be regaining some calm ahead of next week’s Federal Reserve meeting. Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at Think Markets, says; So far this year, volatility has been quite high as investors respond to high levels of inflation around the world, central bank policy tightening and another wave of coronavirus. We have seen some global indices fall sharply, especially in the US, while others have continued higher or consolidated. US technology and small cap shares have taken the brunt of the sell-off due to rising bond yields, while banks and industrials have outperformed. So, it has been quite a mixed start to the new year. With some of the major indices now testing key support levels, it is possible we may be heading for a period of relative calm as dip buyers take advantage of downbeat stocks and sectors. The four-week average of US jobless claims, which smooths out weekly volatility, rose by 20,000 to 231,000, highest since late November. Associated Press points out that if claims remain elevated, it could deter central bank policymakers from lifting interest rates as quickly as expected: “We could see one more week of notably higher claims before they should top out,″ analysts with Contingent Macro Advisors predicted. “This bears close watching going forward.″ The Federal Reserve might reconsider plans to ease its massive support for the economy if claims stay above 250,000 as the Fed’s March policy meeting approaches, Contingent said. Robert Frick, corporate economist at Navy Federal Credit Union, says Omicron seems to have led to the 55,000 increase in layoffs in the US last week: “Weekly unemployment claims jumped 55,000 in the most recent week, and even with the usual noise in the numbers they seem to reflect the record rise in Coved-19 cases from Omicron. Fortunately Omicron is peaking and if past patterns hold, claims should drop quickly in the next two to three weeks.” Danel Zhao of Glassdoor says that demand for workers is still high, despite omicron slowing the recovery: Mohamed El-Erian, chief economic advisor to Allianz, also blames Omicron. Omicron has caused significant disruption in the US, as cases hit record levels above one milion per day. Supply chains have struggled leading to empty shelves, schools closed, flight were cancelled, and hospitals and emergency response departments were left understaffed. Economists had expected a small fall in US jobless claims, not a 55k increase.... More Americans filed new unemployment claims last week, after the Omicron variant hit the US economy late last year. The number of ‘initial claims’ for unemployment benefit jumped to 286,000 in the week to Saturday January 15th, the highest level since October. That’s an increase on the 231,000 initial claims filed in the previous week. It indicates that more Americans lost their jobs at the end of 2021, and were signing on for unemployment insurance. Initial claims fell to their lowest since 1969 late last year, as the tight labor market encouraged firms to hold onto staff. They are still much lower than earlier in the pandemic, despite rising this month. Initial claims surged to 6 million in late March 2020, but fell back to pre-Covid levels as the economy reopened and vaccines were rolled out. Ryanair has experienced a “sea change” in its confidence in recent weeks, a senior executive said today. Perceptions that the threat from the Omicron COVID-19 variant is easing and public attitudes to travel are improving are lifting the budget airline’s morale. Reuters has the story: Fares are also likely to rise across the European short-haul sector this summer due to lower available capacity, said Eddie Wilson, chief executive at Ryanair DAC, the largest airline in the Ryanair Group. Wilson did not give specific guidance about Ryanair’s prospects, citing reporting restrictions ahead of the company’s third-quarter financial results on Jan. 31, but he did say the airline’s focus was “all about next summer”. “There is a sea change, based on what we believe will be customer confidence and the timing of the peaking of Omicron,” Wilson told Reuters in an interview when asked if the airline was a lot more confident than a few weeks ago. “I think people’s mindset has moved as well in terms of ‘I’m traveling’, ‘I’m going’,” Wilson said. “They can see the summer. They are not in the darkest days of where we were the previous year.” Turkey’s central bank has left interest rates on hold today, ending a series of rate cuts that sent the lira tumbling and helped drive inflation dramatically high. The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey decided to leave its policy rate unchanged at 14% today. It had previously cut rates steadily in recent months, down from 19% in August, under pressure from president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to lower borrowing costs to help the eoncomy. The CBRT sat on its hands after Erdoğan struck a softer tone on interest rates this week, telling reporters that rates would fall slowly, gradually and without hurry” to make 2022 “our brightest year,”. But the year has begun with inflation surging to 36% (!), as the slump in the lira pushed up import costs. Food and drink prices are up nearly 44% year-on-year, while consumer prices jumped by 13.58% in December alone. European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen has warned the World Economic Forum that Russia will face massive economic and financial sanctions if it attacks Ukraine. In a special address to WEF’s Davos Agenda event, von der Leyen said that “tragically”, we again face the interference of some powers in their neighbours’ affairs. Europe will not accept Russian attempts to divide the region into “spheres of influence”, she insisted, adding that “we reaffirm our solidarity with Ukraine and our European partners that are threatened by Russia”. She’s speaking a day after US president Joe Biden caused alarm by admitting Nato was divided on how to respond if Russia makes a “minor incursion” into Ukraine, where Russian troops have been gathering. Europe, von der Leyen says, continues to stand behind the fundamental principle that Ukraine is free to decide as a sovereign state. She declares: To be clear: We want this dialogue; we want conflicts to be solved in the bodies that have been formed for this purpose. But if the situation deteriorates, if there are any further attacks on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, we will respond with massive economic and financial sanctions. The transatlantic community stands firm on this. The EU is by far Russia’s biggest trading partner, and by far the largest investor. And yes, this trading relationship is important to us, but it is far more important to Russia. We hope an attack will not happen, but if it does, we are prepared. Von der Leyen also announced that the European Chips Act will be proposed in early February, to strengthen the EU’s semiconductor industry. Dr Jackie Mulligan, founder of the local shopping platform, Shopappy, says the increase in firms reporting lower turnover shows the devastating impact of Omicron on UK businesses: “The move to Plan B holed many businesses under the waterline, just when they needed a festive lift. “Around the country towns became ghost towns in December and 2022 has started on an equally sombre note. “Inflation at a 30-year high is hitting small high street businesses from all angles. “Customers have less to spend, raw materials are costing more, supply chains are being squeezed, interest rates are on the up and the cost to heat their premises is skyrocketing. Mulligan adds that people should support their local retailers, to help them through the economic pain. Two-thirds of UK households have reported that the cost of living has jumped this month. Rising food prices, energy and fuel bills were the main reasons, highlighting how the jump in inflation is hurting people. The Office for National Statistics’ latest data on economic activity and social change found that 66% of adults say their cost of living increased over the last month. Among those, 87% cited rising food shop prices, as retailers passed on higher costs to their customers. Rising energy bills were cited by 79%, following the increase in the UK fuel price cap last autumn, and 71% pointed to increases to the price of fuel, after petrol and diesel hit record prices at the pumps. That’s another sign that the cost of living squeeze is hurting, after higher cost of clothes, food and footwear pushed up UK inflation to its highest in 30 years in December. Primark is to axe 400 jobs across its UK business as the fast fashion retailer cuts back its store management roles in response to rising cost pressures, despite a significant bounceback in trading in recent months. Primark, which operates 191 stores in the UK and more than 400 in total internationally, said it was creating a new management level role as part of the reorganisation but overall expected the changes to leave it with about 400 fewer retail managers in the UK. The company added that although supply chain pressures had now eased it still expected that longer shipping times would “continue for some time”. Primark said that while sales at its UK stores in the 16 weeks to 8 January had been “well ahead” of last year, despite an impact from the spread of Omicron, they remained 10% below pre-pandemic levels. The Omicron variant has left many UK companies nursing a drop in sales in December, but there are signs the economy could be picking up again. In December 2021, a net 6% of firms reported decreasing turnover compared with the previous month, the Office for National Statistics reports. That means that more firms saw falling turnover than rising turnover last month. It’s the highest proportion reporting a fall in monthly turnover since April 2020, when the first Covid-19 lockdown hit the economy. The ONS’s latest real-time economic indicators showed that average company turnovers fell between late November 2021 (when the Omicron variant was identified as a threat) and early January 2022. That’s an early indication of the economic damage caused by Omicron at the end of 2021, after the economy had achieved strong growth in November, back to its pre-pandemic levels. Hospitality firms and retailers were badly hit by the Plan B move in December, as we’ve already heard this morning from Revolution, and Primark. But there are signs that business has picked up in January, as Covid-19 cases fell back from record levels. Restaurant bookings jumped by 5% in the week to Monday 17th January, and credit card spending also increased. Transactions at Pret A Manger stores across the UK jumped by 16 percentage points last week, the ONS adds. That left them at 72% of the average level in January 2020, still “notably” below levels in the four months before Christmas. Firms are gearing up for staff to return to the office again, after the UK government announced the end of its Plan B Covid measures next week. Citigroup has asked its London staff to come into the office at least three days a week, Bloomberg reports. It’s an early indication of the determination of finance firms to return to offices after the U.K. government said people no longer needed to work from home. “We are now free to gather in our offices, without restriction, where we are better able to generate the energy and collaborative spirit on which Citi thrives,” EMEA Chief Executive Officer David Livingstone and U.K. head James Bardrick said in an email to staff seen by Bloomberg. “Everyone is expected to be in the office at least three days per week.” More here: Citi Asks London Staff to Return to Office as U.K. Guidance Ends It’s official, eurozone inflation is running at its highest level since the single currency was created. The euro area annual inflation rate was 5.0% in December 2021, up from 4.9% in November, Eurostat reports (confirming its flash reading). Energy prices were the biggest factor, surging by 25.9% year-on-year as the surge in gas and electricity prices hit household budgets. But price pressures were broader than just energy; Food, alcohol &amp; tobacco was up 3.2%, industrial goods prices were up 2.9%, while services cost 2.4% more. In the wider European Union, prices rose by 5.3% in the year to December, Eurostat adds. In the UK, inflation hit 5.4% while in the United States it soared to 7%. China has eased monetary policy again, as Beijing tries to prop up its slowing economy. China’s central bank lowered mortgage lending benchmark rates on Thursday, after data earlier in the week showed that its property sector was struggling. The cut to the one-year and five-year loan prime rates (LPR) followed surprise cuts by People’s Bank of China to its short- and medium-term lending rates on Monday. The PBoC acted after China’s construction sector shrank in the last quarter of 2021, as developers such as troubled Evergrande were hit by crackdown on credit. The downturn hit developers’ sales, investments, land purchasing and financing activities in December. Share prices of Hong Kong-listed Chinese property developers rose sharply today, recovering some of their recent losse. Sunac China rallied by over 15.2%, while Evergrande gained 4.6%. Primark could benefit from the return to normal life this year, if it can overcome supply chain problems that are driving up costs, says Freetrade’s senior Analyst Dan Lane. Restrictions easing and office life returning are two major boons for footfall-oriented businesses like Primark. It’s never been short on fans and if it insists on not letting them buy online, it only has one way to serve them. The queues have mazed up various UK high streets during lockdown’s less restrictive periods, but appetite has been even more pronounced away from built-up areas. Now that employers look set to crack the whip and get us back to city centre offices, we’re likely to socialise and shop there too. That could mean 2022 is the year Primark and AB Foods really get the engine back to firing on all cylinders. One thorn in the side that’s likely to continue is shipping. Supply chains are finally coming back online but an almighty backlog in global freight means ABF will need to be tactical in getting the public in but having the goods there to sell them. Retail analyst Nick Bubb says Primark’s lack of an e-commerce arm meant it suffered from Omicron. So sales were still below pre-pandemic levels, with UK like-for-like sales 10% below two-years ago. Well, Primark was again disadvantaged by the swing back to Online spending in the Omicron surge, but its stores are still popular shopping venues… Laura Hoy, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says ABF could ride out its inflationary pressures better than other companies. While Primark’s lack of digital presence leaves something to be desired in a global pandemic, we’re impressed by the group’s stock management. Last year’s autumn and winter stock made it to the shelves this year with very little discounting, which should be a welcome tailwind for cashflow. Inflationary headwinds are an unavoidable storm cloud hanging over just about everyone right now, but we think ABF is well-placed to ride it out. The group’s low-cost retail business will appeal to shoppers tightening the purse strings, and improved efficiency across all areas of the business together with price hikes in the grocery business look likely to offset the bulk of the pain for now. But if costs continue to balloon, it could become a problem for Primark as the group has very little space to increase costs due to its position as a discount retailer.” UK manufacturer Premier Foods has hiked its profit forecasts after its Mr Kipling cake brand recorded its best-ever Christmas sales. Premier Foods benefitted from a jump in spending during the festive season, helped by an increased number of family gatherings over the festive period, and demand for less sugary treats. Its ‘Sweet Treats’ arm grew sales of branded baked goods by 6.3% year-on-year in the last quarter (to 1st January) and were 11.6% up on the last three months of 2019. It says: Cadbury cake grew sales across its range of existing and new product ranges, the latter driven by Fudge and Crunchie cake bars. Mr Kipling enjoyed its best ever Christmas trading period, due to increased sales across all its core cake ranges and also healthier products such as reduced sugar Angel Slices. In overall terms, the Group’s healthier product ranges grew ahead of the wider market, up +13%. Total group sales were 7% higher than two years ago, but 1.8% lower than last year (when lockdowns led to more eating at home). It now expects to make a trading profit of at least £145m, up from consensus forecasts of around £140.7m. Shares have jumped by 6.5%, to the top of the FTSE 250 leaderboard. Mr Kipling is now heading across the Atlantic, Premier Food says. Following the successful test in Canada, the first shipments of the Mr Kipling cake test in the US have now been made and will go instore during the fourth quarter [January-March 2022]. Deliveroo has posted another jump in orders in the last quarter of 2021, as the pandemic continued to boost demand for home food deliveries The gross transaction value (GTV) of orders on Deliveroo’s platform rose 36% year-on-year in the fourth quarter, compared to 2020 when lockdowns helped demand. For the full year, GTV grew 70% in constant currency terms -- the top end of Deliveroo’s upgraded guidance from October. On a quarterly basis, GTV rose 12% in the UK compared with Q3 while orders were up 13%, meaning the average order size dipped. Will Shu, founder and CEO of Deliveroo, said the company finished 2021 with a strong Q4 performance: I am proud of what we achieved in 2021; despite a challenging backdrop, we continued to strengthen our customer proposition, widen our customer base and execute against our strategy. We are excited about the opportunity ahead and look forward to making further progress in 2022.” Deliveroo’s shares have risen 2.5% this morning. But at 173p, they are still less than half the level at which they floated last year (at 390p). Costs are also surging in Germany, as inflationary pressures grow. Producer prices surged by 5% in December alone, a very sharp increase. It means Germany’s factories were charging 24% more for their wares than a year ago, a record annual increase in PPI. On average, price rose by 10.5% in 2021 compared to 2020, which will have a knock-on impact on consumers in Germany and abroad as these escalating costs are passed on. Energy prices surged by 69.0%, and there were also significant price increase on intermediate goods, including metals, wooden containers, fertilisers and nitrogen compounds and sawn timber. Bar operator Revolution was also hit by Omicron in the crucial festive period. Revolution’s like-for-like sales in the last six weeks of 2021 were 23% lower than two years ago, it told the City, as concerns over the Covid-19 variant caused a flurry of cancellations. Sales over the Christmas period were impacted by the move to ‘Plan B’ including the return to the ‘Work From Home’ instruction, implementation of Vaccine Passports for late night bars and government messaging which unhelpfully encouraged the limiting of social interactions. Office parties were particularly hit, with ‘pre-booked revenue’ such as corporate hospitality slumping by almost 40% in the six weeks to January 1st, compared to 2019. But total bookings were 19% higher, with younger customers still keen to enjoy Christmas. Revolution, which runs 67 bars, adds that many of those cancelled corporate parties have already been rebooked for early in 2022, as companies look to hold late Christmas festivities. Rob Pitcher, CEO of Revolution Bars Group, said: ‘I am so proud of our team’s resilience in the face of the confusing government messaging and the disappointment of the wave of corporate booking cancellations it caused during December. The only comfort is that many of these parties have already been rebooked and it was pleasing to see the number of general guest bookings significantly up versus 2019 demonstrating that our young guest base remains as enthused and excited about our offering as we are. Yesterday’s news of the scrapping of the work from home guidance and the cancellation of all other restrictions is very welcome for our business and will actively help rebuild consumer confidence. It is imperative that going forward there are no further restrictions as we all learn to live alongside Covid 19. Shares in Associated British Foods have dropped 1.8% in early trading in London. But the wider FTSE 100 has opened around 0.3% higher, touching a fresh two-year high of 7619 points. Unilever is among the risers, up 1.7% after saying it won’t increase its offer for GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer healthcare division above £50bn. City concern about Unilever’s ambitions hit its shares earlier this week. Around 400 jobs are being cut across Primark as it shakes up its store management. The fashion retailer has launched a consultation with staff as part of its plans to simplify its UK store retail management structure (see previous post). It is looking to make the management structure consistent across its estate of over 190 stores in the UK, and those changes are likely to leave it with around 400 fewer retail managers. Kari Rodgers, Primark retail director for the UK, said: “The changes we’re proposing will deliver a simplified and more consistent management structure across all of our stores, provide more opportunities for career progression and offer greater flexibility, all of which are designed to help us provide the best possible experience for both our customers and our colleagues. “We are now focused on supporting our colleagues who are affected by these proposed changes and will be going through the consultation process.” Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Rising raw materials and commodity costs, supply chain tensions and the energy price crunch are all hitting businesses, adding to the cost of living crisis facing households this year. Associated British Foods, which owns Primark plus grocery, sugar, agriculture and ingredients businesses, has reported this morning that all its businesses have seen inflationary pressures in the last few months. ABF, which makes Twinings tea, Ovaltine, Patak’s curry pastes and sauces, Kingsmill bread and Jordans biscuits, has lifted some grocery prices to absorb these rising costs. In a trading update this morning, ABF says these rising costs are eating into its profit margins too: In our Grocery, Sugar, Ingredients and Agriculture businesses we have seen an escalation in the cost of energy, logistics and commodities. We have been implementing plans to offset these through operational cost savings and, where necessary, the implementation of price increases. We expect an increase in the adjusted operating profit for Sugar. We expect reduced adjusted operating profit margins in Grocery and Ingredients at the half year, due to phasing in fully recovering cost but a recovery in the run rate of these margins by the financial year end. World food prices hit 10-year high last year, according to the UN, pushing up inflation, with rising demand, weak harvest and pandemic disruption all driving up costs. Primark is now seeing a rise in footfall in UK and Ireland, after Omicron caused some disruption as shoppers stayed away from the high street. The improving trend in customer footfall was interrupted in December by the rapid rise in Covid-19 cases of the Omicron variant but we are now seeing a recovery in UK and Ireland footfall. Primark sales were 36% ahead of last year in the 16 weeks to 8th January (in November 2020, some stores had to lock down, which hit Christmas trading that year), with operating profit margins ahead of expectations. Like-for-like sales at Primark’s UK stores were still 10% below two years ago, before the pandemic. ABF explains that cost cuts have helped Primark absorb higher costs - and is proposing further job cuts: The effect of inflationary pressure on raw materials and supply chain in this first quarter has been broadly mitigated by a favourable US dollar exchange rate compared to last year and a reduction in store operating costs and overheads. We are proposing to simplify our in-store UK retail management structure as part of our ongoing programme to improve the efficiency of our store retail operations. Yesterday, Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey warned that inflation pressures may last longer than first thought. Bailey told the Treasury Select Committee that financial markets don’t expect energy prices to start easing back until the second half of 2023, which could mean inflation says higher for longer than expected. UK inflation hit 5.4% in December, the highest in three decades, meaning prices are rising faster than wages: The agenda World Economic Forum’s Davos Agenda 9.30am GMT: Weekly economic activity and social change in the UK indicators 10am GMT: Eurozone inflation rate for December (final reading) 12.30pm GMT: ECB Monetary Policy meeting accounts 1.30pm GMT: US weekly jobless figures 3pm GMT: US existing home salesOusmane Dembélé has insisted that contract negotiations at Barcelona continue and warned that he will not be “blackmailed” after he was left out of the squad and told to leave with immediate effect. In a strongly worded statement that left open the possibility of his staying but revealed the severity of the breakdown in relations with the club, Dembélé said he would “not allow anyone to attribute intentions to me that I have never had” or “speak for me or my agent, who I trust entirely”. He also insisted that he “will not allow anyone to say I am not committed to the sporting project” – precisely the accusation aimed at him by Barcelona’s director of football, Mateu Alemany. Dembélé responded after his exclusion from the squad to face Athletic Club on Thursday night and a public statement from Alemany ending negotiations over a new contract, in which the director said that the player no longer wanted to continue behind his current deal and announced Barcelona’s intention to move him on before the end of the transfer window. Alemany suggested that Dembélé would not play for the club again because he was not “committed” to its future. The previous night, the coach, Xavi, had delivered a public ultimatum: renew or leave. Dembélé has six months on his contract and has failed to reach an agreement on a new deal. The club have concluded that the 24-year-old has no intention of continuing, despite Xavi saying Dembélé had said he wanted to stay. Now they want to force a departure. If he does not leave now, he faces the prospect of spending the next six months left in the stands and the club have even investigated the possibility of rescinding his contract. Barcelona need to shed his salary if they are to bring in players and, faced with the possibility of his leaving for free, want to make any saving they can on his wages between now and the summer. Dembélé, though, made clear that he does not intend to be forced out and said that negotiations continue in the hands of his agent. There was no commitment to renew. “Today, 20 January, with 11 days left in the last window before the end of his contract, it is obvious that the player does not want to continue and is not committed to our future,” Alemany said. “In that scenario, he and his agents have been informed that he should leave immediately because we want players who are committed to our project. Therefore, we hope to transfer him before 31 January. “We started conversations with Ousmane and his agents back in July, more or less. In all this time, these six or seven months, we have spoken, we have had dialogue, we have made various offers. We looked at ways that he could stay with us. All those offers were turned down by his agents. The fact that he is not in the squad is no more than a consequence of this whole process. “The conclusion in sporting terms, as evaluated by the coaching staff, is that we don’t want players who are not committed. It’s not the club that takes this decision – the coach does – but he has all our support and we think it is an entirely coherent decision.” Dembélé dismissed those accusations in a statement in which he said that four years of listening to “endless” “gossip”, “lies” and people “speaking for me”, seeking “only to harm me”, had “finally ended”. “I will not allow anyone to give the impression that I am not involved in the sports project,” he said. “I will not allow anyone to speak for me or my representative, whom I fully trust. “Still under contract, I am fully involved and at the disposal of my club, my coach. I have always given everything for my colleagues and also for all the club members. I am not going to change that now. I am not a man who cheats and still less a man who has the habit of giving in to blackmail.” “As you know, there are negotiations. I let my agent handle it, it’s his field. My field is the ball, playing football, sharing moments of joy with my teammates and the supporters. Above all, let’s focus on winning.” Spain’s players’ union released a statement telling Barcelona it would be illegal to threaten to leave a player out to make him sign a contract.In response to Catherine King’s letter (19 January), at my grammar school in the 1970s, a couple of friends and I made the mistake of going for a lunchtime pint at a nearby pub frequented by two of our teachers. Afterwards, I was pinned against the wall by my geography master and informed in no uncertain terms that while he had no objection to underage drinking by pupils during the school day, he would prefer this not to take place in his local. Those were the days. John Rushton Bridge of Weir, Renfrewshire • I was a student teacher in Leicestershire in 1985-86 and, during my school placement, went to the pub with colleagues every single day. I’m not sure if the deputy head knew though. Dennis Lane Johannesburg, South Africa • Your article about more men opting to have a vasectomy (12 January) and letters (14 January) refer to “childless” young men. While that may be technically correct, I always feel the term has a negative feel, evoking sympathy. I prefer the term “child-free”, which suggests it’s a positive choice not to have children. Jacky Creswick Chester • Dick Tuckey (Letters, 19 January) is correct: why should “big dogs” be demeaned? And while the big dogs are in the spotlight, the fat cats are having an easy time. Mike Eggenton Firbeck, South Yorkshire • Another six letters that have torn the country apart: Tories (Letters, 19 January). Bob Epton Brigg, Lincolnshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Just over a quarter of an hour into The Puppet Master: Hunting the Ultimate Conman (Netflix), one of the contributors says something you cannot quite believe. She recalls how, in 1993, she chose to go on a road trip with two friends and a stranger called Rob: “That decision changed the next 10 years of my life.” At this point, we know we are watching a documentary about a fearsomely persuasive con artist, but even so: 10 years? By the end of this chilling, frequently astounding three-parter about how powerful lies can be when delivered with confidence – and specifically about the abusive behaviour known as coercive control – it makes perfect, awful sense. The woman is Sarah Smith, who was studying at agricultural college in Shropshire when her boyfriend met a man who claimed to be an undercover MI5 agent. A fellow student had recently been arrested for IRA gun-running; now Smith and her pals were in danger, Rob said, because their housemate was suspected of similar activities. Rob told them they had to go on the run from the IRA, under his protection. They agreed to do so. Smith didn’t return home for another decade. Meanwhile, in 2012, teenage siblings Jake and Sophie Clifton were increasingly worried about their mum, Sandra Clifton. (The series hops back and forth, scrolling left and right along a timeline à la The Last Dance.) The behaviour of Sandra’s boyfriend, David, was progressing from troubling anomalies – having money but not apparently going to work; being reluctant to divulge his surname – to aggressive gaslighting that seemed designed to force the children to leave home. “Rob” and “David” were, of course, the same person: Robert Hendy-Freegard, who was sentenced to life imprisonment for a plethora of offences in 2005, before being cleared of the most serious one, kidnapping, on appeal two years later and released. That Sandra was bewitched by a man who had already been publicly identified as a ruthless deceiver – Jake and Sophie could have brought him down with a simple Google search, had they only known what to type in – is one of so many near misses and if-onlys in a series that makes your jaw drop wider and wider, without ever straying into prurient sensationalism. Tight storytelling combines with efficient dramatic reconstructions to take us through a twin narrative that barrels on like a thriller. Indeed, a movie dramatisation starring James Norton as Hendy-Freegard has begun filming. What makes The Puppet Master unforgettable, however, is its dissection of how coercive abuse works. Once fear or love, or a mix of both, has caused the victim to give the perpetrator their trust, all sorts of incredible lies can be believed and all kinds of humiliations endured. Smith, in particular, shows considerable courage in describing honestly how she was browbeaten into cutting herself off from her loving family, not communicating with them unless it was to demand ever-growing sums of money. Initially, it seems preposterous that anyone would believe a man who says: “I am an MI5 agent,” but Smith’s testimony proves that, in the hands of someone as appallingly talented as Hendy-Freegard, sensible people can make absurd choices and strong people can be broken. As Hendy-Freegard takes Smith on an indefinite tour of the UK, moving her from one “safe house” to another and isolating her more every time until her loved ones are abandoned altogether, the story goes to places much darker than Hendy-Freegard leeching her for cash. Much of the series’ power to grip comes from mounting revulsion at Hendy-Freegard’s deliberate, sustained cruelty. That said, it has heroes as well as a momentous villain. Chief among them is Peter Smith, Smith’s father, who saw through Hendy-Freegard immediately and, having failed to stop this man taking away his daughter, spent the next decade conducting what was often a one-man surveillance and intelligence operation, doing it old-school, his study wall covered in giant maps dotted with pins linked by string. He never gave up. Eventually, he got his girl back. Not everyone has been so lucky. We are told from the outset that Sandra’s kids, now young adults, have not seen her in person since she skipped town with Hendy-Freegard some years ago. His successful appeal against his kidnapping conviction was based on the claim that his victims were free to leave him at any time. That coercive control did not become a criminal offence in England and Wales until 2015 is The Puppet Master’s biggest if-only of all.Your editorial (19 January) chimes with our charity’s recent experience of helping those who face an impossible choice between topping up the gas meter or putting food on the table. Our fear is that the removal three months ago of the £20-a-week increase in universal credit, just as the cost of living began to rise sharply, has slammed shut the window of opportunity to continue reducing the need for food banks. Members of Feeding Britain’s social supermarkets are already showing signs of distress. People who were shopping every couple of weeks for low-cost food are now doing so daily or weekly. Among those who relied only on the option of low-cost food, there is a growing need for the help we can offer with gas and electricity costs as well. Two moves the government should make to rescue those households are to recalculate April’s benefit uprating so as to reflect the actual costs of living, rather than those of six months ago; and to both reform and extend the warm home discount to this group. In the absence of these moves, worse is indeed yet to come. Andrew Forsey National director, Feeding Britain • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In response to your letters (18 January), from my experience there are three kinds of parish or town council: the proactive, the reactive and the inactive. I should know as I spent 30 years as a councillor – 24 on a town council, as well as 18 on a district council and 16 on a county council, but not necessarily all at the same time. To bring English local government in line with the other three nations of the UK, we should complete the move started in the 1990s and replace the remaining district and county councils with unitary authorities, and offer enhanced powers to parish/town/neighbourhood councils. Then we should devolve more fiscal powers to local government in general as a precursor to setting up regional assemblies in England and creating a federal UK. With more cash and power riding on the result of local elections and the chance to make a real difference in local communities, not only might voter turnout increase but also the willingness of ordinary citizens to get involved by putting themselves forward for election. Currently, most parish councils rely on co-option to fill vacancies and the turnout in tier one and tier two councils in elections that do not coincide with general elections is frankly often derisory. John Marriott North Hykeham, Lincolnshire • Your correspondents fail to recognise the real power of parish councils. These are statutory public bodies with unlimited powers to raise funds through taxation. Also, under “general powers of competency” (Localism Act 2011), they have the freedom to do anything that is not against the law. This creates opportunities and threats. At a local level, they have the freedom to benefit and strengthen communities through local initiatives and neighbourhood development plans. However, there is no regulatory framework to ensure that parish councils act within the law and there is little or no interest shown by the press or the public. In my experience, the lawful requirements as defined in the Local Government Act 1972 are often ignored. Likewise the Nolan principles. The example set by our current PM will surely encourage continued rule-breaking. My advice would be to value your parish council, but be very vigilant. Dr Trevor Aughey Hatt, Cornwall • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I read Nesrine Malik’s article (For the Tory party, Boris Johnson is a blip not a crisis, 17 January) and I sincerely hope that she turns out to be wrong for all our sakes, because so many in this country cannot afford yet another Tory government. I hear Neil Kinnock’s warning “not to be young, not to fall ill, not to grow old”, on a continuous loop in my head at the moment. Surely, I keep telling myself, when people witness first-hand the irreparable damage done to the NHS and the care sector, they will not vote the Conservatives in again. Surely people will realise that the Tories’ laissez-faire attitude to market forces dictating the way our public utilities are run, and the bleak prospect of inflation creating a perfect storm for millions, is not the way forward. I fear that many want some kind of return to their rose-tinted memories of the Thatcher years. Having grown up in the Thatcher years on the outskirts of Manchester, that thought petrifies me. Because those years are ingrained in my memory – when it was made painfully clear that if you didn’t have money, your value as a person was minimal. Do we really wish that on our children and grandchildren, for them to feel that unless they earn a good living they are a burden on society? If that is what people believe would improve our lot, they are sorely mistaken. Sue Hardman Woodbridge, Suffolk • Nesrine Malik is spot-on regarding Boris Johnson’s position vis-a-vis new Tory voters in the “red wall” constituencies. It reminds me of Prof Stuart Hall’s commentary on how Margaret Thatcher constructed a new ultra-rightwing hegemonic consensus, supported by most of the national press, which began the dismantling of the Keynesian “mixed economy”, and replaced it with market fundamentalism, outsourcing, privatisation and the financial deregulation that has wrecked our society and culminated in the catastrophes of austerity and Brexit. Thatcher managed to capture older and working-class voters with the discounted sale of council houses and the slashing of social security for those deemed undeserving. Boris Johnson’s perceived strength with early vaccination, culture war policies and Brexit has maintained his popularity among new Tory voters, despite the long list of his lethal pandemic failures, mendacity and abuse of public office. Labour ought to be 20 points in front. Keir Starmer has got no room for complacency and needs to craft a pro-European, vote-reforming, green alliance with centre-left parties to finally end Conservative electoral dictatorships and Britain’s decades-long rightwing folly. Philip Wood Kidlington, Oxfordshire • I smiled at Nesrine Malik’s reference to people’s perception of Boris Johnson as a pantomime villain. He grasps the electorate’s attention and media headlines by dint of his incompetent, crass and inept behaviour. Meanwhile, his government introduces legislation that attacks the very tenets of our democracy – restricting the right to protest, curtailing the effectiveness and independence of the country’s major broadcaster, increasing the privatisation of the NHS, restricting our right to vote and so much more. Let’s not get distracted by Johnson’s pantomime behaviour. Let’s keep our focus on the real threats to our future democracy, because these threats will endure whether or not Johnson remains. Peter Riddle Wirksworth, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Beleaguered pubs and restaurants are reporting early signs of a recovery in trade, fuelling hope that pent-up demand from a dismal Christmas for the sector is about to be unleashed. Hospitality bosses told the Guardian that takings have picked up pace lately and that the easing of Plan B Covid restrictions – including the dropping of work-from-home guidance – could further bolster the recovery. As research revealed that the UK lost more than 8,000 licensed premises in 2021 – the equivalent of 13 a day – pub bosses warned the industry was not out of the woods yet and called on the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to extend support for the sector. Early signs of recovery included a stock market update from Revolution Bars, which has 67 venues. It said many of the office parties that were cancelled in December due to concerns about Omicron had been rebooked for early 2022. The number of pub-goers is on the rise, according to Chris Jowsey, the chief executive of 1000-strong Admiral Taverns chain, although he called for further Treasury support to help take advantage of higher footfall. “There is some pent-up demand because so much of Christmas was cancelled,” he said. “Even last week, we saw signs of people starting to go back to the local, and our trading over last weekend was decent.” However, he called on Sunak to extend the lower, temporary 12.5% rate of VAT for hospitality businesses, and bring forward budget plans to reduce duty on draught beer, scheduled for 2023. Restrictions on socialising forced pubs, restaurants and hotels to close, or drastically reduce capacity, during large parts of 2020 and 2021. Figures from the industry analysts AlixPartners, released on Thursday, showed a net loss of 8,228 hospitality venues, a 7% decline, during 2021. The group echoed calls for further government support, saying any recovery could be choked off by “rapidly rising food and energy costs, staff shortages and supply problems”. While the recovery remains fragile, the figures showed an apparent rebound in the final quarter of 2021, with a 1.6% increase in the total number of licensed premises between October and December, by 1,672 to 106,880. The rise was partly led by nightclubs, with numbers increasing by 3.1%, as they enjoyed the first sustained period of being allowed to open. Growth in city centre venues was particularly strong, with the number of Edinburgh premises up 3.3%, Leeds up 3.9% and Liverpool leading the way on 4.4%. A survey by the CGA data consultancy suggested a third of people were planning to increase the frequency of their evenings out. Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of the trade body UK Hospitality, said the sector was hoping for renewed momentum from the easing of restrictions, in particular the work-from-home guidance. “Now that’s being lifted, that will accelerate those events and activities that are going on. Consumer demand is out there, there’s an appetite to get back out and if we can get through the next few months I’ve no doubt the industry can look forward to a successful recovery from Easter onwards.”It’s been another busy day in Westminster. Here’s a summary of what happened: Sajid Javid said the partygate scandal had been “damaging to our democracy”, and defended the lifting of mask rules in schools since it is “harder to teach children” if they wear them. The Conservative MP William Wragg accused the government of trying to “blackmail” MPs pushing for a confidence vote in Boris Johnson. No 10 swiftly responded and, without outright refuting Wragg’s claims, said it was “not aware of any evidence” to support them. The stance was repeated soon after by Johnson. The Lib Dem leader, Ed Davey, accused Johnson of acting “like a mafia boss”, and Labour called for an investigation into the blackmail claims, which was echoed by the Scottish Tories. The former Brexit minister Steve Baker suggested that “it does look like checkmate” for Johnson, while the Treasury chief secretary, Simon Clark, said it would be “absolutely wrong” for government whips to threaten to withdraw constituency funding. Wragg’s claims were followed by allegations from Christian Wakeford, the Bury South MP who defected to Labour, that he had been threatened with a loss of funding for his constituency if he rebelled as a Tory MP. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, called for an investigation into bullying and blackmail, which she called “gravely serious allegations”. She also cast her doubts on the decision to lift Plan B restrictions. “There are still significant uncertainties ahead,” she said. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, accused the Conservatives of no longer being the party of business given that they had presided over a “lost decade” of low growth. Both I and the blog are signing off for the evening. For coronavirus news from around the world, you can follow our global Covid blog: The Guardian’s home affairs editor Rajeev Syal has done some research and found that there is a precedent for parliamentary authorities investigating threats to withhold funds from MPs if they vote certain ways. He writes: The Labour peer and QC Dale Campbell-Savours points out that the parliamentary authorities have previously investigated threats to withhold funds from an MP. In 1981, when he was the MP for Workington, Campbell-Savours complained to the privileges committee – and had his complaint upheld – after being threatened by Iain MacGregor, the then head of British Steel. He claimed that MacGregor had verbally threatened to withhold money from a steelworks in his Workington constituency. In this excerpt from Hansard in January 1981, Campbell-Savours recalled the meeting with MacGregor, who had taken issue with his criticisms in parliament of British Steel. “After further conversation about my general approach in the House concerning the steel industry, he said that if this was the way that I intended to conduct my case in parliament, and if I persisted in making such statements and attacks on the corporation, further investment in Workington would be ended. He made reference, in passing, to a particular investment project,” he said. Campbell-Savours says the privileges committee ruled in his favour. MacGregor went on to become the head of the National Coal Board during the miners’ strike. He died in 1988. The Treasury chief secretary, Simon Clarke, has said it would “absolutely be wrong” for government whips to threaten to withdraw constituency funding if MPs did not support the prime minister. Clarke told Times Radio he had not “seen any evidence of” blackmail or intimidation by the whips, but said: Anyone with any substantive evidence to substantiate that kind of allegation should go to the relevant authorities. “It would absolutely be wrong and, look, the reality is that my experience as a minister is, of course, that that is not a tactic that I’ve ever seen or heard of being deployed and the wider reality, of course, is that we also have a civil service, we have our officials who are, of course, precisely in place to make sure that in all funding allocations there is due process and proper rigour. On the wider whipping system he said there was “obviously a legitimate difference between trying to persuade people to support key policy and doing something which obviously would involve misuse of public funds in that way”. On specific allegations made by the former Tory MP Christian Wakeford, he said: It’s either something he can substantiate, or it isn’t. I think that’s the point. And I simply need to see any evidence that that has in fact occurred. I think we have to accept objectively here that Mr Wakeford is not entirely a neutral source on these matters, having made the decision that he has. No new analysis here, but the Green MP Caroline Lucas deserves a mention for this pithy tweet: Polling from Survation in December – just as the partygate scandal was emerging - suggested that voters in the north west did not rate highly the government’s adherence to the core ethical standards that underpin public life the lowest out of any England region. Survation’s polling also suggests that this had already translated into gains for Labour: in December, Labour was leading the Conservatives in the north west by 22 points, a six point increase for Labour relative to the 2019 general election and an 8-point decrease for the Conservatives. The Survation chief executive, Damian Lyons Lowe, said his data showed that in his defection to Labour, Christian Wakeford “doesn’t need to win the hearts and minds of his former voters”, since Labour are currently “way ahead” in Bury South. Nearly £900,000 of taxpayers’ money was spent on a study commissioned by Boris Johnson which found it would be too expensive to build a bridge or tunnel between Scotland and Northern Ireland. PA Media reports: The Department for Transport (DfT) said the research into the feasibility of a fixed link cost £896,681. Network Rail chair Sir Peter Hendy led the investigation, which found that a bridge would cost £335 billion, while a tunnel would require a budget of around £209 billion. His report concluded that the project “would be impossible to justify” as “the benefits could not possibly outweigh the costs”. In addition to the huge expense, the inquiry also noted that the necessary work would be incredibly challenging. Johnson previously talked up the creation of a fixed link but accepted the conclusion of the report. Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader and shadow first secretary of state, has tweeted the response from the paymaster general to her letter sent to all ministers on the subject of the Downing Street parties. She said the letter, which emphasises the need to wait for the outcome of the ongoing investigation by civil servant Sue Gray, is “an insult to the public’s intelligence”. She wrote: A whole cabinet of people that need a civil servant to tell them if they attended parties or not! They are all a total joke, propping up Boris Johnson when he is quite so unfit to lead. Watch the MP for Bury South, Christian Wakeford, tell the BBC that he was threatened with the loss of funding for a school in his constituency if he did not vote with the government on a particular issue. A culture of survival in Number 10 is undermining the governance of the country, shadow chief secretary to the Treasury Pat McFadden said. Mr McFadden told LBC: “What do you want your government doing? Do you want your government and your Prime Minister being solely concerned with their own survival? Or do you want them addressing your issues? The issues of your listeners. “If you look at what happened last weekend, we were told there’s this ‘operation red meat’ where we’ll launch an attack on the BBC licence fee, or put the military into the middle of the Channel. These things are being done to take attention away from the troubles. “They’re part of a negotiation between the Prime Minister and the right-wing faction in his party. They’re not actually about the governance of the country. “The governance of the country is now being undermined by the culture in Number 10.” Culture secretary Nadine Dorries has dismissed as “nonsense” claims by William Wragg of a No 10 campaign of intimidation against Tory MPs seeking to oust Boris Johnson. Dorries told BBC News: That is nonsense because that is not how government works. The whips have no say over what happens in individual constituencies. It is just attention-seeking behaviour from William Wragg who has been a constant critic of the prime minister, who delivered us the greatest majority since Margaret Thatcher. More from Michael Fabricant, a backbencher known for his loyalty to Boris Johnson. He has been active in the prime minister’s defence on Twitter today, with some strident criticisms of William Wragg. In his latest, he argues Wragg has “abused his position to continue with his long-standing vendetta against Boris and Brexit”. He’s referring to a thread we posted about here. His comments echo an earlier tweet, in which he accused Wragg of acting “improper[ly]”. Limits on socialising and hospitality in Northern Ireland will be lifted tomorrow, the BBC reports. A tweet from political correspondent Jayne McCormack said ministers in Stormont had agreed to lift the rule of six and a requirement to provide table service. From 26 January, nightclubs can reopen, although vaccine passports will still be required. All other hospitality businesses will be exempt. The Conservatives as the party of business is a “distant memory”, the shadow chancellor has claimed, arguing that Labour’s plan for the country is “proudly pro-worker and proudly pro-business”. Speaking at an event in Bury, Rachel Reeves, the MP for Leeds West said: Under Keir Starmer’s leadership, Labour has changed, but so too have the Conservatives. The Conservatives once called themselves the party of business. That’s a distant memory. When the prime minister said, ‘F business’, I thought it was a throwaway remark. Little did I know it would be the central organising principle of his government. Reeves accused the Conservatives of being “the party of high taxation because they are the party of low growth”. Setting out Labour’s plan for the economy, she said: Now is the wrong time to raise taxes on ordinary working people. Labour would keep bills down by cutting VAT on energy and expanding the Warm Homes Discount (Scheme), taking at least 200 off the typical bill - with up to 400 in additional support for low and middle earners and pensioners - paid for by a windfall tax on North Sea oil and gas profits. Reeves said Labour would support high streets by “abolishing business rates and replacing them with a fair system that levels the playing field between online multinationals and high street businesses”. She added: Labour would start now with our plan to create apprenticeship opportunities for young people, which could have seen 100,000 extra apprenticeships created this year, to drive our economic recovery. She emphasised Labour’s climate investment pledge of 28 billion for each year of the decade “to ensure the industries and jobs of the future are found all across Britain”. A Labour future, she said, would entail “gigafactories to build batteries for electric vehicles, a thriving hydrogen industry, offshore wind with turbines made in Britain, planting trees and building flood defences, getting energy bills down and guaranteeing Britain’s energy security, and allowing our economy to adapt as we drive down our carbon emissions”. Reeves went on to say Labour would “champion British businesses at home and abroad”. She said: The first step is to make Brexit work for the British people - addressing the flaws in the Tories’ deal that are hitting our food and drinks manufacturers, creative industries, and professionals. “We will build on the UK-EU trade deal in the interests of British businesses to cut red tape and make life easier for our exporters. Reeves started her speech saying it was “particularly fitting to welcome” Christian Wakeford, the Tory MP for Bury South who defected to Labour on Wednesday. She said: “Christian, like so many others, sees that our country needs Keir Starmer’s leadership and a Labour government now more than ever.” The fact that MP Christian Wakeford gave his evidence to the BBC and not in the House of Commons means that police will be able to use the disclosures in a possible blackmail inquiry since it means they do not have to worry about parliamentary privilege, according to Jo Maugham, director of the Good Law Project. The doctrine of parliamentary privilege grants certain legal immunities for members of the House of Commons to enable them to speak freely without worrying about outside interference or how it might be used in court. This means that police might not be able to use William Wragg’s disclosures, which were made in the House of Commons, as evidence, but they can use Wakeford’s. Plaid Cymru MS Delyth Jewell is calling for an inquiry into the revelation that the government threatened to withhold funds for a school unless MP Christian Wakeford voted a certain way. Jewell said she has uncovered evidence that Tory constituencies were prioritised over less affluent Welsh areas for receiving funds through the community renewal fund, and that this, alongside other publicly known examples, constitutes enough evidence to warrant an inquiry. Jewell, Plaid Cymru member of the Senedd for south Wales east, said: “Christopher Wakeford has confirmed what we suspected all along: that this Tory UK Government has been misusing public funds in order to achieve its own selfish, internal aims. “There is ample evidence to suggest that the UK Government used the Levelling Up Fund, Community Renewal Fund, Town Fund and school funding in a manner that may have been unlawful, using opaque metrics in order to be able to funnel funds into the constituencies of Tory MPs loyal to Boris Johnson. “And only last week, the High Court ruled that the government’s use of a VIP lane to award PPE contracts to the friends of Tory MPs and Ministers was unlawful. “I believe that the UK government’s practices amount to wholesale corruption and that a public inquiry needs to be held to explore these funding decisions in detail, since what we know about is likely to be only the tip of the iceberg and the fear shared among many is that billions of pounds may have been misappropriated.” Rachel Hall here taking over from Andrew Sparrow for the rest of the afternoon. I’ll be focussing on the fallout of the Wragg revelations, while also keeping you updated with the other key developments in Westminster, including any important updates on coronavirus. If there’s anything I’ve missed, do send it over to rachel.hall@theguardian.com. In her speech this morning in Bury, where she was introduced by Christian Wakeford, who defected to Labour from the Tories yesterday, Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, said Britain has had a “lost decade” under the Tories. “The Conservatives have become the party of high taxation because they are the party of low growth,” she said. And explaining what she meant by “lost decade”, she said: The question is: why is a country with such rich resources not seeing that potential realised? Why are so many working people here in Bury and all across the country not feeling the benefits? And how have we become trapped in this cycle of low growth, low pay, and high taxes? The answer is simple. It comes down to a decade of Conservative failure. Their failure to plan ahead. Their failure to work together with business and industry. And their failure to put the national interest above the interests of their friends and donors, utterly removed from the lives of working people. For the best part of a decade, I worked as an economist at the Bank of England. My first job there was to analyse the Japanese economy. Japan had just reached the end of what was often called its ‘Lost Decade’. We now talk about Japan’s ‘Lost Decades’ - 30 years of stagnant growth. I saw the perils of an economy becoming trapped in a cycle where demand is sucked out of the economy and growth suppressed. Britain has been through its own lost decade. That is all from me for today. I need to wrap up early. My colleague Rachel Hall is taking over now. These are from Mark Jenkinson, another Conservative MP saying he has never experienced tactics of the kind described William Wragg. Robert Buckland, the Conservative former justice secretary, told Times Radio that MPs should be able to resist even the fiercest threats from whips. He said: I think any allegations about threats etc are extremely unpleasant. MPs should be able to vote according to their free will. And you would hope you’d have a collection of people here in Westminster who had been through the electoral process and media scrutiny and should be strong enough to resist even the most forcible requests, or dare I say blandishments, of the whips. In an interview with Radio 4’s the World at One Tony Blair, the former Labour prime minister, said the Wragg allegations would be “very serious” if they were true. He went on: No doubt this is something that the Speaker will look into. I should imagine this will be something that both members of parliament and Downing Street itself will want to investigate. He said that withdrawing funding from a constituency because of the way an MP voted would be “grossly improper” and “completely wrong”. But asked what he would say to people who thought this happened under all governments, Blair gave an interesting answer. “I certainly would never have authorised such a thing,” he said. Asked if he ever heard of this happening when he was PM, he said he did not. But then he added: You know, politics at a certain level, there are all sorts of different people doing different things, and what’s authorised, not authorised and so on – all of that is extremely difficult. That sounded like an admission that his own administration was capable of underhand tactics on occasion (which it was). He put this even more memorably in his final PMQs as prime minister, when he said politics “may sometimes be a place of low skullduggery but it is more often a place for more noble causes”. Nicola Sturgeon posted this on Twitter after her interview with ITV Border. (See 1.50pm.) She says, if No 10 has threatened to withhold money from constituencies in an attempt to buy the support of MPs, that would amount to corruption. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has called for an independent inquiry into the Wragg allegations. Speaking to ITV Border ahead of FMQs, she said: These are gravely serious allegations - intimidation, blackmail and using public money to do it. I would suggest that these accusations need to be fully and, crucially, independently investigated. With every day right now, Boris Johnson is tarnishing the office of prime minister and I think if he has concerns for the interests of the country, he will go. Asked if the allegations surprised her, Strugeon replied: “They shock me.” This is what Boris Johnson said about the William Wragg allegations in his pooled TV interview at lunchtime during a visit to Rutherford Diagnostic Centre in Taunton. (See 10.19am) I’ve seen no evidence to support any of those allegations. What I am focused on is what we’re doing to deal with, the No 1 priority of the British people, which is coming through Covid. Asked if he would look for evidence to support allegations, Johnson replied: “Of course.” Andrew Brigden is one of the few Conservative MPs who has called for Boris Johnson to resign. Radio 4’s the World at One says it approached Tory MPs critical of Johnson to find out if they had suffered the sort of intimidatory tactics described by William Wragg (see 10.19am), and Bridgen told the programme he had been smeared on Monday in the Times by a story that wasn’t true. He is presumably referring to this. No 10 says there is no need to investigate the Wragg allegations because there is no evidence to back them up. That line may not last for long because some evidence is now starting to come in. Christian Wakeford, the MP who defected from the Conservatives to Labour yesterday, has told the BBC that he was threatened with the loss of funding for his constituency if he voted the wrong way on an issue. He said: I was threatened that I would not get a school for Radcliffe if I didn’t vote one particular way. This is a town that’s not had a high school for the best part of 10 years. How would you feel holding back the rejuvenation of a town for a vote? It didn’t sit comfortably, and that was really [me] starting to question my place where I was, and ultimately to where I am now. Steve Baker, the former Brexit minister, has said “it does look like checkmate” for Boris Johnson. In an interview with the BBC’s Nick Robinson for Robinson’s Political Thinking podcast, Baker said: It’s a sorry situation we’re in. I’m appalled we’ve reached this position. We didn’t make Boris Johnson prime minister for his meticulous grasp of tedious rules but this is appalling and the public are rightly furious. At the moment I’m afraid it does look like checkmate but whether he can save himself, we’ll see. Boris Johnson said he had seen “no evidence to support any of those allegations” when asked about the William Wragg blackmail claims. (See 10.19am.) The PM delivered the response in a pooled TV interview. I will post more when I’ve seen the full clip. Asked about the UK government’s decision to freeze the licence fee at FMQs, Nicola Sturgeon said she was “deeply concerned”, that the BBC was “an important part of our broadcasting framework”, and asked MSPs to “all defend the principle of public service at broadcasting”. She added: I think there is some evidence that these were an attempt to divert attention from the prime minister’s troubles but nevertheless, all of us have to stand up for these principles and guard against this government and the damage it seems willing to do to key institutions often just to try to save its own skin. Nicola Sturgeon has raised doubts about Boris Johnson’s decision to scrap all plan B Covid rules in England, as Scottish Conservative leader Douglas Ross has attacked her at FMQs for imposing “unnecessary restrictions” on the Scottish public over the festive period. “There are still significant uncertainties ahead,” she told Ross at first minister’s questions, “which is why I think doctors, nurses, NHS managers, trade unions, all expressed some concern at the prime minister’s announcement yesterday to lift all restrictions at this stage, including the requirement to wear face coverings”. She said her government – in line with the Welsh and Northern Irish administrations – would continue to take a “proportionate and balanced” approach. But Ross said Omicron restrictions – including closure of nightclubs, social distancing in hospitality venues and guidance of a three household mixing limit indoors – had a significant impact on mental health and businesses, which were still struggling to get support. He said: We can now see they weren’t needed. It was the Scottish public’s actions, not the SNP government’s restrictions, that got this [reduction in infections]. The first minister has tried to build a reputation for caution during this pandemic, but she was far too gung ho in imposing extra restrictions last month. The Conservative MP Anthony Mangnall says he has never experienced the kind of threats described by William Wragg. (See 10.19am.) Sue Gray, the senior civil servant investigating partygate, has found the email from a very senior civil servant to Martin Reynolds, Boris Johnson’s principal private secretary, saying the party on 20 May 2020 should be cancelled because it broke the rules, ITV’s Robert Peston reports. The existence of this email was revealed by Dominic Cummings in a blog on Monday. As Peston says, this would amount to written proof undermining Johnson’s claim that he was not told the party would be against the rules. In his interview on Tuesday Johnson said: “Nobody told me that what we were doing was against the rules.” In Johnson’s thinking, the word me may be doing an awful lot of work in that sentence (as they like to say). According to Cummings’ account, Reynolds was told by at least two people on 20 May – the very senior official, in an email, and Cummings himself in person – that the party was against the rules. Reynolds then apparently discussed the matter with Johnson, who apparently agreed that the party should go ahead. Johnson’s defence only holds up if Reynolds failed to explain to him that colleagues said the event would be against the rules. This seems unlikely – and of course Johnson should have realised the event was clearly against the rules anyway. In his blog Cummings also says that he also raised concerns with Johnson about the party personally on 20 May, but he does not record specifically telling Johnson the party would be against the rules. But Cummings did imply that, his account suggests. Cummings says: “I said to the PM something like: Martin’s invited the building to a drinks party, this is what I’m talking about, you’ve got to grip this madhouse.” Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, has told ITV Border that the Wragg allegations should be investigated. “They are serious allegations and I’m sure they will be investigated,” he said. He said anyone in the Conservative party would be “disappointed” by the claims, which was why an inquiry would be proper. But he also said he did not have any experience himself of being intimidated by the government in the way described by Wragg. Ross, like Wragg, has also called for Johnson’s resignation last week. Here are tweets from two political journalists who have also heard reports of disloyal Tory MPs being threatened with funding to the constituencies being cut. From my colleague Jessica Elgot From ITV’s Anushka Asthana At the Downing Street lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesman said he was not aware of any plans for an investigation into the William Wragg blackmail allegations. (See 10.19am.) The spokesman highlighted the earlier No 10 response (see 11.26am) saying it was not aware of any evidence to support the claims. Asked about the Lib Dem claim that Boris Johnson has been behaving like a mafia boss (see 11.29am), the spokesman said: We’ve been clear again that there is no evidence to support the claims put forward, but this is a matter for the whips office and not one for me to comment on. Asked if Johnson condemned all forms of bullying and harassment, the spokesman replied: “Yes.” Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Commons Speaker, told MPs that it would be a “contempt” to obstruct MPs in doing their duties by trying to “intimidate” them. Speaking in the chamber, he noted the “serious allegations” made by William Wragg (see 10.19am) and went on: Those who work for them are not above the criminal law. The investigation of allegedly criminal conduct is a matter for the police and decisions about prosecution are for the CPS. It will be wrong of me to interfere with such matters. While the whipping system is long-established, it is of course a contempt to obstruct members in the discharge of their duty or to attempt to intimidate a member in their parliamentary conduct by threats. NHS England staff absences due to Covid have fallen by 22% on the previous week, figures show, with signs the staffing crisis in the health service may be easing off. My colleagues Niamh McIntyre and Pamela Duncan have the story here. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has also called for an investigation into the Wragg allegations. (See 10.19am.) Michael Fabricant, a Conservative backbencher highly supportive of Boris Johnson, has posted this on Twitter in response to the Wragg allegations. Not for the first time, his intervention (which implies what’s alleged is just normal) may be judged as less than helpful. Plaid Cymru is calling for a police investigation into the Wragg allegations. (See 10.19am.) In a statement Liz Saville Roberts, the party’s leader at Westminster, said: When ‘levelling up’ morphs into ‘blackmail’ - this is how the Tory UK government uses threats to withhold public money to browbeat its MPs into supine obedience. Levelling up funds to tackle inequality? Of course not, just to keep Prime Minister Johnson in Number 10. We may have become desensitised to daily reports of Boris Johnson’s corruption. But this is an extremely serious matter that must be investigated by the police. In the light of the Wragg allegations, Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, has accused Boris Johnson of acting like a mafia boss. In a statement he said: It is simply remarkable that a prime minister could countenance scrapping local projects and funding if MPs refuse to back him. All Boris Johnson cares about is saving his own skin. He’s acting more like a mafia boss than a prime minister. These latest allegations of criminal behaviour are yet more proof that a civil servant investigation into partygate is utterly inadequate. The Metropolitan police must investigate. No 10 is now in full scorched earth mode. Every minute the Tories allow him to stay in power damages our country. No 10 says it is not aware of any evidence to back up William Wragg’s allegations, but that if there is evidence, it will look at it very seriously, the Mirror’s Pippa Crerar reports. UPDATE: Here is the full quote from a No 10 spokesperson. We are not aware of any evidence to support what are clearly serious allegations. If there is any evidence to support these claims we would look at it very carefully. The allegations from William Wragg this morning about the tactics being used by No 10 to stop Tory MPs demanding a no-confidence vote in Boris Johnson (see 10.19am) are both unremarkable and incendiary. They are unremarkable in that, throughout history, prime ministers have used underhand tactics to persuade MPs to back them on contentious issues. Wragg acknowledges this, but he argues that two sorts of threats have been deployed recently which go way beyond the normal, and accepted, “you’ll never get that promotion or knighthood” threat levelled at potential rebels. First, Wragg claims some MPs have been told that their constituencies will lose government funding if they don’t back the PM. This would amount to using public money for political advantage, which could conceivably pass a criminal test for corruption, and would be much more serious than threatening an MP with the loss of party funding for campaigning at the next general election. There have been allegations of MPs being threatened with the loss of constituency infrastructure spending under Boris Johnson’s government before, although MPs have not gone on the record to say directly they were threatened in this way. My colleague Aubrey Allegretti wrote about MPs being threatened in this way in September last year, and similar threats were reportedly issued ahead of the Owen Paterson vote in November. Other administrations have been accused of doing this too. In his new book about Brexit, Spartan Victory, the Tory MP Mark Francois writes that, before the third vote on Theresa May’s Brexit deal in 2019, one of his European Research Group colleagues told that he had “held out for and subsequently secured in writing a promise of £7m for a major investment project in his constituency” in return for backing the government. The MP told Francois his constituency was less affluent than Francois’, and “really needed” the money. Second, Wragg alleges that Tory MPs trying to force Johnson out have been threatened with the publication in the newspapers of stories that would embarrass them. This is entirely plausible; the pro-Johnson papers have already been running articles critical of the 2019 intake Tories calling for a no-confidence vote (like this one in the Daily Mail, about Dehenna Davison and Christian Wakeford) and it seems likely they are being briefed by government sources. This is also something that has happened in the past under previous administrations. What is new, though, is for an MP like Wragg to publicly denounce it as “blackmail” and for him to encourage victims to go to the police or the Speaker. Even if actions of this kind did not meet a criminal threshold for blackmail, trying to improperly influence an MP does count as contempt of parliament, which means it is something that could in theory be investigated by the Commons authorities. An inquiry of this kind would be highly embarrassing for the government, although MPs may decide not to take up Wragg’s invitation to complain. At the every least, though, his intervention will be seen as a warning shot. William Wragg, the Conservative chair of the Commons public administration and constitutional affairs committee, has accused the government of trying to “blackmail” MPs pushing for a confidence vote in Boris Johnson. He made the claim in an opening statement at the start of this morning’s committee hearing. Wragg, of course, is one of the few Conservative who has publicly called for Johnson to go. Here is the statement in full. In recent days a number of members of parliament have faced pressures and intimidation from members of the government because of their declared or assumed desire for a vote of confidence in the party leadership of the prime minister. It is of course the duty of the government whip’s office to secure the government’s business in the House of Commons. However it is not their function to breach the ministerial code in threatening to withdraw investments from members of parliament’s constituencies which are funded from the public purse. Additionally, reports to me and others of members of staff at No 10 Downing Street, special advisers, government ministers and others encouraging the publication of stories in the press seeking to embarrass those who they suspect of lacking confidence in the prime minister is simply unacceptable. The intimidation of a member of parliament is a serious matter. Moreover, the reports of which I’m aware would seem to constitute blackmail. As such, it would be my general advice to colleagues report these matters to the Speaker of the House of Commons and the commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, and they’re also welcome to contact me at any time. Wragg also asked Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, to ensure his concerns about this were passed on to the government. Barclay said he would. Tony Blair, the former Labour prime minister, is giving a speech on the future of Britain later this morning. On the basis of the extracts sent out in advance, he thinks the real problem with Boris Johnson’s leadership is not partygate, but that he does not have a plan for the future. Blair is expected to say: I understand completely the rage against what happened in Downing Street during lockdown and how the country feels. Maybe Boris Johnson goes and maybe he doesn’t. But the real problem is the absence of a government plan for Britain’s future. Blair will argue that Johnson’s “levelling up” slogan implies that the problems facing the UK are limited to only some parts of the country. He is expected to say: I hesitate when I hear the government slogan ‘Levelling Up’. Other than a desire to give opportunity to those without it, which is obviously hard to disagree with, the slogan risks misdirecting the framing of the country’s problem. We face a national challenge – all the country, not simply the areas ‘left behind’. Instead, Blair will argue, the country faces three challenges, which are not being addressed by the government. He is expected to say: There is a gaping hole in the governing of Britain where new ideas should be. We are living through three revolutionary changes simultaneously and are ill prepared for any of them. Each of them would require major changes to the way we work as a nation. All of them together pose a challenge which is unprecedented in recent history. The changes are: Brexit; the technology revolution; and a climate ambition which foresees a unique transition to being carbon neutral in the power sector in just over a decade and the whole country in 25 years. There will be an urgent question on Afghanistan in the Commons at 10.30am, which means Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Commons leader, will not be taking questions on next week’s business until around 11.15am. In his inteviews this morning Sajid Javid, the health secretary, defended the decision to end the advice for pupils and staff to wear masks in class in England from today. This was one of several measures announced yesterday marking the end of plan B. Javid told the BBC: There has long been a debate about face masks, particularly in schools. The government’s job is to take a balanced and proportionate decision, in this case balanced against the best interests of children. It is harder to teach children and it will have an impact on their education if they are required to wear face mask at all times in classrooms. Asked if he would continue to wear a mask when shopping from next Thursday, when masks will no longer be compulsory in any setting in England (although people will still be advised to wear them “in crowded and enclosed spaces, where you may come into contact with people you do not normally meet”), Javid said: Will I be wearing a face mask? Yeah, I think I probably would be in a week’s time. Because prevalence is still high and there will be people there, especially if I am going to my local shop which is small and enclosed and can have quite a few people in there at one time in quite a small space, I don’t know most of those people, I think that would be sensible. I think it will be sensible on the tube in London, for example - quite an enclosed space. People will be asked to make their own personal judgment just as we do in fighting flu. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, was doing media on behalf of the government this morning and, in an interview on the Today programme, he said that the scandal about partying at No 10 has damaged Britain’s democracy. He was responding to questions from Mishal Husain, who asked him repeatedly if he thought the affair had damaged trust in democracy. At first he tried to sidestep the question, but when she put it to him that people think we live in a country where everyone follows the rules, and that to discover people in Downing Street were not has been damaging to democracy, he replied: Yes it does. Of course things like this damage our democracy. From what we already know from the people who have come forward and apologised for the parties that took place, for example the one on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral, that was completely wrong. It was wrong in every single way. That is already damaging, of course it is. What was notable about his answer was that he also admitted parties had taken place. Other ministers have tried to avoid using this word, either sticking to the original claim that they were work events, or leaving it for the Sue Gray report to determine whether they were parties. Good morning. The best play on regicide in English literature is Macbeth, which includes the sound advice: “If it were done when ‘tis done, then ‘twere well it were done quickly.” Boris Johnson is a big fan of the play; Jennifer Arcuri once said they used to read it together on dates. But the Tory MPs plotting to force him out seem less familiar with the masterpiece, because the intense speculation about a vote of no confidence being triggered this week (which peaked on Tuesday night) has now faded. “If it were done, ‘twere well to wait for the Sue Gray report first” now seems to be the advice they are following. The surprise defection of the Conservative MP Christian Wakeford to Labour has made a difference. Here is the write-through by my colleagues Jessica Elgot, Aubrey Allegretti and Rowena Mason that explains why. And this morning the Conservative MP Andrew Percy has said this explicitly. He told the Today programme: It’s kind of made people a bit more relaxed, it’s calmed nerves. I think people have recognised that actually this constant navel gazing and internal debating is only to the advantage of our political opponents. The prime minister is probably thanking Christian for what he did because it’s made a lot of people think again, think twice. This may seem like good news for Johnson, but all that has really changed is timing. As the politics professor Tim Bale argues, the fundamental situation for the prime minister remains grim. Here is the agenda for the day. 10am: Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, gives evidence to the Commons public administration and constitutional affairs committee about the work of his department. After 10.30am: Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, takes questions from MPs on next week’s business. 11am: Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, gives a speech on Labour’s plan for growth. 11am: Tony Blair, the former Labour prime minister, gives a speech on the future of Britain. 11am: Maria Caulfield, the health minister, gives evidence to the Commons health committee about cancer services. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 12pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, takes questions in the Scottish parliament. There will be some UK Covid coverage here, but for more coronavirus coverage, do read our global live blog. It’s here. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comMy aunt, Susan Waller Thomas, who has died of cancer aged 80, was an inspiring and dedicated teacher, councillor, lord mayor and high sheriff in Swansea and West Glamorgan. She was compassionate and fiercely intelligent and had a deep belief in the power of advocacy to change lives and create opportunities. Born in Stamford, Lincolnshire, Susan was the daughter of Mary (nee Peasgood) and Freddie Amoore, an RAF engineer. Her schooldays in Lincolnshire she described as appallingly awful, and she went on to dedicate many years of her life to young people and to improving the experience that they would have of education and wider society. She always listened to what people had to say and never dismissed the concerns of others. Sue studied psychology and English at Liverpool University, graduating in 1963. At Liverpool she met Derek Waller, a mathematician. After their marriage in 1964, they moved to south Wales, where Derek became a lecturer in mathematics at University College of Swansea (later Swansea University). They intended to stay for only two years but instead built their lives in Wales. Sue taught English at Gowerton girls’ grammar school, at West Glamorgan Institute and Gorseinon College. In 1978, Derek died of leukaemia aged 37, leaving Sue to parent their three young children – which she did with immense devotion and courage. Sue also had an extraordinary commitment to community and became actively involved in Swansea’s services for refugees from the Vietnam war. She was an English teacher and advocate to Vietnamese refugee families, many of whom became lifelong friends. In the early 1980s she was elected a Liberal Democrat councillor for Newton ward on Swansea council. After many years as a councillor, Sue served as lord mayor of Swansea in 2007, and as high sheriff of West Glamorgan in 2011. In 2008 Sue married Alan Thomas, an academic at Swansea University. Their home was a place of delicious dinners for family and friends, barbecues and Easter egg hunts. She continued to support causes that were dear to her, including charities for young carers, and sponsoring Guide Dogs for the Blind. She was honorary chair of the Gower Badgers cricket club. Alan died in 2011. Sue is survived by her three children, Julia, John, and Duncan, six grandchildren, and a great-grandson; by her stepchildren, Stefan and Jo, her brother, John, her nephew, Jonathan, and me.The UK government has rejected plans from a leading Tory donor to build a controversial £1.2bn electricity and internet cable running from the UK to France. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, has refused to grant consent to Aquind Energy for the project, which has provoked fierce opposition over national security and environmental concerns from MPs and campaigners in the UK and France. Aquind applied more than two years ago for permission to run the giant subsea cable from near Dieppe to Portsmouth. It would have carried one of Europe’s biggest internet data links and enough electricity to meet almost 5% of the UK’s annual demand. After multiple delays, Kwarteng refused the application on Thursday, in what campaigners have described as a “victory” for Portsmouth residents. The business secretary said he was unable to conclude that the benefits of the proposed development would outweigh its adverse impacts on the local area. Penny Mordaunt, the Conservative MP for Portsmouth North and a former defence secretary, had led calls against the project, saying it was not helpful to the UK’s energy security. She had raised concerns France could cut the supply in any future dispute. Welcoming Kwarteng’s decision, she said: “If you stand up for what you believe in and you fight for it you can actually change things”. The cross-Channel cable faced steady criticism from Portsmouth city council, which raised almost £250,000 to oppose the venture, saying the project could severely disrupt local traffic and threaten parts of the South Downs national park. Concerns were also raised in parliament about the company’s close links with the Conservative party and the source of its finances, though a source close to Kwarteng said the application was refused consent “on planning grounds alone”. The refusal appears to reverse the minister’s earlier support for the project, which he expressed in a 2019 letter to Aquind, later disclosed under freedom of information laws. Together, Aquind and one of its co-owners, Alexander Temerko, have donated £1.1m to the party, including contributions to 21 Tory MPs and ministers. In October, the Guardian and BBC reported that documents in the Pandora papers suggest Aquind’s majority owner, Viktor Fedotov, secretly co-owned a company once accused of participating in a massive embezzlement scheme in Russia. Lawyers for Fedotov and Aquind strongly denied all accusations of wrongdoing. The company has said it has operated in an open and transparent manner, saying its donations were “entirely lawful, properly declared and have not been made in return for any special treatment”. Stephen Morgan, the Labour MP for Porstmouth South, said the decision to reject the application was “a victory for the people of Portsmouth over years of uncertainty”. Morgan paid tribute “to local campaigners who have helped me lead our city’s united opposition”, adding: “Without our efforts, this would not have been possible. Together, we have stopped Aquind.” A spokesperson for Aquind said the company was “naturally disappointed” that its application was refused and that it would consider the decision and whether a legal challenge was worth pursuing. “We believe our application for a development consent order to be accurate and robust, and it has met all the requirements,” they added.‘I want it to be big,” says Jade Atkin of the Cardiff Met Archers. “I want people to be saying: ‘You’re on TV, we want to watch you’ and I want people to want to come and I want the sport to do well. We all want the sport to do well. And to be honest, I think that can happen.” The sport is wheelchair basketball and Atkin, a Great Britain international, is going to be part of a revolution. When the Women’s Premier League taps off for the first time this weekend it will not just create a new professional league in women’s sport, it will be the first in women’s parasport in the UK. Four teams – Worcester Wolves, Loughborough Lightning, East London Phoenix and the Archers - will compete for the title and the BBC is committed to showing eight games live, including May’s final. “Whenever you see sport on the TV it’s always the men, and always the men making all the money,” says the American Curran Brown, who will play for the Phoenix. “Women as a whole struggle to make a name for themselves in the sporting world and when you put disability with it it’s even lower, it’s not represented at all. I think we have two barriers on top of each other. So I think this is a great beginning, to show what we represent and that we can play toughly as well.” Wheelchair basketball was the third most-watched sport during Channel 4’s Paralympics coverage last year. It is fast, technical, tactical and easy for newcomers to understand. Supported by a network of 200 clubs and community organisations across the country, the British Wheelchair Basketball Women’s Premier League (or BWBWPL for short) starts from strong foundations and 1,000 tickets have been sold for Saturday’s opener in Worcester between the Wolves and the Lightning. The BWBWPL is breaking sporting ground, not just in itself as a competition but by aiming to shift perceptions more broadly. Speak to any Paralympian and they will tell you that the next challenge for parasport is to take the attention and passion that alights on the Games every four years and bring it back into domestic competition all year round. This is a chicken and egg situation to an extent, with the contribution of broadcasters a crucial component but regular compelling competition a prerequisite too. Women’s wheelchair basketball now aspires to provide that offering. Beaming parasport (and, as Brown observes, women’s sport too) into the nation’s homes then provides other opportunities. “This is hugely significant in getting disability representation out there,” says Lisa Pearce, the CEO of British Wheelchair Basketball, “and also to help more disabled people across the country and around the world see how incredible this sport is and how great it is to get involved in sport and physical activity.” Seven in every 10 people who have died from Covid in the UK up to this point have been registered disabled, but the pandemic has also brought a disproportionate impact on activity levels of people with disabilities more broadly. “It’s completely unacceptable, and we need to create more opportunities for disabled people to have sporting and physical activity opportunities,” says Pearce. “We need to create a platform to have wider conversations too and sport – wheelchair basketball in this instance – offers a great opportunity to have a wider societal discussion about why there are so many systematic issues with disability in this country.” The opportunities for disabled people to engage in sport are limited and so too is awareness. Atkin says she did not know about wheelchair basketball herself until a few years ago. At that time she was not disabled herself, but she accompanied her sister as she discovered the sport, forming an enthusiasm of her own. When Atkin later developed the same condition as her sister, a form of hereditary spastic paraplegia, she continued to pursue that passion. Now Atkin can dream of being someone who people want to watch on TV, and can seek to inspire other young women and other people with disabilities. Among that audience may be the parasport champions of tomorrow. More importantly, however, there may be more people who simply find the opportunity to fall in love with the sport as Atkin has. “It’s so much fun”, she says. “Every time I play, whether it’s internationally or national league [a mixed-sex competition], wherever I play, I play for fun. I play for fun no matter what and that won’t change, it will never change. I love basketball.” To find out more about the BWBWPL and to buy tickets, go to www.britishwheelchairbasketball.co.uk/womens-premier-leagueMy brother, Simon Foxley, who has died aged 64 of circulatory problems, was an accomplished musician, conductor, teacher, arranger and composer. He was born in Harrow, north-west London, the son of Doreen (nee Hartle), a nurse specialising in anaesthetics, and Ray (Raymond) Foxley, a professional jazz pianist. He grew up in Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, and began playing the piano at a young age, encouraged by his father. At North Bromsgrove high school Simon also took up the French horn and played in the school and county youth orchestras. In the early 1970s along with three friends he formed the band Hunkpapa. They played a diverse set list at local gigs in and around Birmingham while still at school, earning a commendation in a competition from Melody Maker. Simon went on to study music at the University of Manchester, graduating in 1978. During his time there he established himself as a conductor and began his lifelong interest in contemporary classical music. After graduating he worked as a freelance conductor, pianist and piano teacher in Manchester before moving to London in 1980, where he was a senior music tutor with the Inner London Education Authority for 10 years. From 1990 to 1996 he was education and community officer for the Spitalfields festival and was a project coordinator for the London Arts Board (1994-95), and the Women’s Playhouse Trust (1995-96). Simon was also music director for Contemporary Music-Making for Amateurs (Coma) from its inception in 1992. In 1994 he became head of the Centre for Young Musicians in Hackney. He stopped working in 2006 but continued to write music, embracing new music technology as he came across it. In 2020, he completed a large-scale piece for violin and electronics called The Day’s Deep Midnight. The violin would be accompanied by a mixture of bells, clocks and birdsong. It is intricate and strikingly original. He possessed an enormous collection of CDs, minidiscs and other recorded music; a fiercely guarded hi-fi system, including a Linn turntable whose virtues he never tired of extolling; and a sophisticated home recording studio. He also played bridge, was a devoted supporter of Manchester United and read the Guardian daily. Simon believed that making music was a life-enhancing experience that should be available to everyone, regardless of age, experience, or financial circumstances. His passion for this goal, along with his flowing mane of hair, will remain a lasting memory for those who knew him. Simon is survived by his sisters, Kate and me.Álvaro Cervera had the look. He also had the T-shirts, the slogan and even the sign, a symbol all of his own. Not for him a bat beamed across the sky but a pair of stylised yellow specs, like some sort of short-sighted superman. Which he kind of was and always will be now, even for those who accepted it was time to let go: a cult figure in Cádiz, city of carnival and comedy. This great counter-cultural anti-hero who changed them and let them change him too, if maybe not quite enough in the end. ‘Mr Glasses’, Salvi Sánchez called him. Salvi knew what he had done, they all did. Born in the province, across the bay in Sanlúcar de Barrameda, Salvi had been at Cádiz when Cervera turned up as an unknown and unlikely coach in April 2016 and he was still there when he left last week, sacked after six years and bidding farewell to appreciative applause. Back then, Cádiz were in the Second Division B, Spain’s 80-team, regionalised, third-to-seventh division, and on the edge of the abyss; by the time he had gone, they had been promoted twice and were a top-flight team, having returned at last in 2020. Cervera always insisted he wouldn’t be remembered like Mágico González, the forward they were as fond of for sleeping in and sitting on the beach strumming his guitar as for scoring goals. In a place with a reputation for silliness and fun, where the football team supposedly fit that ideal too and fans pride themselves on being a little different, blowing kisses rather than hurling insults at opponents, he was unapologetically practical, a defensive coach who celebrated being more boring than bohemian, a prophet of parking the bus. He was also wrong, as it turned out. Even when his superpowers waned, Cervera’s popularity didn’t. He had taken Cádiz back to the first division after 15 years. Within three months, they had beaten Athletic, Madrid and Barcelona, the three teams who have only ever been there. He is, the club’s president said, the best manager in their history, the achievement too huge and the gratitude too great to get hung up on aesthetics. On the pitch anyway. Because if there was a sort of joy taken in being so bloody-minded, something almost funny about the way they socked it to the man, off the pitch there was something about him too. When he turned up in bright yellow glasses, Cádiz colours, it worked somehow. Something in how the city reached him reached them. Even in his style there was a straight-talking humility that hit home. When he used the phrase “fight is non-negotiable”, it got printed on T-shirts that soon sold out. One fan called his house that – and found Cervera popping in to say hello. He was the club, breaking down in tears when they returned to primera. Everyone knew this wasn’t easy and hadn’t been easy on him. They also kind of knew they shouldn’t really be there. The problem was, they weren’t likely to be there much longer. Last year Cádiz survived surprisingly comfortably but the second season was always likely to be harder. Their enemies had got wise to them, which didn’t take much. “It worked last year, but teams watch a lot of videos,” said striker Álvaro Negredo. Their signings have not had a particularly significant impact. Beaten 2-0 at Osasuna, Cádiz ended week 20 second bottom, three points from safety. They hadn’t won in nine games and had only two wins all season. Something was broken, between president and coach particularly, while defender Juan Cala understandably sounded like a man who feared they had already given up, relegation inevitable now. Talking of the need to “swim and swim, even if we die on the shore”, “to pull together, even if the boat is sinking”, he insisted: “No one escapes the fire.” Not even Cervera, and he knew that better than anyone. “We won’t survive like this,” he said after the Osasuna game, “salvation is possible but a lot has to change, and you could think of me in that too.” The following day he was sacked. The day after, Sergio Fernández was introduced as his replacement, arriving on a mission to keep them in the division. On a mission to give them the ball back too. It wasn’t just that results were bad; it was that even good ones might no longer be enough. When they drew 0-0 at Madrid recently, it was described by full-back Carlos Akapo as pure Cervera. But while that felt good, it was still only a point at a time when they need wins, and only lasted seven days. The style that had served them started to divide not bind. When he was sacked, Alex Fernández was one of many players calling him “a father”, but the fun had gone. Cervera, though, clung even tighter to the way they were, doubling down on his discourse to the point where it felt deliberate. Asked if Cervera had been “asking to be sacked”, the president said no, but there was something in how he spoke that seemed that way. He talked about how the more they tried to do, the worse they were, how he didn’t want the ball. There had been a perverse pleasure in that message before; now, it sounded like a self-parody. At times, the tone felt taunting, challenging. For players, it didn’t exactly feel like faith in them. The weight grew. “We’re a long way from our target and there’s a sadness about the team,” the president Vizcaíno said. Which is why Cervera was sitting there behind a picture of his specs and his hashtag – #LLNSN, fight is non-negotiable – last week, a shirt listing his achievements alongside him. “Gracias Álvaro” was written across the shoulders, the glasses symbol beneath. “I never imagined that I would come here at 50 and find a place that would change me so much,” he said, “but now I have a family that is waiting for me.” He closed by reciting a line from the club’s unofficial anthem, a pasodoble from the 1998 carnival called Me Han Dicho Que El Amarillo. “Long live Cádiz, long live cadistas, long live their bollocks!” he said, slapping the desk and standing to leave for the last time. Fans were furious, audible outside the ground. A banner declared Cervera the best manager in their history and they were sure the blame lay with Vizcaíno instead. A week on, at Cádiz’s first league game under Sergio against his former club Espanyol on Tuesday night, some called for the president to resign and chanted Cervera’s name. They owed him so much, after all. And it wasn’t like things were getting better, at least to begin with. Cádiz timid, inhibited, second to every ball: a team that looked beyond help. Espanyol were one-up and should have ended it. But at half-time, something shifted. “We had nothing to lose,” Negredo said afterwards. “Sergio told us to take the ‘rucksack’ off our shoulders, that we have to enjoy this.” Cádiz took control and took the ball. Negredo scored an equaliser and had two ruled out by VAR – “it’s been a long time since I had so many chances,” he said – and around the ground something shifted, a hint of hope, and then a chant. “Yes, we can,” it ran. They almost could too. In the 91st minute, Iván Alejo escaped up the right, and slipped a superb finish through Diego López’s legs to put them ahead. The place went wild, and no wonder: they had not been in a position like this for as long as anyone could remember, on the verge of a first home win of the season to take them within a point of salvation. Hope reappeared. All they had to do was hang on, defend one last throw of the dice and the ball, and they could experience something they hadn’t experienced for too long. They didn’t. The throw was taken on 94.58, the ball hit their net on 95.02, Raúl de Tomas heading in and skidding to his knees in celebration while Cádiz’s players fell to theirs. “It hurts,” Sergio said. It wasn’t just the points, how they were caught or that Cádiz had not won at home all season, or since the ground’s name had been forcibly changed from the Carranza to the Nuevo Mirandilla, a curse that needed lifting. It was worse: when at last Cervera had brought Cádiz back, they did so without their supporters; when the supporters came back, the team stopped winning. The fans had not been there to see a first division win since May 2006. It’s been 5,726 days. Playing like this, it won’t be much longer. They will get another chance. Cervera won’t, the best coach in Cádiz’s history bringing them back but unable to share that particular pleasure with the people who made him one of their own, an anti-hero in yellow specs.To leave feels unthinkable but to stay would be worse. Like ending a marriage or quitting a job you loved, abandoning one’s political tribe is never easy. But after months of agonising, the final break often brings with it a giddy feeling of relief. Odd, then, that there was so little sense of catharsis in Christian Wakeford’s “welcome to Labour” photocall with Keir Starmer, in which the defecting MP for Bury South looked like a man whose sleepless nights were just beginning. Perhaps he was worrying about his former colleagues scrolling furiously through their phones for old text messages with which to embarrass him. Or maybe he was anticipating a furious denunciation from the left, the minute they checked his voting record. (Young Labour swiftly obliged, tweeting that he shouldn’t be allowed to join the party, while Laura Pidcock – who lost what had been a safe seat for Labour in 2019 – tweeted that her former colleagues’ cheers for a defector swelling their ranks were a “deep insult to all of those fighting this disgraceful government”.) Wakeford’s personal journey is certainly harder to follow than some. Quentin Davies, who crossed the floor to Labour in 2007, was a passionate pro-European exasperated by his leader’s flirtation with Euroscepticism. Shaun Woodward, the suave millionaire Tory who defected to Labour in 1999, did so after being fired from the Tory frontbench for his support for gay rights (and, many years later, came out as gay himself). Their stories made instinctive emotional sense. Wakeford, meanwhile, says he has wrestled for months with his unease at Conservative decisions on issues such as free school meals and the universal credit cut. But if so, why not rebel? The whips, he says, threatened to withhold a new school from his constituency if he didn’t fall into line on at least one vote, the kind of strong-arm tactics that will rightly shock his constituents but which rebels in the past have had to defy. Nor is it lost on either side that he had a paper-thin majority in Bury South, a seat he won only after the outgoing Labour-turned-independent MP, Ivan Lewis, urged constituents to vote Conservative in protest against antisemitism in the Labour party. For many on the left, welcoming him aboard while continuing to deny Jeremy Corbyn the whip just rubs salt into their wounds. Yet welcomed he must be, albeit with a silent prayer that due diligence was done first, and that’s not the worst of it. They’re going to have to take at least part of his advice, too. Wakeford’s defection has spooked his colleagues into briefly suspending their plotting against Boris Johnson, partly for practical reasons – if there was one spy in the rebel camp, then there might be others, just waiting for their moment to decamp to Labour and take all the party’s secrets with them – but also for more emotional ones. Watching one of their own choose a new party over a new leader as the best way out of the current mess was a brutal reminder that voters could easily do the same, coming as it did just as Theresa May’s former pollster James Johnson released polling giving Labour an 11-point lead in the so-called “red wall” seats captured by the Tories in 2019. It’s not Wakeford himself that matters but all the other Wakefords: the countless Conservative voters who share his stirrings of unease, aren’t yet sure what to do about it and are watching closely now. The last thing they need to see is a Labour party recoiling in disgust at the very idea that such people might be attracted to them. For that fat Labour poll lead hides a large pool of formerly Conservative voters who have shifted only as far as the “don’t know” column, where they’re waiting to see what happens next. Starmer’s job now is to seal the deal with these hovering voters before a punch-drunk government, which is willing to do whatever it takes to get them back, has time to scrape itself off the floor. If parts of the Labour movement can’t conceal their distaste for that project, then they have forgotten what politics is for. To the horror of some who backed Starmer for leader and the delight of others, last autumn he came off the fence on which he has been sitting since the leadership contest and landed, with a thud, on the side of doing what it takes to win. The playbook is familiar to anyone old enough to remember pre-Corbyn Labour – speeches on patriotism, claims to be “the party of business” – but this isn’t 1997 all over again. Many of the Conservative voters Starmer needs to win over aren’t alien to Labour traditions; rather, they are its tradition. They’re people who voted Labour all their lives before taking a punt on Boris Johnson and regretting it. Tales of boozing through lockdown made them feel taken for fools, and Labour’s task is to connect that anger, which crosses party lines, to an economic argument that resonates equally widely but moves the battle on to Johnson’s likely successors. In a week when inflation topped 5%, that no longer looks impossible. In talks before he defected, Wakeford reportedly advised Starmer to focus on rocketing energy bills, telling him that “we’ve got nothing” in response. Here, political necessity marries happily with gut Labour instincts. Soaring food and heating costs will force the poorest into unimaginably dire straits; who on the left isn’t incensed by that? But higher heating bills will also be keenly felt by pensioners on fixed incomes, businesses at a fragile point of post-pandemic recovery and ordinary families who were managing until the price of everything started going through the roof. So where is the chancellor? For weeks, Rishi Sunak has sidestepped all the scandal by piously insisted he’s just getting on with the day job. What has he got to show for it? Where’s the plan to soften the blow everyone knows is coming this spring, when soaring energy bills meet national insurance rises? Rachel Reeves, his Labour shadow, has been weeks ahead of him with detailed proposals. Winning over former Tory voters won’t always be this easy. Obviously there are painful conversations to come, on issues that threaten to split the Labour party all over again. But right now a government waiting for Sue Gray to put it out of its misery is in no fit state to set the agenda and Labour has a priceless chance to show its concerns are the country’s. If it throws that away in favour of yet more glorious infighting, then frankly it deserves to lose. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistEnergy companies want the government to implement policies to achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions, the industry’s leader has said, despite claims from some on the political right that high energy prices should spark a rethink. Emma Pinchbeck, chief executive of Energy UK, which represents the industry, said: “The government should press on with net zero policies. That’s something they still need to do. We are missing the carbon budgets.” She called on ministers to “tighten energy efficiency”, by insulating more homes, and changing planning and construction rules, while developing a strategy for decarbonising the UK’s fleet of gas-fired power stations. She rejected claims that renewable energy had increased costs, saying the problem was clearly an over-reliance on gas, especially for heating. She told a meeting hosted by the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit: “The UK is exposed to gas because we have a huge amount of gas burned in our homes, and so helping people get off gas boilers on to other forms of heating technology is critical over the next decades to reduce our reliance on places like Russia.” She added: “But [it’s also necessary] to make our building stock much more energy-efficient. The reason we have high rates of fuel poverty in the UK isn’t just about the commodity we burn, it’s the volume of it we burn because our energy efficiency rates here are much lower than other countries.” Households are facing an energy price cap rise this April, likely to amount to £2,000 for the average bill, and possibly a further rise to £2,400 in October. The cost-of-living crisis has embroiled the government in calls from its own backbenches to scale back or abandon measures to promote renewable energy and pay for home insulation for poor households, even though renewable energy is many times cheaper than gas and improving home insulation would cut bills for the most vulnerable. Bim Afolami, Conservative MP for Hitchin and Harpenden, called on his fellow Tories to get behind net zero policies, saying only “a very small number” of MPs were questioning them. “Let’s be clear, in terms of delivering net zero, there is no real option other than what the government has set out. It’s a shame that it needs saying, but everyone should rest assured that the bulk of the Conservative party and the government is four-square behind this, and committed to getting it done,” he said. Michael Grubb, professor of energy and climate change at University College London, said consumers were paying unnecessarily high prices for their electricity, as well as their gas, because of the way the UK energy market works. Electricity prices are set by the gas price, even though gas makes up only about 40% of electricity generation and renewable energy prices are far lower. He said the government could ease this by changing the way the UK energy market is structured, allowing for a “pool” of green energy contracts. Ministers should levy a windfall tax on fossil fuel producers, which have seen bumper profits from the global rise in gas prices and Russia’s constraint on European supplies, added Tessa Khan, founder of campaigning organisation Uplift. Taxes on fossil fuels in the UK were far too low, and tiny compared with those of other countries, at about $2 (£1.47) a barrel in the UK compared with more than $20 a barrel for Norway. Even at such low rates, thanks to favourable rules, some fossil fuels had received payouts from the government in recent years, rather than pay tax, she said. Oil and gas producers faced no extra costs but were reaping “windfall profits” from the gas price. “These profits are being privatised. The UK tax regime has made this the most profitable country in the world for oil and gas companies,” she said.The US has alleged that Russian intelligence is recruiting current and former Ukrainian government officials to take over the government in Kyiv and cooperate with a Russian occupying force. The US Treasury on Thursday imposed sanctions on two Ukrainian members of parliament and two former officials it said were involved in the alleged conspiracy, which involved discrediting the current government of the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. “Russia has directed its intelligence services to recruit current and former Ukrainian government officials to prepare to take over the government of Ukraine and to control Ukraine’s critical infrastructure with an occupying Russian force,” the Treasury statement accompanying the sanctions said. The claims suggest US intelligence fears Russia is preparing a full-scale invasion and not the “minor incursion” that Joe Biden referred to as a possibility in remarks on Wednesday that triggered alarm in Kyiv. Online researchers have identified Russian troops and military vehicles within just ten miles of Ukraine’s borders, increasing the risk that Vladimir Putin could launch a military offensive on short notice. Local media showed Russian troops arrived in the town of Yelsk in Belarus and at other points near the border with Ukraine as part of joint military exercises set to begin next month. Russian forces there include rocket artillery, anti-air systems, and possibly elite units such as speznaz. An investigation by the Conflict Intelligence Team and Radio Svoboda raised questions of whether the deployments were just an exercise, as some family members said the soldiers were deploying for months. In his earlier remarks Biden seemed to say that if Russia invaded just a small part of Ukraine, the Nato alliance would be divided on how to respond. Speaking on Thursday, the US president sought to clarify those comments. “If any assembled Russian units move across the Ukrainian border, that is an invasion,” he said. “Let there be no doubt if Putin makes this choice, Russia will pay a heavy price.” Biden added that the US and its allies would also have to be ready to respond if Russia employed “measures other than overt military action to carry out aggression” against Ukraine. The president was speaking soon after Zelenskiy complained in a tweet: “We want to remind the great powers that there are no minor incursions and small nations. Just as there are no minor casualties and little grief from the loss of loved ones.” The US has threatened unprecedented sanctions against Russia if it goes ahead with an invasion, though there are disagreements with European allies, as Biden admitted on Wednesday, on how extensive the punitive measures should be. European capitals have resisted the suggestion that Russia should be cut off from the international electronic payment system, Swift. The US, the UK and other allies have also continued to supply arms to Ukraine, in a move aimed at raising the costs of an invasion, and potentially contributing to a Ukrainian insurgency in the wake of an invasion. Despite the threats, Russian forces have continued to build up near the Ukrainian border. Short-range ballistic missiles and tanks have been pictured heading westwards on trains from positions in Russia’s far east. Satellite imagery shows increasing numbers of encampments of men and equipment in the Ukrainian border region, and Russian and Belarusian troops have been conducting military exercises, which the US says are unusually large and carried out without giving sufficient notice. The two MPs the US has placed sanctions on were named as Taras Kozak and Oleh Voloshyn, both members of a pro-Russian party led by Victor Medvedchuk, an oligarch who has been under house arrest in Ukraine since last May, accused of treason. A former Ukrainian official, Volodymyr Oliynyk, now living in Russia, has a sanction against him for working “at the direction of the FSB [Russian intelligence] to gather information about Ukrainian critical infrastructure”. The fourth man named is Vladimir Sivkovich, a former deputy secretary of the Ukrainian national security and defence council. “In 2021, Sivkovich worked with a network of Russian intelligence actors to carry out influence operations that attempted to build support for Ukraine to officially cede Crimea to Russia in exchange for a drawdown of Russian-backed forces in the Donbas,” the US Treasury alleged. Voloshyn denied being a Russian asset and said he had never “wittingly” talked to the FSB or any other Russian spy agency. He said he was an elected MP for an explicitly pro-Russian political party and that his US-sceptical views reflected those of some Ukrainian voters. Voloshyn said he suspected he was being punished for calling – unsuccessfully – for a parliamentary investigation into Biden’s son, Hunter, and his work in Ukraine. In an interview, Voloshyn described US accusations against him as “strange”. He said he had been interviewed by the FBI last summer when he flew to Washington, adding that he had been in contact regularly in the past with the US embassy in Kyiv. He said he last visited Moscow in November for a national prayer breakfast – his first trip to Russia for two years. “There were several Americans at the same breakfast,” he said. Voloshyn said he knew Kozak but had never met the other two Ukrainians targeted with sanctions. The three other men could not immediately be reached for comment. Russia has denied it plans to invade Ukraine, but it has massed over 100,000 troops along the country’s border. “There’s been a lot of speculation about President Putin’s true intentions, but we don’t actually have to guess. He’s told us repeatedly. He’s laying the groundwork for an invasion because he doesn’t believe that Ukraine is a sovereign nation,” the US secretary of state, Tony Blinken, said in a speech in Berlin. Blinken is due to meet his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva on Friday. Three sets of talks between Russia, the US, Nato and other European states last week, failed to make any progress. The US and Nato have offered negotiations on limiting missile deployments and military exercises, but Russian officials have demanded sweeping security guarantees, that Ukraine is never join Nato, and that the alliance will withdraw forces from member states in eastern Europe who were once part of the communist bloc.Well that was an impressive Ivory Coast performance; they were sharper, quicker and slicker than a pretty insipid Algeria, who never found a cutting edge to match their neat passing all tournament. Just as they did the last time they went into a Cup of Nations as champions, in 1992, they’ve gone out at the first hurdle. If I wanted to be boring and Eurocentric I could point out how West Ham, Manchester City, Milan and others can now welcome back their Algerian stars early, but that would be boring and Eurocentric so I won’t. Ivory Coast, on the other hand, go through to the tie of the round in the last 16, against Egypt next Wednesday. You’d make them favourites on the evidence of the tournament so far. Equatorial Guinea will play the winners of Group F, which resolves itself later tonight. Sierra Leone go out, alas, having acquitted themselves well on their return to the finals. And that’s it from us for now. Stay on the site for Arsenal v Liverpool later, and more AFCON action when the knockouts commence. Thanks for your company and comments. Bye. Full-time in Limbe too, and Equatorial Guinea qualify in second place. In the other game in the group, Kwame Quee of Sierra Leone has been sent off in injury-time as they still trail 0-1 to Equatorial Guinea And that’s it. Ivory Coast are through as group winners and Algeria are out. The crowning glory. Or is it? Haller nods in after a fien cross from the right but he’s clearly offside. 90+2 mins: Zaha has a crack from 25 yards and his fierce low shot is well saved 90+1 mins: Ivory Coast’s Konan wins another free-kick on the left, which is headed clear but Algeria can’t build again in the face of the Ivorians’ press. Three added minutes are being played by the way 89 mins: Algeria are attacking with purpose still but that finishing touch is eluding them, as it has all tournament. And now Ivory Coast break again, and Zaha gets his first touch by the byline on the left, but the move breaks down when a now-knackered Seri miscontrols in front of the keeper. 88 mins: Ivory Coast gee up their fans with some flashy possession football in the middle of the park before Algeria win it back and earn a throw. But Ivory Coast repel all thrown at them. It’s surely too late. 85 mins: Substitution: One for the Palace fans, at last, Wilfried Zaha is on for Pepe. 84 mins: Pepe drives forward from right to left in another fluent Ivorian move and tees up Gradel on the left but his low shot is easily saved. 83 mins: Algeria are stacking up their corner count now, and another one is won on the left but again is comfortably cleared and Ivory Coast break with Pepe, who slows the game to a stroll. 82 mins: Another Algeria chance! Brahimi’s angled shot from distance is tipped over by the impressive Sangare. 81 mins: Algeria subs: Boulaya and Benayada are on for Atal and Belaili. 80 mins: Zerrouki traction-engines a shot from distance but it deflects off his own man, Slimani. 77 mins: Slimani has perked Algeria up considerably here but Ivory Coast still look as if they have another goal in them on the break as Haller is crudely pulled back by Brahimi 76 mins: Ivory Coast get the ball in the net again after a swift break but Nicolas Pépé was offside. It’s livened right up again 75 mins: Another Algeria chance! They’re looking sprightlier and Slimani burrows into the area and is forced back but half a minute later gets on the end of a fine cross and his downward header is smartly turned behind by Sangare. Belaili has a free-kick now up the other end which is deflected for a corner, the first of which goes straight back for another oem, which is rather more cleverly worked and Mandi deftly knees it back across goal for Bendebka to score Algeria’s first goal of the tournament. 71 mins: Ivory Coast now have a free-kick in a promising position on the right, but Pepe curls it high and over. 70 mins: Algeria win a corner on the left but it’s bent into the far post for a comfortable take from Sangare. That penalty might well have supplied a tedious VAR-tinged Talking Point had a) the game still been in the balance and b) it been scored. It was very soft. But there we are. 69 mins: Ivory Coast subs: Sangare and Deli off for Die and Kanon 66 mins: On the touchline, Belmadi is displaying every ounce of his anguish and despair. He knows their 35-game unbeaten run is a goner. 64 mins: Zerrouki clatters Pepe, who’s been everywhere, but escapes a booking. 62 mins: Algeria substitutions: Bennacer and Bounedjah off, Bendebka and Brahimi on. 61 mins: Algeria have another chance with a free-kick just outside the area but Mahrez skims this one wide. And Algeria still aren’t off the mark. Mahrez’s spot-kick comes straight back off the keeper’s left-hand post. 58 mins: And now Algeria build slickly, and they win a penalty as Belaili goes down. Looks contentious to say the least. But no VAR review 56 mins: Thanks Niall. Well this has all escalated quickly. Game, and tournament, over for Algeria. As Gradel skips down the left again in acres of space before being dispossessed. This has been coming since the second half started. Nicolas Pépé strolls into the penalty area and without a defender to bother him, curls his shot into the far corner. Game over, surely. And with that, I’ll hand you back to Tom ... pe 51 mins: Another chance for Ivory Coast! They want to get this game won, and M’Bolhi does well to repel Pepe’s snap shot at his near post. 50 mins: Aurier is having fun out there – now the Ivorian captain has a go from fully 30 yards out, and his shot grazes the outside of the post with Rais M’Bolhi a helpless spectator. 48 mins: It’s the team in orange who have started the second half on the front foot, with Sangaré seeing his shot blocked before Aurier fizzes in a low cross that Haller can’t quite turn into the net. 46 mins: One half-time change from Algeria; Islam Slimani is on for Saïd Benrahma. That’s something of a surprise, although the West Ham man was ineffective in the first half. Here we go, then – we’re back under way in Douala. The Algeria players gather for an on-field huddle before kick-off. Half-time reading: In the other Group E game, it’s Sierra Leone 0-1 Equatorial Guinea at the break. As it stands, Equatorial Guinea are going through in second place and Sierra Leone will fall short in third – with Comoros moving on to the last 16. Goals from Franck Kessié and Ibrahim Sangaré have given the Elephants a deserved lead, and Algeria need three goals in the second half to stay in the competition. 45 mins: There will be three added minutes for Algeria to find something before the break – but Ivory Coast look comfortable since scoring the second, sitting back and keeping Mahrez and Benrahma off the ball. So, the defending champions’ hopes are hanging by a gossamer thread now. They need to win here, and they’re heading in at half-time 2-0 down. Ivory Coast win a free kick a long way out, wide on the right. Serge Aurier steps up and whips in a superb deep cross on to the head of Ibrahim Sangaré, who nods home from six yards out! Thanks, Tom – and in a moment of textbook timing, Ivory Coast have scored their second! 39 mins: Algeria are having to resort to quite a lot of long balls with the Ivorians having the upper hand in midfield. Right, in the rolling-sub tradition of the best pub team six-a-side competitions, I’m going to briefly sub myself off for Niall McVeigh until early in the second half. 36 mins: Algeria win a corner on the left after smart play down the left. It’s another short win and it’s worked right to Mahrez who jinks inside but his menacing low cross is cleared. 35 mins: Algeria sort-of chance! A superb long ball forward from Mandi finds Belaili who’s stolen in beyond the last man but his volleyed first touch lets him down and Sangare gathers. 33 mins: Algeria just aren’t looking as threatening as their opponents; while Bounedjah is closed down on the edge of the area, Ivory Coast break swiftly down the right again before play breaks down and now Mandi, Bennacer and Haller collide leaving the latter two on the deck. 31 mins: Konan shows fine skill and control to open things up on the left again before it’s worked out to the inside right to Aurier, whose teasing low cross just eludes Haller. 28 mins: It’s end to end at the minute and Algeria win another corenr on the right but, though Bensebaini’s header is blocked, Algeria regain possession and win another corner after a penetrating run by the full-back Atal. But that corner comes to nowt too. 26 mins: Gradel wins a free-kick up the other end but it’s overhit badly and goes out for a goalkick to Algeria. 25 mins: Kossonou slips momentarily under pressure from Benrahma but regains his ground as Sangare the keeper comes out to gather. It’s still goalless in the other game, so as things stand Algeria are headed for bottom spot and Ivory Coast progress as group winners. 23 mins: Pepe has been busy all game and after slick quick passing midway into the Algeria half he’s played in down the right and pulls it back for Kessie to volley deftly into the corner. Algeria are staring at the exit door now. No sooner do I say that than they concede a well-worked goal. 21 mins: Aurier concedes a corner to Algeria on the left, which is taken quickly to Bennacer, who ghosts in and fires just high and wide at the near post. Good training-ground move there from Algeria, who are beginning to look more threatening. 20 mins: “The Ivory Coast left back is looking lively,” honks Peter Oh. “Excuse the barbaric pun but if he continues to maraud into the Algerian area like that he could earn the nickname Konan the Destroyer (of Algeria’s flagging title defence)“ 18 mins: The dangerous Haller is given a ball over the top to chase and Algeria clear for a throw. But Ivory Coast win a free-kick in an attacking position, from which Pepe is fed on the inside right channel and fires in a low shot to test M’Bohli in goal, who saves comfortably to his left. 15 mins: The upshot is Algeria have a free-kick, which is swung in from Mahrez – and finds no one, drifting out for a goalkick. 13 mins: Algeria win another corner, on the right this time. It’s a decent delivery met by a firm but wide header from Mandi. And now Belaili’s down, pushed by Deli, who’s just been booked. This looked more of an offence than the previous one to be honest. 12 mins: Bookings: Ivory Coast’s Sergio Aurier goes into the book for dissent after Deli’s flailing arms around the noggin of Bounedjah also earns him a yellow card. 10 mins: Behrahma forages down the left and wins a corner for Algeria, which is taken quickly but Belaili’s shot is charged down and cleared after he cut in from the left. No real openings yet for the defending champions. 8 mins: Ivory Coast chance! Konan is fed by the already-lively Gradel and pulls it back from the byline to Pepe but the Arsenal man scuffs his shot over the bar. 6 mins: Gradel is found by a searching ball out wide to the left, and shimmies and jinks his way to the by-line before just running it out of play. There could be openings on the break for Ivory Coast here. 4 mins: Ivory Coast’s Konan breaks forward from left-back right into the Algeria penalty area before going down under a challenge. No penalty. 3 mins: Mahrez belts it into the wall, where it cannons back off the prostrate Max Gradel in the “draft excluder” role. 2 mins: Bennacer starts an early Algeria attack on the inside-left channel and after the ball is played from left to right then back again they win a free-kick in a dangerous position after a foul on Bounedjah … Peep! And we’re off. There’s a decent amount of noise coming from the crowd rattling around this sizeable bowl as Algeria get us under way. Both sides look to be playing a 4-2-3-1 The teams are on their way out Of course, something of a second-round hazard awaits the winners of this group, in the form of Egypt, but the Pharaohs have been well below their best so far too. Such has been the unpredictable nature of the group stage, which after a goalshy start, has thrown up all manner of drama. Second in this group lands you a knockout tie against Gambia, Mali or Tunisia. And in the other game: Sierra Leone: Mohamed Kamara, Kakay, Bangura, Steven Caulker, Wright, John Kamara, Abu Dumbuya, Quee, Kei Kamara, Bundu, Musa Kamara. Subs: Medo Kamara, Fofanah, Williams, KaiKai, Alhaji Kamara, Kargbo, Turay, Dunia, Ibrahim Sesay, Mansaray, Kallon, Isaac Caulker. Equatorial Guinea: Owono, Carlos Akapo, Obiang, Coco, Ndong, Salvador, Ganet, Pepin, Miranda, Bikoro, Hanza. Subs: Angel, Cosme, Belima, Siafa, Emilio Nsue, Magno, Buyla, Nlavo, Eneme, Meseguer, Balboa, Luis Enrique Nsue. And they line up thusly: Ivory Coast: Badra Ali Sangare; Aurier, Kossounou, Deli, Konan, Ibrahim Sangare, Seri, Kessie, Gradel, Haller, Pepe. Subs: Tape, Kanon, Zaha, Kouassi, Cornet, Maiga, Boga, Die, Bailly, Kouame, Cisse, Boli. Algeria: M’Bolhi; Attal, Bensebaini, Bedrane, Mandi, Belaili, Zerrouki, Bennacer, Mahrez, Benrahma, Bounedjah. Subs: Zeghba, Tahrat, Feghouli, Brahimi, Belkebla, Slimani, Bendebka, Boulaya, Zorgane, Chetti, Benayada, Amoura. So, West Ham’s Said Benhrahma gets a start in Algeria’s attack in place of Sofiane Feghouli while at the back Abdelkader Bedrane is back instead of Djamel Benlamri and the FC Twente midfielder Ramiz Zerrouki comes in for Sofiane Bendebka. Can the reshuffle result in a first goal at AFCON 21 for Algeria? Afternoon everyone, and welcome to an intriguing and hard-to-call denouement in Group E, in which the holders, Algeria, are in real danger of elimination. They need to win their most difficult fixture, against already-qualified Ivory Coast, to progress. To do that they’ll need to massively improve on limp, blunt performances against Sierra Leone and Equatorial Guinea, whose win against them would have been the shock of the tournament had not Comoros upstaged them with their incredible triumph over Ghana. So we’ll have an eye on the clash in Limbé, where Equatorial Guinea, on three points, take on Sierra Leone, on two, the latter having also impressed and exceeded expectations by holding the group’s two heavyweights to draws. At least one of these would deserve to go through too. Algeria knocked out Ivory Coast on penalties in the quarter-finals en route to their 2019 triumph, so the Elephants should have some extra motivation this evening, alongside the need to shake off a creaky display against Sierra Leone. “We are going too play to win,” insists their manager, Patrice Beaumelle. Algeria’s coach, Djamel Belmadi, admits his side have “lacked efficiency” but has called on them to rise to the occasion. Team news will be dropping shortly, and the matches kick off at 4pm GMT. Don’t go anywhere.