Millions of people with mild depression in England should be offered therapy, exercise, mindfulness or meditation before antidepressants, according to the first new NHS guidelines in more than a decade. Under draft guidance, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) recommends the “menu of treatment options” be offered to patients by health professionals before medication is considered. Currently, those with mild depression are offered antidepressants or a high-intensity psychological intervention, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). The shake-up forms part of the first new recommendations to identify, treat and manage depression in adults since 2009. According to the Office for National Statistics (ONS), about one in six (17%) adults experienced some form of depression this summer. The rate is higher than before the pandemic, when 10% of adults experienced it. Younger adults and women are more likely to be affected, the ONS found. A 2019 review showed 17% of the adult population in England (7.3 million people) had been prescribed antidepressants in the year 2017-18. Dr Paul Chrisp, director of the centre for guidelines at Nice, said: “The Covid-19 pandemic has shown us the impact depression has had on the nation’s mental health. People with depression need these evidence-based guideline recommendations available to the NHS, without delay.” Under the changes, those with “less severe depression”, which includes people with mild depression, should be involved in conversations with doctors about what would suit them best, but group cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) could be offered as a first treatment. CBT “focuses on how thoughts, beliefs, attitudes, feelings and behaviour interact, and teaches coping skills to deal with things in life differently”. This could be followed by offers of seven other treatments including individual CBT, self help, group exercise or group mindfulness or meditation, before medication is discussed as an option. Group exercise will typically involve three 60-minute sessions a week for 10 weeks, Nice said. Alternatively, patients could opt for group mindfulness or meditation, which Nice said usually consist of eight weekly two-hour sessions and focus on “concentrating on the present, observing and sitting with thoughts and feelings and bodily sensations, and breathing exercises”. The guideline adds: “Do not routinely offer antidepressant medication as first-line treatment for less severe depression, unless that is the person’s preference.” A similar range of psychological interventions, along with the option of antidepressant medication, should be available to those choosing a first-line treatment for “more severe depression”. When considering treatment options, Nice said people should also be encouraged to discuss what may be contributing to their depression, and the patient’s experience of any prior episodes of depression or treatments. Nav Kapur, professor of psychiatry and population health at the University of Manchester and chair of the guideline committee, said: “As a committee we have drawn up recommendations that we hope will have a real impact on people who are suffering from depression and their carers. In particular we’ve emphasised the role of patient choice – suggesting that practitioners should offer people a choice of evidence-based treatments and understanding that not every treatment will suit every person.” The guidance recommends doctors discuss mental health waiting lists with patients. It also contains new recommendations for those stopping antidepressants. People who are considering taking, or stopping, antidepressants medication should talk with their healthcare professional about the benefits and risks, Nice said. Doctors should explain that withdrawal may take weeks or months to complete successfully, that it is usually necessary to reduce the dose in stages over time, and that most people stop antidepressants successfully. Figures from the NHS Business Services Authority show more than 20 million antidepressants were prescribed between October and December 2020 – a 6% increase compared with the same three months in 2019. “There has been significant progress in science and medicine in the past 12 years,” said retired solicitor Catherine Ruane, a lay member on the guideline committee who acted as a carer to two family members with depression. “This guideline emphasises a greater amount of patient choice and takes greater account of the things that really matter to the patients and their carers.”The economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic has made Britain’s workforce smaller, younger and more female after a sharp rise in people leaving work during lockdown, according to a report. The Resolution Foundation said that while mass unemployment had been avoided during the Covid-19 emergency, there had been an increase in people who had exited the workforce and were no longer looking for a job. Reflecting a sharp rise in early retirement among older workers, the thinktank said economic inactivity – a measure of people out of a job, but who are not looking for work – had soared by 586,000 since the start of the crisis. Alongside a fall in employment in sectors with higher proportions of men in work, such as construction and manufacturing, it said these trends had led to a shrinking of Britain’s workforce, leaving a more concentrated number of women and younger adults to form the backbone of the UK economy. According to the report, participation in the UK workforce had fallen by 1.2 percentage points among older workers aged between 55 and 64, the biggest drop in any recession for the past 40 years. In stark contrast, participation among women rose by 0.4 percentage points – building on a pre-crisis trend for rising levels of female employment in recent decades. Highlighting the shift, it said the proportion of women in the UK workforce had risen from about 44% in 1992 to 48% of the total working population. The figures come amid concerns that women who work mostly from home risk getting caught in a “she-cession” as more men return to the office post-pandemic, gaining a career advantage over their remote-working female colleagues. Catherine Mann, a member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee, said this month that virtual working methods, such as video conferencing, could not replicate spontaneous office conversations that are important to career advancement. However, the Resolution Foundation found that the shift to remote working during the pandemic had helped some women stay in a job. Finding a sharp increase in official jobs market figures for participation among mothers with young children in particular, it said participation among mothers with children aged nought to three had risen by 5.4 percentage points. According to a survey of 6,100 adults undertaken by YouGov on behalf of the thinktank, as many as one in 10 mothers who are part of a couple said that remote working had enabled them to enter work or increase their hours, compared with one in 20 coupled fathers and women without children. It also found an increase in women increasing their hours or entering work to offset a partner’s loss of work. The report, compiled in collaboration with the Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics and funded by the Nuffield Foundation, said the rise of hybrid working could help maintain higher levels of participation among women. However, the changes are concentrated among higher-paid workers and those living in London, where there are typically more jobs that can be done from home. Hannah Slaughter, economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “We need to bank the benefits of more flexible working patterns in post-pandemic Britain, and avoid the risk of remote workers being turned into second-class staff, as we have done with so many part-time workers.”What has Nice announced? The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) has developed the first new guidelines for 12 years to identify, treat and manage depression in adults. How many people are affected by depression? According to the Office for National Statistics (ONS), about one in six (17%) adults experienced some form of depression this summer. The rate is higher than before the pandemic, when 10% of adults experienced it. Younger adults and women are more likely to be affected, the ONS found. Who will be affected by the changes? Nice has drawn up guidance for health professionals when treating patients in two broad categories: those with “less severe depression” and those with “more severe depression”. What is “less severe depression”, and what does the new guidance say? This group includes those deemed to have “sub-threshold” or “mild depression”. Sub-threshold means fewer than five symptoms of depression, Nice said, while mild depression includes those with few, if any, symptoms in excess of the five required to make the diagnosis, and whose symptoms result in only minor functional impairment. The new guideline suggests patients with less severe depression should be offered therapy, exercise, mindfulness or meditation before antidepressants. What about “more severe depression”? This includes people who suffer from moderate or severe depression. A similar range of psychological interventions, along with the option of antidepressant medication, should be available to these people when choosing a primary treatment. Is the new guidance final? No – these are draft guidelines which are now subject to consultation. Are the guidelines mandatory? When exercising their judgment, health professionals are expected to take the guidelines fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service, Nice said. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guidelines do not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the patient, in consultation with them and their family, carers or guardians.The White House has said that Joe Biden intends to run for re-election in 2024, a statement that comes amid speculation over his future as the president sees a dip in his approval rating. Biden, 79, has suffered a drop in his polling numbers in recent months, leading some Democrats to speculate he might not seek another four-year term. “He is. That’s his intention,” said the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, as Biden flew onboard Air Force One for a Thanksgiving event with US troops in Fort Bragg, North Carolina. Democrats were rattled by Republican victories in Virginia’s gubernatorial election earlier this month and a narrow Democratic victory in New Jersey. The statement from the White House follows reports that Biden has been reassuring allies of his intentions to run again, and that he is keen to quash rumors of a one-term presidency. A recent Washington Post/ABC survey survey found just over 40% of voters approved of Biden, continuing a steady downward trend in the president’s ratings amid inflation and supply chain issues and intra-party fighting over key aspects of the president’s agenda. Questions have arisen about the viability of Kamala Harris as a presidential candidate in 2024 should Biden decide not to run again. A recent USA Today/Suffolk University poll found her with a 28% job approval rating. Biden underwent his first physical examination on Friday since taking office in January and doctors found he has a stiffened gait and attributed frequent bouts of coughing to acid reflux. Doctors said he was fit to serve. Biden’s political prospects appeared to have been buoyed last week by congressional passage of a $1.2tn infrastructure plan. Still being debated is another $1.75tn in spending on a social safety net package. Biden was already the oldest presidential candidate to be elected as commander-in-chief when he beat Donald Trump in the November 2020 election, and will be 15 days short of his 82nd birthday on 5 November 2024, the next time voters in the US will be asked to choose their president.A few days before her wedding, Meghan decided she wanted to wear a particular tiara with emeralds. True, this isn’t the sort of issue that should trouble citizens of a mature democracy but when it comes to royals, Britain is neither mature nor, let’s face it, democratic. Indeed, Amol Rajan, the BBC media editor who presented the Princes and the Press (BBC Two), is a declared republican who once branded the royal family as “absurd” and the media as a “propaganda outlet” for the monarchy. As his measured, compelling analysis of the troubled relationship showed, he may have been right about the former, but the latter? Not so much. The media, we might conclude from his programme, may be driving the monarchy to self-destruct, which would, ironically enough, suit his earlier republican views. Back to tiaras. There was a problem: the Duchess of Sussex could not be allowed to wear the emerald tiara because it had some unfortunate history to do with Russia, according to the Sun’s former correspondent Dan Wootton. We never learned what that history was nor why it should matter. What we did learn from Wootton’s report is that Harry reportedly shouted at a royal dresser (who is a person, not a thing) that “whatever Meghan wants, Meghan gets.” This in turn prompted the Queen to tell somebody off. Tiaragate, as it since has become known, has had more column inches and minutes of airtime devoted to it than many sensible things. According to Robert Jobson, royal reporter for the Evening Standard, that person was Harry: she told him to calm down. Not so, countered Wootton, who with access to other sources, insisted that the Queen reprimanded not Harry but Meghan on her behaviour. According to Rajan, obviously both accounts could not be true. Rajan didn’t consider the possibility that both versions were equally false and that Tiaragate was a load of old royal guff, possibly confected from within, or from without by a disgruntled “source” or by a bevy of bevvied hacks needing something to shove on their front pages. And yet, the reporting of Tiaragate was the moment when the Deal, as Rajan called it, broke down. The Deal, he explained, meant that in exchange for intimate royal access the media would give positive coverage. That way, the press could sell papers and the royal family could fulfil its constitutional role set out by Victorian constitutional writer Walter Bagehot, namely to “excite and preserve the reverence of the population”. Of course, Harry may never have believed in the Deal. The media’s treatment of his mother – from Martin Bashir’s importunate interview to the paparazzi who shadowed her to her car-crash death – made him, understandably, hate the press. As did the hacking of his previous girlfriends’ phones. The case for his scepticism was strengthened here by Rajan’s interview with private investigator Gavin Burrows who told that he and others hacked into Chelsy Davy’s voicemails, tried to find out whether she had had an abortion, attempted to get hold of her medical records and scrutinised her sexual past. And then flogged the information to the red tops. And then there was the racism. Our prime minister’s sister Rachel was interviewed about her column of four years ago in which she wrote of Meghan bringing “exotic DNA” into the Windsor bloodline. These days, she suggested, she wouldn’t have written such stuff. Why? Because “it sounds either eugenicist or racist”, she replied. Rajan rightly pointed out, it wouldn’t have sounded any less so four years ago. Ultimately, Rajan’s programme eloquently if unwittingly made the case for the republicanism he once overtly espoused. Royal journalism, as he showed it in action, does the opposite of exciting reverence: rather, it places its hand gently on the backs of Britons’ heads and pushes our noses deep into the royal family’s dirty linen. Everybody involved gets degraded by it.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s Covid blog. I’ll be back a little later to bring you all the new developments. In the meantime, please follow along with all the latest headlines here. US health officials are not currently recommending lockdowns or economic restrictions to curb rising Covid-19 cases, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said on Monday. France’s prime minister Jean Castex tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday, hours after returning from a visit to neighbouring Belgium and just as France is seeing a nationwide resurgence of infections, according to his office. Germany and the Netherlands are set to face tougher Covid restrictions. Germany issues stark warning. “Probably by the end of winter, more or less everyone in Germany will be vaccinated, cured or dead,” German health minister, Jens Spahn, said. “That sounds cynical, but it’s the reality.” The outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, said tighter restrictions were needed. The UK reported an additional 44,917 new Covid cases and 45 new deaths. Greece imposes strict new Covid curbs, aimed at reducing Covid-19 infections that have pushed death rates to almost twice the EU average. The new restrictions went into effect as authorities struggled to convince older Greeks in particular to have the jab. More than two-thirds of people in high-income countries have been fully vaccinated, while in low-income countries an average of less than one in 20 of people have received a single dose, according to a new report by the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response. Israel started rolling out vaccinations for five- to 11-year-olds in a bid to bring down rising Covid infections. Italy’s health minister announced that Italians will be able to get a Covid booster five months after their first vaccination cycle. The Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response accused the UK of throwing unused vaccines “down the drain”. Boris Johnson says the UK government is “concerned” about Covid, but that there is nothing to suggest that the country should bring back restrictions, despite rising cases across Europe. US health officials are not currently recommending lockdowns or economic restrictions to curb rising Covid-19 cases, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said on Monday. While some other countries have reimposed lockdowns, “our process and our focus continues to be getting more Americans vaccinated,” she said. “We will continue to rely on the advice of our own health and medical team, and that is not something that they have recommended.” France’s prime minister Jean Castex tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday, hours after returning from a visit to neighbouring Belgium and just as France is seeing a nationwide resurgence of infections, according to his office. The positive test also means that his Belgian counterpart Alexander De Croo and four other minister immediately went into quarantine since they met with Castex for talks in Brussels earlier Monday. Castex will adapt his schedule for the coming 10 days to continue his activities in isolation, his office said. Officials at the prime minister’s headquarters did not comment on whether he has any virus symptoms. One of Castex’s daughters tested positive Monday after her father returned from a meeting with Belgian Prime Minister Alexander de Croo in Brussels, and Castex himself then took two tests that were both positive, his office said. De Croo’s office said he will be tested Wednesday and will self-isolate while awaiting the result, as will the foreign affairs, defence, justice and home ministers. Germany and the Netherlands have been told they should face still tougher Covid restrictions as the German health minister, Jens Spahn, made the startling prediction that most of his compatriots would be “vaccinated, cured or dead” by the end of winter. With Europe again the centre of the pandemic, ushering in tighter controls mainly on the unvaccinated across the continent, on Monday Austria became the first west European country to re-enter lockdown since vaccination began earlier this year. “Probably by the end of winter, more or less everyone in Germany will be vaccinated, cured or dead,” Spahn said. “That sounds cynical, but it’s the reality.” The outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, said tighter restrictions were needed. “We are in a highly dramatic situation. What is in place now is not sufficient,” Merkel told leaders of her centre-right CDU party. About 68% of Germans and 66% of Austrians are fully vaccinated, among the lowest in western Europe. Read the full story here. The UK today reported an additional 44,917 new Covid cases and 45 new deaths. The figures mark an increase on cases yesterday, when there were 40,004 new cases, and a slight decrease in deaths compared with yesterday, when 61 deaths were reported. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, has condemned violent anti-lockdown rioters as “idiots” after a wave of protests over the weekend. “This was pure violence disguised as protest,” said Rutte. Draconian curbs have been imposed in Greece, aimed at reducing Covid-19 infections that have pushed death rates to almost twice the EU average. The new restrictions went into effect as authorities struggled to convince older Greeks in particular to have the jab. The UK is to review its Covid-19 travel rules in January, the country’s aviation minister said today. Robert Courts’s comments come amid complaints from airlines who claim that day two coronavirus test requirements and passenger locator forms are putting people off travelling to and from the UK. Angela Merkel, Germany’s acting chancellor, has reportedly told leaders of her party that Covid measures are insufficient. “We are in a highly dramatic situation. What is in place now is not sufficient,” she told Christian Democratic Union of Germany leaders in a meeting, according to two participants, reports Reuters. Helen Clark, the co-chair of the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response, has accused the UK of throwing unused vaccines “down the drain”. The former prime minister of New Zealand told a press conference today that vaccine manufacturing had been “far too slow” and urged countries such as the UK and the US to exert pressure on manufacturers and to redistribute vaccines. More than two-thirds of people in high-income countries have been fully vaccinated, while in low-income countries an average of less than one in 20 of people have received a single dose, according to a new report by the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response. Germany’s health minister today issued a stark warning amid rapidly rising Covid cases, telling Germans that by the end of winter everyone will either have “been vaccinated, recovered or died”. Jens Spahn urged Germans to urgently get vaccinated – or, if applicable, get booster doses – as the country recorded more than 30,000 new coronavirus cases in the last 24 hours. Boris Johnson has said the UK government is “concerned” about Covid, but that there is nothing to suggest that the country should bring back restrictions, despite rising cases across Europe. He claimed he saw “nothing in the data” to suggest the UK should switch course from plan A to plan B in its coronavirus response. Israel started rolling out vaccinations for five- to 11-year-olds today in a bid to bring down rising Covid infections. After a fourth wave subsided in September, over the last two weeks the reproduction rate of the virus has been rising again, with half of confirmed infections among children aged 11 and under. Italy’s health minister has announced that Italians will be able to get a Covid booster five months after their first vaccination cycle. Roberto Speranza wrote on Facebook on Monday: The booster dose is crucial to better protect ourselves and those around us. After Aifa’s [Italy’s medicines authority] latest advice, it will be possible to take it five months after completing the first cycle. How has the pandemic changed young people? For the past year, the Guardian has tracked the journey of a group of young people from across the UK. They tell Amelia Hill how coronavirus has turned their lives upside down and transformed their futures. Scientists in the UK have urged caution in making plans to celebrate Christmas as transmission rates remain high. Prof Susan Michie of University College London, a member of the government’s Covid-19 behavioural science team and the Independent Sage group of experts, told Guardian science correspondent Nicola Davis: Rates of transmission are still very high, numbers of Covid weekly deaths continue at around 1,000, the NHS is described by those running it as ‘hitting breaking point’ and ‘unsustainable’, with Covid cases taking up hospital beds with the potential to tip the NHS into crisis. And we haven’t yet hit winter. The Czech Republic and Slovakia banned unvaccinated people from hotels, pubs, hairdressers and most public events from Monday after Covid-19 cases surged in recent weeks. The central European neighbours both acted a step behind Austria, which first set restrictions on unvaccinated people but went for a full lockdown on Monday as the region became the world’s latest Covid hotspot. Less than a day into the new system, Slovakia signalled it could indeed echo Austria with a three-week lockdown for all as the prime minister, Eduard Heger, said he was “intensively” looking at the possibility, to be discussed in the cabinet later this week. “The prime minister is aware it is necessary to resolve the situation immediately so we can have a calmer Christmas and be able to relax measures in view of the coming tourism season,” Heger’s office said in a statement. The two countries took the decision to target unvaccinated people last week to encourage inoculations as daily infections hit new records with vaccination rates lagging behind most European Union countries. Covid infections are on the rise in South Africa weeks before an expected fourth wave in December, the country’s national health laboratory service said today. The National Institute for Communicable Diseases reported a “sustained” increase over the past seven days, with the majority of cases detected in the most populous province of Gauteng, which includes Johannesburg and Pretoria. “We are monitoring these trends to see if these increases persist,” said Adrian Puren, NICD’s interim executive director. He said that while localised increases were expected, “it is hard to say whether the increases indicate the start of a widespread resurgence”. South Africa, which has the largest caseload on the African continent, has recorded nearly 2.93 million infections, with 687 new cases reported on Sunday, up from about 106 earlier this month. Of the total cases, at least 89,574 have been fatal. After a rather slow start, vaccination rates have picked up pace with 41% of adults in South Africa having received at least a single dose, while 35% are fully vaccinated. In the meantime, Pfizer has applied to the country’s regulatory bodies for clearance of its third dose booster shot. The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority said it had received the application on Wednesday and would start assessment of data for the safety and efficacy of the third dose. Prof Chris Whitty, the UK government’s chief medical adviser, said businesses had been “extraordinary” during Covid but that more needed to be done to improve ventilation systems and Britain’s “weak” occupational health system. Whitty told the CBI conference that the pandemic has shown how collaboration between industry and government could be very powerful and said there should be more of it. But he said Britain’s occupational health needed looking at systematically. He said the UK was still “firmly in Covid” and urged businesses to help make getting vaccinated as easy as possible for workers and to encourage them to do so. He also encouraged businesses to improve workplace ventilation systems – to prevent the spread of Covid and other illnesses. In the medium to longer term he said businesses should help employees to be as active as possible, encouraging them to take the stairs rather than lifts, and called for more government-business collaboration in future. The UK today reported an additional 44,917 new Covid cases and 45 new deaths. Between 16 and 22 November, there were 1,027 Covid deaths – a 5.2% decrease on the previous week. On Friday, there were 8,024 patients in hospital with coronavirus and 911 on beds with a mechanical ventilator. Today’s figures mark an increase on cases yesterday, when there were 40,004 new cases, and a slight decrease in deaths compared with yesterday, when 61 deaths were reported. More than half of people aged 50 and over in England have now received an additional dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. Figures from NHS England show that 11,093,652 booster and third doses have been given to people in the age bracket, the equivalent of 52.1%. Scotland, where 56.4% of over-50s have received an additional dose, became the first UK nation to reach the milestone last week. Wales and Northern Ireland do not publish a full breakdown by age group of extra doses, but do give figures for boosters. Public Health Wales said that 610,267 booster doses had been given to over-50s as of yesterday (equivalent to 46.8%). Meanwhile, Northern Ireland department of health said it had administered 233,167 booster doses to people aged 50-plus (equivalent to 33.9%). Across the UK, booster doses are being extended to all people aged 40-plus from Monday. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, has condemned violent anti-lockdown rioters as “idiots” after a wave of protests over the weekend. More than 100 people were arrested during three nights of violence that saw police open fire at rioters in Rotterdam on Friday after a protest against plans to ban most unvaccinated people from public spaces turned violent. It came after daily infections surged to their highest levels since the start of the pandemic. “This was pure violence disguised as protest,” said Rutte, reports Reuters. He added: There is a lot of unrest in society because we have been dealing with the misery of corona for so long. But I will never accept idiots using pure violence just because they are unhappy. Other European cities that saw protests were Zagreb, Rome, Vienna and Brussels. Draconian curbs have been imposed in Greece, aimed at reducing Covid-19 infections that have pushed death rates to almost twice the EU average. The new restrictions went into effect as authorities struggled to convince older Greeks in particular to have the jab. As of today, unvaccinated citizens are barred from entry to all enclosed public spaces, including bars, restaurants, cinemas and museums. Gyms are also off-limits for those unable to provide proof of immunisation or recent recovery from the virus – reportedly triggering many to sell gym memberships. Until further notice, employees in the public and private sector will have to work staggered shifts, with masks being made obligatory in all workspaces. The measures were imposed as capacity in ICU units across the Mediterranean nation exceeded 90%, according to health officials. Vaccination rates in Greece are much lower than other parts of Europe, with a quarter of all adults yet to have the shot. As a result fatalities have also risen in recent weeks. The death toll, as of Sunday, stood at 17,313 in a population of around 11 million. Barely six weeks ago, the country crossed the grim milestone of 15,000 deaths. The restrictions were enforced as dozens were charged with producing fake inoculation certificates. In an unprecedented step, 48 people were prosecuted for participating in a criminal ring that had manufactured and sold scores of fraudulent Covid-19 certificates out of a health centre in central Greece. Judicial authorities signalled that similar investigations were under way in other parts of the country. The Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, told parliament on Monday that bonuses averaging €900 would be given to 100,000 health workers in recognition of their help throughout the pandemic. “It is the least that we can [do] today [given] the great many things that we owe them,” he said. In the US, more than 90% of federal workers have received at least one dose of a coronavirus vaccine ahead of today’s deadline set by the president, Joe Biden. In September, Biden mandated that more than 3.5 million federal workers needed to be vaccinated, unless they had a medical or religious exemption, in order to keep their job. A US official told the Associated Press that the vast majority of federal workers were fully vaccinated, with a minority with either pending or approved exemption. The UK is to review its Covid-19 travel rules in January, the country’s aviation minister said today. Robert Courts’s comments come amid complaints from airlines who claim that day two coronavirus test requirements and passenger locator forms are putting people off travelling to and from the UK. “We will be reviewing the policy in January. We’ll be looking to see what we can do at that stage,” Courts told the Airlines UK conference, reports Reuters. He also said that reforming the UK’s airport slots system, which saw the usual “use it or lose it” takeoff and landing rights waived during the pandemic, remains a priority for the UK government. “We are carefully considering the role of the slot system as part of our future aviation strategy,” he said. The European Union’s drug regulator said today that it was assessing data on booster doses of the Johnson &amp; Johnson Covid vaccine and that it expected a decision “within weeks”. The application is for a booster of the one-dose vaccine, Covid-19 Vaccine Janssen, to be given at least two months after the first dose to adults, according to the European Medicines Agency (EMA). Angela Merkel, Germany’s acting chancellor, has reportedly told leaders of her party that Covid measures are insufficient and warned that the country is in a “highly dramatic situation”. “We are in a highly dramatic situation. What is in place now is not sufficient,” she told Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) leaders in a meeting, according to two participants, reports Reuters. Helen Clark, the co-chair of the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response, has accused the UK of throwing unused vaccines “down the drain”. The former prime minister of New Zealand told a press conference today (see also 12.32pm and other recent posts) that vaccine manufacturing had been “far too slow” and urged countries such as the UK and the US to exert pressure on manufacturers and to redistribute vaccines. On paper, she said, countries’ vaccine donation pledges “don’t look so bad”, but they were aimed at dates too far in the future. Meanwhile, she said, “wealthy countries like the UK have thrown vaccines down the drain because they haven’t used them”. She said 80 counties were not on track to reach a 40% vaccination target by December. Helen Clark said intellectual property (IP) rules should go out the window when the world has to fight a pandemic. She said a “fundamental redesign” of the Covax concept is needed. Zane Dangor said he hopes Covid leads to new discussion over IP rules so that countries don’t have to go back each time to ask for a new waiver. Zane Dangor, a special adviser to South Africa’s minister of international relations and cooperation, told the panel that a “vaccine-plus strategy is vital”. David Miliband, the president and CEO of the International Rescue Committee and former UK foreign secretary, has condemned the “comprehensive global failure” and “inadequate” global leadership of the pandemic response. Speaking to the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response (see also 12.32pm), he criticised the “grotesque failure of the G20” to come up with reforms. More than two-thirds of people in high-income countries have been fully vaccinated, while in low-income countries an average of fewer than one in 20 of people have received a single dose, according to a new report. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, a co-chair of the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response and former president of Liberia, urged global cooperation, warning that the world is “losing vital time against a virus that continues to thrive when we don’t work urgently together”. It comes ahead of a three-day conference of health ministers next week. The panel’s other co-chair, Helen Clark, the former prime minister of New Zealand, recommended the introduction and implementation of a global health threats council as part of a package of measures and urged the UN and World Health Assembly to “get cracking”. She said vaccines “can’t do the job alone” and warned that if action is not taken, coronavirus will “slip through every crack that we have”. Germany’s health minister today issued a stark warning amid rapidly rising Covid cases, telling Germans that by the end of winter everyone will either have “been vaccinated, recovered or died”. Jens Spahn urged Germans to urgently get vaccinated – or, if applicable, get booster doses – as the country recorded more than 30,000 new coronavirus cases in the last 24 hours. Hospitals warned that ICUs were almost full and that some patients were having to be transferred to far-away clinics to be treated, reports the Associated Press. Spahn told reporters in Berlin: By the end of this winter pretty much everyone in Germany ... will have been vaccinated, recovered or died. Admitting that some saw his prediction as cynical, he added: “But it’s true. With the highly contagious delta variant this is very, very likely and that’s why we are recommending vaccination so urgently.” He said he expects the EU to approve vaccines for five- to 11-year-olds at the end of the week. Children of school age have among the country’s highest infection rates. Belgium’s deputy prime minister has called for a debate on compulsory vaccination, after protests against coronavirus restrictions turned violent in the Belgian capital on Sunday (see 10:48). Pierre-Yves Dermagne, the Socialist deputy prime minister, who is responsible for the economy, called for a “genuine social dialogue” on compulsory vaccination. “We must have this debate because we know that we are going to live with this virus for months and even years. We cannot limit ourselves to short-term measures.” Belgium’s seven-party ruling coalition is divided on compulsory vaccination for all, although it agreed to introduce mandatory jabs for healthcare workers. On Sunday an estimated 35,000 demonstrators gathered in Brussels to march against the Covid Safe Pass, the app demonstrating vaccine and covid recovery status, which is essential to enter bars and restaurants. Under the slogan of “together for freedom”, many were voicing their discontent with Covid restrictions in general, which were tightened last week as infections rise across Belgium. On Sunday, police used water cannons and tear gas to disperse protesters, who had gathered close to EU headquarters, and were throwing firecrackers, smashing cars and setting bins on fire. Police said 42 people were arrested, while one was taken to hospital with injuries to their hand. Three police officers were injured and taken to hospital. Belgium’s home affairs minister, Annelies Verlinden, condemned the violence. Writing on Twitter, she said: “A mature democracy respects the opinion of a minority but does not accept that a few abuse their protest vote by force. Vaccinated or not: it is important that we continue to follow the measures. Only together can we win the fight against the virus.” The weekend there were two nights of violent protests in the Netherlands, as well as demonstrations in Austria, Italy, Switzerland, Denmark, Croatia and the French overseas territory of Guadeloupe as governments in various EU countries tighten restrictions in response to a fourth wave of the pandemic. Boris Johnson has said the UK government is “concerned” about Covid, but that there is nothing to suggest that the country should bring back restrictions, despite rising cases across Europe. He said he saw “nothing in the data” to suggest the UK should switch course from plan A to plan B in its coronavirus response. However, the prime minister said the UK must remain “humble in the face of nature” and urged people to get their booster vaccine dose as soon as they are invited. He told a CBI conference in South Shields: Of course we are concerned about the potential from that disease. You have got to be humble in the face of nature but at the moment we see nothing in the data to say that we need to move from plan A to plan B, or any other plan. The best single thing you can all do is get your booster. When you are called forward to get it, please do so. Hi, I will be looking after the Covid blog for the next few hours. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.uk People in Austria are not allowed to leave home except to go to work, shop for essentials and exercise, as the country returned to a Covid-19 lockdown on Monday morning. The Alpine nation is also imposing a sweeping vaccine mandate from 1 February – joining the Vatican as the only places in Europe with such a requirement. Russia’s coronavirus death toll is still hovering near all-time highs – the state coronavirus task force reported 1,241 Covid-19 deaths, down from the pandemic’s record of 1,254 recorded last week. Kazan, the central city of the Russian province of Tatarstan, on Monday became the first city in Russia to start demanding QR codes proving vaccination, past illness or a negative coronavirus test on public transport. About 500 people were denied access to public transport in the city of 1.2 million, and a conflict between a passenger and controllers led to a brief suspension of service on one of the city’s tram lines. Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization special envoy on Covid-19, has said he can understand the scenes of protest in Europe over the reimposition of Covid restrictions, but added: “I’m really very, very anxious about what I’m seeing right across Europe, these very large numbers of cases – but also the speed with which they’re increasing really is a cause for concern.” People were lining up for Covid-19 shots outside Budapest’s main hospitals as Hungary for the first time offered vaccinations without prior registration amid a surge in new infections. There are reports in Ireland today that the government there may be reconsidering the level of financial support available for businesses in the light of rising cases in the run-up to Christmas. UK education secretary Nadhim Zahawi has said he was not in favour of exclusion zones for anti-vaccine protests around schools, suggesting that “the moment you start giving them the space to think that they are somehow being prohibited” would be counter-productive. Shadow health secretary in the UK, Jonathan Ashworth, has said “There are still parts of the country where the second jab rate, like Leicester or Blackburn, still isn’t good enough. We really need to drive that up.” The mayor of a city hit by unrest over Covid restrictions on the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe has made an appeal to French authorities to restore calm. “We just don’t know how far this will still go,” the Pointe-a-Pitre mayor, Harry Durimel, told Franceinfo radio. Guadeloupe has been hit by violent protests before, but he said there were “big worries” on the island. In Kenya, people will have to prove they are fully vaccinated against Covid-19 to gain access to government services, public transport and public places such as national parks, bars and restaurants under new health regulations. Air New Zealand has cancelled about 1,000 flights between New Zealand and Australia, citing “continued border uncertainty” between the two countries. Australia will welcome international students and skilled workers for exemption-free travel into the country from next week, in what the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has hailed a “major milestone” for the country returning to normal. Andrew Sparrow has our UK politics live blog today. Miranda Bryant will be here shortly to take over and bring you the rest of the day’s UK and global Covid developments. Riot police and protesters clashed in the streets of Brussels on Sunday in demonstrations over government-imposed Covid-19 restrictions, with police firing water cannon and teargas at crowds. Protesters threw smoke bombs, fireworks and rocks at officers. Belgium tightened its coronavirus restrictions on Wednesday, mandating wider use of masks and enforcing working from home, as cases surged in the country. There’s another Covid line here via PA Media from the UK education secretary Nadhim Zahawi’s appearance on LBC Radio, where he was asked about anti-vaccine protests outside of schools. He said: I have spoken to the home secretary about this and she has reassured me that the police have all the resources they need to deal with this. The anti-vaxx protesters should not be going anywhere near a school or a pupil or a parent or a teacher. If they do, the police will and can take action against them. Local government, of course, are also working with schools ... if anybody feels threatened by these anti-vaxx protesters, they should report them and they will be arrested. He also said that he was not in favour of the idea of exclusion zones, suggesting that “the moment you start giving them the space to think that they are somehow being prohibited” would be counter-productive. Russia’s coronavirus death toll is still hovering near all-time highs – the state coronavirus task force reported 1,241 Covid-19 deaths, down from the pandemic’s record of 1,254 recorded last week. The country continues to have a low vaccination rate. About 40% of Russia’s nearly 146 million people have been fully vaccinated, despite the country approving a domestically developed vaccine months before most of the world. Vladimir Isachenkov reports for Associated Press that Kazan, the central city of the Russian province of Tatarstan, on Monday became the first city in Russia to start demanding QR codes proving vaccination, past illness or a negative coronavirus test on public transport. About 500 people were denied access to public transport in the city of 1.2 million, and a conflict between a passenger and controllers led to a brief suspension of service on one of the city’s tram lines. Just a quick one from PA Media here, who have picked up a quote on LBC Radio by Nadhim Zahawi. He is the education secretary in the UK, but was formerly the vaccines minister. He has said: Our four-step plan meant that we were able to open up the economy in the summer. Some said it was a mistake – I think it was absolutely the right thing to do. We will probably, I hope, without being complacent, be the first major economy in the world to demonstrate how you transition from pandemic to endemic using vaccines. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK politics live blog for the day. I’ll be continuing to carry UK Covid lines on this live blog as the day develops. Russia’s Covid figures are out for the day – with 35,681 new infections and 1,241 deaths. The seven-day average for new cases has been on a downward trend since 8 November, although that is yet to have any impact on the death figures, which have hovered around the 1,200 mark since 14 November. Moscow Times notes that President Vladimir Putin appeared on television last night and said that he had received a third vaccine dose, telling viewers that it had been painless. The coronavirus picture in parts of Europe is “really worrying”, a senior Labour MP said as he urged ministers to put extra protections in place in order to avoid a winter lockdown. Shadow health secretary Jonathan Ashworth told Sky News: “There are still parts of the country where the second jab rate, like Leicester or Blackburn, still isn’t good enough. We really need to drive that up. “And of course you need to put in other protections as well. We still don’t pay people decent sick pay. We’re still not doing enough to deal with the fact the virus is airborne - we’re still breathing in contaminated air, we’re not putting in place air filtration systems in public buildings to improve the quality of air. PA Media quote him saying “So the ball is in ministers’ court really. They’ve got to put these protections in place to avoid further restrictions, but I definitely do not want another one of Boris Johnson’s lockdowns. They do a huge amount of damage to family life, to community life, to the economy, so it is really worrying when you see what’s happening in Austria and parts of Europe.” Dr David Nabarro, a World Health Organisation special envoy on Covid-19, has told Sky News he can understand the protests in Europe but added: “I’m really very, very anxious about what I’m seeing right across Europe, including now in Western Europe - these very large numbers of cases - but also the speed with which they’re increasing really is a cause for concern. PA Media quote him saying “I’m not surprised because this virus is just not going away. And I’m also not surprised that people are protesting because, actually, the public in so many countries are really fed up with what’s going on. “However, me, as a public health person, I’ve got to share with UK and with your viewers that we’re going to have to go on, we’re going have to go on resisting this virus and we do it through making it hard for the virus to get from one person to another with face masks and also with avoiding breathing in the air breathed out by others.” He said there is a need to “make sure that those who are eligible for vaccination are vaccinated and vaccinated promptly, because that also makes a huge difference to the amount of suffering and death. “So we’ve got to keep going. And, please, everybody take it really seriously. This virus has got so many surprises in store for us.” Here’s an updated map of the latest caseloads across the continent. People were lining up for Covid-19 shots outside Budapest’s main hospitals on Monday as Hungary for the first time offered vaccinations without prior registration amid a surge in new infections. Reuters report that Hungary had a record high tally of 11,289 new cases on Friday and on Monday reported 27,209 new cases for Friday to Sunday and 392 deaths. Hungary, with a population of 10 million, has reported 33,172 coronavirus deaths in total. Despite people lining up for shots, Hungary’s vaccination rate lags behind the EU average, with about 5.8 million people having had the two shots. The government imposed mandatory mask-wearing in closed spaces last week and said it would make Covid shots mandatory for all healthcare workers. But these fall short of the strict measures that the Hungarian Medical Chamber called for on Wednesday. Janos Szlavik, of Budapest’s main Covid-19 hospital, said late on Sunday on commercial television ATV that further measures could soon be necessary to curb infections. He was cited as saying that 80-90% of Covid-19 patients requiring intensive care were unvaccinated, and the intensive care unit in his hospital was full. Prof Peter Openshaw, a member of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), has told BBC Breakfast this morning that he is pleased that the UK can currently avoid the measures being introduced in Europe. “The situation appears to have really been destabilised in some parts of Europe because of misinformation, particularly about vaccines,” he said. “I think, in the UK, we had a very successful early vaccination campaign and we got very high vaccination rates, particularly amongst those who are vulnerable, but obviously that means that many people have now been vaccinated some time ago and they do need the boosters in order to raise their level of immunity back up again and make sure that, as we go into the winter season and towards Christmas, that we have very high levels of immunity again within society.” PA Media quote him, adding: “I am concerned that we do have really quite high levels of transmission in the UK. My personal preference would be that we should really try to get these rates down – we know that masks do work … because there are people who are unvaccinated for various reasons, and we do need to try and reduce the level of circulation of the virus, as well as getting up vaccination rates. “No single measure by itself is going to be successful; we need the combination of measures, which includes re-vaccination, third doses, but also wearing masks and being very careful not to transmit the virus.” Here’s some more detail from Agence France-Presse in Vienna on Austria’s move into its fourth Covid lockdown: People in Austria are not allowed to leave home except to go to work, shop for essentials and exercise, as the country returned to a Covid-19 lockdown on Monday morning. Tens of thousands of people took to the streets on Saturday to protest against the measures, some blaming the government for not doing more to avert the latest coronavirus wave crashing into Europe. The Alpine nation is also imposing a sweeping vaccine mandate from 1 February – joining the Vatican as the only places in Europe with such a requirement. Battling a resurgent pandemic almost two years since Covid-19 first emerged, several countries on the continent have reintroduced curbs, some banning unvaccinated people from venues including restaurants and bars. But not since Covid jabs became widely available has an EU country had to re-enter a nationwide lockdown. Austria’s decision punctures earlier promises that tough virus restrictions would be a thing of the past. Over the summer, then chancellor Sebastian Kurz had declared the pandemic “over”. But plateauing inoculation rates, record case numbers and a spiralling death toll have forced the government to row back on such bold claims. Read more here: Austria re-enters Covid lockdown as Europe battles virus surge India is not considering authorising booster Covid-19 doses yet as many in the country have been naturally infected and the government believes two doses of a vaccine offers sufficient protection for now, three sources with knowledge of the matter have told Reuters. As vaccine supplies have increased, some doctors and public health experts in India have urged the government to start a booster programme for the most vulnerable like many western nations have done. Authorities will instead concentrate on having most of India’s 944 million adults complete a two-dose vaccination by January before shifting their focus to a big expansion in exports, said the sources who are involved in vaccine policy discussions. So far, 81% of India’s adults have received at least one dose, while 43% have had two doses. Vaccination for people under 18 has not yet begun. “The priority is to fully immunise the adult population,” said one of the sources. “A big majority has been naturally infected, and for them two doses are enough. That’s why we are seeing that even after recent festivals, cases are not rising.” The source said that once most adults have had two vaccine doses, the government could make boosters optional. The health ministry did not respond to a Reuters request for comment. The mayor of a city hit by unrest on the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe has made an appeal to French authorities to restore calm. “We just don’t know how far this will still go,” the Pointe-a-Pitre mayor, Harry Durimel, told Franceinfo radio. Guadeloupe has been hit by violent protests before, but he said there were “big worries” on the island now because rioters had guns. Speaking in the early hours of the morning, Durimel said he could still hear noise from protests outside. Tassilo Hummel reports for Reuters that violence erupted last week after walkouts organised by the territory’s labour unions to challenge local Covid-19 restrictions such as the mandatory vaccination of health workers degenerated. The French prime minister, Jean Castex, is due to meet lawmakers from Guadeloupe later today to try to resolve the crisis. “France must re-establish peace,” Durimel told Franceinfo when asked about his expectations of the meeting. He also urged the government in Paris to open up dialogue with the local population suffering from issues such as social distress which were adding to the current health crisis. Over the weekend, France announced it would send police special forces to restore order in the French overseas territory. The local school authority said on Sunday that all schools in Guadeloupe would be closed on Monday. Kenyans will have to prove they are fully vaccinated against Covid-19 to gain access to government services, public transport and public places such as national parks, bars and restaurants under new health regulations. The move comes despite Kenya recording a declining number of coronavirus infections in recent weeks. People will be required to show vaccination certificates from 21 December. The government is planning a 10-day mass inoculation campaign from 26 November, the health minister, Mutahi Kagwe, said in a statement. He said Kenya had recorded a “marked decrease” in the number of severe cases and deaths. “I have no doubt that looking at these statistics, it’s very easy to become complacent and fail to appreciate the magnitude of the problem that we still face with the pandemic,” Kagwe said. “The current decline in the number of new infections may be attributed to a buildup of immunity both through natural exposure to the disease and the ongoing vaccination exercise. Nonetheless we know that it’s not yet time to celebrate.” Agence France-Presse reported that only 2.4 million people, or less than 9% of Kenya’s adult population, had been vaccinated, according to official figures, compared with a government target of 30 million by the end of next year. Since the start of the pandemic, Kenya has recorded a total of 254,629 cases and 5,325 deaths. The Irish Times this morning is leading with news that the government there may be reconsidering financial support for businesses in the light of rising cases in the run-up to Christmas. Their political correspondent Harry McGee writes: The Cabinet subcommittee on economics will receive an update on financial supports amid widespread infections across the State and new restrictions being imposed on businesses, particularly in the hospitality sector. While a proposal is anticipated in relation to the employment wage subsidy scheme (EWSS), a number of sources said they did not expect the Government to reverse reductions in pandemic unemployment payment (PUP) from €250 per week to €200, which kicked in last week. The EWSS gives businesses impacted by Covid-19 a subsidy per employee to help keep them in work. Payments for each employee are due to fall to €203 per week on December 1st, from the existing rates of €250 and €350. For those receiving €203 at present, this is due to fall to €151. The subcommittee – which includes the five most senior ministers in government – will discuss putting a stay on those reductions until after the Christmas period. Cambodia’s vaccination programme got off to a slow start, but the rate has reached 78%, which compares favourably with the rate of 58% in the US and some other Western countries. The prime minister, Hun Sen, leveraged close ties with Beijing to procure nearly 37m doses from China, some of which were donated. He declared last week that Cambodia’s “victory of vaccination” could not have happened without them. The country also received large donations from the US, Japan, Britain and from the international Covax program. David Rising and Sopheng Cheang report for Associated Press from Phnom Penh that it still took time to get sufficient supplies, and many countries in the region that started their programs later struggled even more, especially when the region’s major producer, India, suspended vaccine exports during its spring surge. “Certainly getting the supply in place was really important for the countries that have done particularly well,” said John Fleming, the Asia-Pacific head of health for the Red Cross. “Then there’s the demand creation side – clearly this is about getting a buy-in from the population and also reaching out to marginalized groups.” Early in the pandemic, many Asian countries imposed strict lockdown and travel rules that kept the virus largely at bay. As vaccines rolled out in force elsewhere, those low rates sometimes worked against them, giving some people the impression that getting the shot wasn’t urgent. But when the virulent delta variant began ripping through the region, cases rose, encouraging people to sign up. Hello, it is Martin Belam in London taking over from my colleague Samantha Lock in Sydney. I’ll bring you any Covid lines that emerge from the UK’s morning media round. Here’s a reminder of the latest Covid statistics in the UK. That is a 9.4% rise week-on-week in cases. Fatalities are down 5.9% week-on-week, and hospital admissions are down 4.7% week-on-week. I’ll also have the latest coronavirus developments from around the world. After being shut out since early last year, a range of international visa holders will be able to access exemption-free travel to Australia from 1 December – but there’s still no decision about tourists. Travel exemptions will no longer be required for fully vaccinated eligible visa holders – including students, skilled workers, and those on humanitarian, working holiday and family visas – for the first time since borders closed in early 2020. A travel bubble operating for Singapore will also extend to Japan and South Korea, allowing quarantine-free travel for these citizens, including tourists, subject to a negative Covid test before departure. Government figures show that there are about 235,000 eligible visa holders who would be free to travel to Australia under the eased restrictions, including 162,000 international students. Read the full story here. Air New Zealand has cancelled about 1,000 flights between New Zealand and Australia, citing “continued border uncertainty” between the two countries. The announcement will scuttle the plans of some New Zealanders and Australians who had hoped to be reunited for Christmas. The airline said about 20,000 customers would be affected. The flights cancelled fall between now and the end of December – while the airline’s flight schedule beyond then remains in place, it’s not clear whether more flights may be cancelled down the line. “This will be particularly tough news for families and friends who were hoping to catch up over Christmas ... But our hands are tied until border restrictions ease, and we receive further clarity from the New Zealand government,” Air New Zealand’s chief customer and sales officer, Leanne Geraghty, said in a written statement. The trans-Tasman bubble, which allowed for quarantine-free travel between the two countries, shut in July in response to a Covid outbreak in Australia. It has remained closed since New Zealand began struggling to contain its own outbreak in August. It’s Samantha Lock back with you to give a rundown of all the latest Covid headlines. The regional disparity in tackling Covid has become even more pronounced in recent weeks as Europe introduces more lockdowns and nations in Asia and the Pacific ease restrictions. Austria has entered its fourth national Covid lockdown today, making it the first western European country to reimpose the measure this autumn in the face of surging coronavirus infections. Average daily deaths in the nation have tripled in recent weeks and hospitals in heavily hit states have warned that intensive care units are reaching capacity. The lockdown will last at least 10 days but could go up to 20, officials said. The government also will make vaccinations mandatory starting 1 February. About 66% of Austria’s 8.9 million people are fully vaccinated, one of the lowest rates in Western Europe. “For a long time, maybe too long, I and others thought that it must be possible to convince people in Austria, to convince them to get vaccinated voluntarily,” Austrian Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg said. Australia will welcome international students and skilled workers for exemption-free travel into the country from next week, in what the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has hailed a “major milestone” for the country returning to normal. South Korea’s schools will resume full in-person classes for the first time since the pandemic began on Monday. German politicians are debating making Covid-19 vaccinations compulsory for citizens in light of soaring infections and low inoculation rates. Germany reports another 30,643 confirmed coronavirus cases and 62 deaths, the Robert Koch Institute reports. The US government’s chief medical adviser Dr Anthony Fauci warns that time is running short to prevent a “dangerous” new surge of Covid-19 infections from overwhelming the upcoming holiday season. England’s flagship test-and-trace service is still spending more than £1m a day on private consultants, official figures reveal weeks after MPs lambasted it as an “eye-watering” waste of taxpayers’ money that is failing to cut Covid infection levels. In the UK, Covid booster jabs are likely to be offered to all adults eventually, with the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation already considering the issue, the health secretary has suggested. Some Pacific countries will have less than a quarter of adults vaccinated by the end of the year, with predictions that Papua New Guinea will take five years to vaccinate just one-third of its population, undermining economic recovery and threatening huge loss of life across the region. New Zealand will soon be opening up far more freedoms as the country approaches 90% of adults vaccinated, with prime minister Jacinda Ardern announcing it will move into a new “traffic light” framework of covid protections on 3 December. The Delta variant was first detected a year ago and is now dominant across the globe. Scientists are concerned that a new strain could supersede it. Violence erupted at demonstrations in Belgium and the Netherlands over the weekend as tougher Covid-19 restrictions to curb the resurgent pandemic led to angry protests in several European countries. The US Marine Corps has the worst vaccination record among US military branches, Reuters reports, with thousands of active-duty staff set to miss a 28 November deadline for personnel to be fully vaccinated. The World Health Organisation said it is “very worried” about a fresh wave of European infection. The French government has warned that Covid is spreading at “lighting speed”. The seven-day average of new cases in France reached 17,153 on Saturday, an increase of 81%.For a master of political spin, our Prime Marketer should be entering the upcoming election cycle with a significant advantage: the enduring mythology that conservatives are better economic managers. Right now, you can see him grasping for a fight on the economy like a drowning man with a manic flurry of real-time iterative message testing from “can-do capitalism” to “cost of living”, anything to shift the political contest from the here and now to a hypothetical future under a reckless, profligate Labor government. This brand advantage has been a constant of contests between political parties of the right and left around the globe, encapsulated by veteran Washington pollster Vic Fingerhut’s insight from more than 50 years of polling that right-of-centre parties win the narrow “better economic manager” contest regardless of actual performance. The Coalition has been adroit at winning and holding on to power running on the economy: interest rates (2004), foreign debt (2013) and a confected scare on taxes (2019) just three examples of where the election has been run and won on their political home turf. But findings in this week’s Guardian essential report suggest that no matter how hard he rubs it, the PM is struggling to summon the economic genie out of the bottle this time around. These are remarkable numbers, the cruising control on economic management is typically a 10-15% lead for conservatives, with the numbers equalising when people are inserted into the formulation. This time around the major parties appear line ball on the abstraction of economic management, with Labor surging into pole position when the proposition is extended to encompass the intersection of the economy with the lived experience of voters. This is the critical second arm of what I call the “Fingerhut effect”. Left-of-centre parties do best when economics is anchored to the kitchen table; think Labor’s last election win in 2007 when the economic debate was about workers’ rights. Even more alarming for the PM will be the degree to which his attempts to tie Labor to higher household prices is also falling flat. This has been portrayed by some commentators as a master stroke, echoing John Howard’s demolition of Latham Labor by campaigning on trust keeping interest rates low. But unlike 2004, voters are already reporting lived experience of rising petrol costs of fuel, energy, housing and groceries, meaning the straw man that Labor will push prices even higher is just not flying. On these numbers, the PM can’t even convince his own voting base that his government is better credentialed to manage household expenses. Which leaves the PM with his tenuous metanarrative, a celebration of “can-do capitalism” set up in contrast with “don’t-do government”. While he is banking on voter fatigue with public health restrictions driving an embrace of laissez-faire economics, again the facts are getting in the way of the slogan. First, people may be fatigued with lockdown restrictions, but they are still supportive of their state governments and, pointedly, significantly more approving of state administrations than the federal government. In any federal-state showdown, the PM is holding a losing hand. More profoundly though they see an enhanced, rather than truncated role for government as Australia works through how to rebuild the economy, with nearly two third of voters wanting more, not less, from their government. Again, the split on voter response should be a caution for the PM, with even his own voters rejecting the idea that bonsai government will meet the challenges of the times. In setting up a fight between “can-do” capitalism and “don’t-do” government, the PM has not only presented a false dichotomy, he’s opened the way for Labor to present an alternate approach to leadership drawing on its own band strength and storied history of “managing the economy in the interests of everyday Australians”. Whitlam modernised the political economy of Australia, securing equal pay for women, decentralising government to the regions, recognising China. The Hawke-Keating government’s reforms did not just increase national wealth, but delivered Medicare and superannuation, long-term structural changes that made the nation wealthier and more equitable. And Rudd-Gillard used a moment of global financial crisis to invest behind energy efficiency and affordable housing, while building the market mechanism Australia still desperately needs to drive the energy transformation we have to have. In between these Labor governments there have been periods of stasis. Fraser presided over a cycle of inflation and industrial confrontation. Howard increased the tax base for working people with the GST and then sprayed the proceeds into tax breaks for those who had already accumulated capital. After three terms of Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison rule, the only real commitment has been to entrench the status quo. Labor’s political opportunity is to offer something beyond economic cliches. The building blocks of this plan is taking shape with policies already announced – expanded childcare and early learning, recharging Tafe, addressing the flatlining of wages, and a more self-reliant manufacturing policy, with local industries in everything from vaccines to batteries to electric vehicles. We know from these numbers that people want more government not less: to start acting like architects and not plumbers, building back stronger by growing our own people, supporting more secure work and partnering with business to create local industries. People, jobs, industries. This is an economic agenda that would put Australians at the centre of their economic future not just as numbers in a data set. Labor has a once-in-a-generation chance to rebuild an economy that works for its citizens. • Peter Lewis will discuss the latest Essential Report findings with Guardian Australia political editor Katharine Murphy at 1pm on Tuesday. Free registration hereA trucker was arrested after trying to smuggle record-breaking amounts of methamphetamine and fentanyl from Mexico into the US, federal prosecutors said on Monday. More than 17,500 pounds (7,930 kg) of meth and 389 pounds (176 kg) of fentanyl were discovered last Thursday, hidden inside a tractor-trailer at the Otay Mesa Port of Entry in San Diego, according to a statement from the US Attorney’s Office. The seizures are the largest for either drug in the US for both 2020 and 2021, the statement said. Carlos Martin Quintana-Arias, a Mexican citizen, faces federal drug charges. It wasn’t known Monday if he has an attorney. The driver’s manifest indicated his truck contained auto body parts, but “anomalies” were detected in the trailer by an X-ray machine and a drug-sniffing dog, according to the statement. The arrest comes as overdose deaths in the US are surging, and fentanyl, a synthetic opioid, is being blamed for this increase. The drug, which is far more potent than heroin, often finds its way into other substances such as painkillers or cocaine. The number of drug overdose deaths in the US rose nearly 30% during a 12-month stretch of the pandemic, compared with the previous year, according to recently released data from the CDC. In the past year, fentanyl was involved in more than 60% of the overdose deaths.When she walked into the London casting room of The Wheel of Time, Madeleine Madden scanned the faces – a sea of white – and thought, “Yep, standard.” To announce her presence, she politely inquired, “The Wheel of Time?” “They were like, ‘Oh no – upstairs’,” she recalls. “Then I walked into the actual room and it was such a diverse room of people, I just felt so relieved. For so much of my life I was the odd one out. Here they’d done a worldwide search and brought in people from all over who they felt they were the best for the job.” Madden had starred in Australia’s first Indigenous teen drama, Ready for This, and Redfern Now, a critically praised drama following Aboriginal families living in the Sydney suburb, which should have been considered a triumph – yet she was told by an industry insider that she’d never need to get dialect sessions because she’d never find a job outside Australia. “It was something that was just such a casual throwaway comment, but I was like, ‘Yes, I’m being put in this box once again, and being told what I can and can’t aspire to,’” she says. As things transpired, Madden has found freedom overseas. She went on to have a key role in the Hollywood blockbuster Dora and the Lost City of Gold, and now she’s the heroine of The Wheel of Time, the scenic Amazon-commissioned fantasy series based on the books of Robert Jordan, with a notably multiracial cast. Madden’s entrance is dramatic: as apprentice healer Egwene al’Vere, she is violently pushed from a cliff (a stunt she undertook herself) in an initiation ceremony. It’s a fitting metaphor for the actor, who describes taking on the role as “sink or swim”. She’s 24 now, and this project (the number of seasons as yet unknown, though there are 14 books) will likely document all of her 20s. (It’s safe to say she’ll also be invited to comic cons for the rest of her life.) Right now, promotional images dominate billboards in Times Square and Piccadilly Circus. With the cast and crew having been in a tight bubble – shooting on location in Czech Republic, Slovenia and Croatia for two years, on sets such as a quaint village built into a quarry outside Prague – it must be discombobulating to resurface into such scrutiny. The most bankable name on board is Rosamund Pike (Gone Girl, Pride and Prejudice, Beirut), who plays Moiraine Damodred, one of the Aes Sedai sisterhood of sorceresses. Yes, the hero’s journey narrative, so common in blockbuster movies, has had a gender flip. In the books, of which 90m copies have been sold since their inception in 1990, the female characters were more feisty than feminist – and all notably buxom. In showrunner Rafe Judkins’s adaptation, they’re contemporised for a more progressive, PC audience. “Particularly with Egwene and Nynaeve, we really get insight into their thinking and their lives, which we may not necessarily get in the books,” Madden says. “Women are at the forefront in this story, and it’s such a celebration of not only diverse people, but diverse ways of thinking and perspectives.” Many moons ago (well, 2017), Jeff Bezos had a prophesy that Amazon Studios would produce shows to outperform Game of Thrones, and so there’s a lot banking on The Wheel of Time – $10m an episode, in fact. But this creation is far more YA in tone than its HBO rival. The cast is largely young and clean-cut, playing “dentally sound peasants”, and morality is as central a conceit as it is in Lord of the Rings (the rights of which Amazon has also bought, for $250m). The frequent earnest exposition monologues threaten to outnumber the gruesome deaths, and future headlines in the vein of “Game of Thrones walks fine line on rape: how much more can audiences take?” seem unlikely. As Madden says, “The darkness definitely creeps into the series as we go along further, but I don’t think there is a glorification of physical violence or sexual violence in our story, which is quite unique for the fantasy genre.” Madden calls Egwene the “dream role”, relating to her character’s core values and sense of duty. Being born into a family known for its activism and creativity has a profound influence on her career; Madden’s grandfather was Aboriginal rights activist Charles Perkins; her film-maker aunt, Rachel Perkins, founded Blackfella Films; and her mother is art curator and writer Hetti Perkins. “I’ve been raised by strong women in my life, who have sacrificed a lot for me to be where I am. And I think that’s the same with Egwene,” Madden says. “You know, literally what doesn’t kill her makes her stronger, and I feel that’s something that I also take on.” As a teenager in Australia, she’d delivered a televised address to the nation, on behalf of Generation One, an Indigenous initiative seeking education and employment parity. “I just remember being like, this is something that I could get behind as a kid,” she says. “I didn’t really understand the gravitas at the time, or the scale of what this was.” After the broadcast, Madden became a target, and not just of children at her school. “Obviously, this brought out some nasty things from the woodwork, and that was quite shocking, being a 13-year-old kid,” she says. “And having adults come for you, which was just insane.” But rather than discourage her, the pushback crystallised Madden’s belief that the campaign was important. “It’s been instilled in me since I was young that I have to use my platform to change the world. That’s something that’s part of my DNA,” she says. “I think also that just being born as an Aboriginal woman, my life is politicised, so that’s something I’ve dealt with every day of my life.” Politics certainly promise to shadow The Wheel of Time as each episode is released. Early opinions on Twitter veer from dismissing it as a “woke show” to applauding the diversity in the casting that moves beyond being tokenistic. Critical reviews are more singular in their disappointment, though Madden is often singled out for praise. Forbes called her likable and observed that she was given a less restricted role than that originally created by Jordan, while Gizmodo observed the depth and nuance she gave to Egwene, at odds with the “stereotypes and cliches” of the books. The first three episodes of The Wheel of Time are now available to stream on Amazon Prime Video, with further episodes released weeklyThat’s all from me here on the West Coast. Here are some of the biggest news moments of the day: Five more political operatives have been subpoenaed by the House select committee investigating the 6 January Capitol attack. The chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said the subpoenas aimed to uncover “who organized, planned, paid for, and received funds related to those events.” A circuit court judge in Lake County, Florida, cleared the charges against four Black men accused of rape in 1949. The then teenagers were accused of raping a white teenager at gunpoint and were pardoned by Ron DeSantis in 2019. An eight-month investigation by the New York assembly backs up the state attorney general’s misconduct allegations against Andrew Cuomo. The 46-page report also detailed Cuomo’s use of state workers and other public resources to write, publish and promote his memoir. At least three Senate progressives have indicated they will oppose Joe Biden’s nomination of Jerome Powell as chair of the Federal Reserve board of governors. Democratic Senators Elizabeth Warren, Jeff Merkley and Sheldon Whitehouse have said they will vote against Powell’s nomination, but the chairman appears to have enough Republican support to overcome progressive opposition. Sean Parnell, a Republican Senate candidate in Pennsylvania who received Donald Trump’s endorsement, is dropping out of the race. Parnell’s announcement came after the candidate lost a custody battle with his estranged wife, Laurie Snell, who has accused him of physical and verbal abuse. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack on Monday issued new subpoenas to five political operatives associated with Donald Trump. They are: Roger Stone, a veteran political operative and Trump advisor who was pardoned by the former president in 2020 Alex Jones, a far-right talk show host Dustin Stockton and Jennifer Lawrence, a pro-Trump husband and wife pair Taylor Budowich, a spokesman for Donald Trump The chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said the subpoenas aimed to uncover “who organized, planned, paid for, and received funds related to those events, as well as what communications organizers had with officials in the White House and Congress.” Steve Bannon a former strategist for Trump has refused to cooperate with his subpoena and was indicted for contempt of congress earlier this month. And last month Trump sued to stop the select committee from receiving White House documents from the National Archives, over executive privilege claims. Read the Guardian’s coverage of the newest subpoenas here. An eight-month investigation by the New York Assembly has backed up much of what a previous inquest by the state attorney general that revealed that the former New York governor sexually harassed at least 11 women. In addition to the sexual misconduct, the 46-page report also detailed Cuomo’s use of state workers and other public resources to write, publish and promote his memoir about his handling of the coronavirus pandemic, which could be an ethical violation. The report also revisits Cuomo’s dealings with nursing homes early in the pandemic. It found that he, “was not fully transparent regarding the number of nursing home residents who died as a result of Covid-19,” the report stated. Cuomo’s attorney argues that the newest report from the assembly just regurgitates what the attorney general said in an investigation Cuomo’s attorney described as “flawed” to the New York Times. The read the full report alongside the New York Times’ coverage is here. The state of Florida has admitted its justice system failed in the case of four men who were accused of rape as teenagers in the 1940s. The then-teenagers, who became known as the Groveland Four, were accused of raping a white teenager at gunpoint. The accusation led to a violent manhunt during which one of the accused was killed and several Black people injured in Groveland, a rural Florida town. The four men received a posthumous pardon from Governor Ron DeSantis in 2019. And today, a circuit court judge in Lake County cleared the charges against the men and issuing a ruling that effectively exonerated them of the crime. “We are blessed. I hope that this is a start because a lot of people didn’t get this opportunity. A lot of families didn’t get this opportunity. Maybe they will,” said Aaron Newson, the nephew of Ernest Thomas, one of the Groveland Four. “This country needs to come together.” The Guardian has a full story of the case’s dismissal here. Joe Biden plans to run for re-election in 2024. Jen Psaki, the White House spokesperson told reporters earlier today. As Biden flew to Fort Bragg for an early Thanksgiving celebration with military members, Psaki said, “He is. That’s his intention.” Biden’s intentions remained unclear as he faced a dip in his approval ratings and his party suffered hard losses in Virginia’s recent state election. Read the rest of Reuter’s report on the announcement here. The organizers of the Brit Awards say they are going to do away with gender-specific categories and will instead introduce the British and international artist of the year, which will replace the respective male and female awards for each category. This excerpt from the Guardian’s coverage of the shake-up puts this move into context with the Brit Awards’ own history as well as changes across the industry: At 2021’s ceremony, the non-binary British pop singer Sam Smith was left out of the gendered categories for solo artist. They responded: “I look forward to a time where awards shows can be reflective of the society we live in. Let’s celebrate everybody, regardless of gender, race, age, ability, sexuality and class.” The MTV VMA awards have been gender neutral since 2017. The Television Critics Association awards in the US also uses mixed-gender categories, and literary prizes have long been primarily mixed. This year’s Emmy awards acknowledged non-binary actors by allowing them to be named a “performer” rather than an actor or actress, though they would still ultimately appear in a gendered category. The 2022 Brit Awards ceremony will be held on 8 February at London’s O2 Arena. Read the rest of Ben Beaumont-Thomas’ article here. Hello, blog readers. I’m Abené Clayton blogging from Los Angeles. Here’s one of the national politics stories on my radar. Lucy McBath will be running for congress in a nearby district after Georgia Republicans redrew her district map. McBath currently represents the state’s sixth district, which was recently “drawn specifically to win back one of the two suburban Atlanta US House seats that Republicans lost during Donald Trump’s presidency”, according to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution. So McBath will be moving to the more suburban seventh district where she will run against Democratic incumbent Carolyn Bourdeaux. “As a Black woman, too often I’ve been told to stand down. I refuse to let our voices be silenced in Congress. And people in that district need a voice...It’s not about power to me. It’s about keeping promises,” McBath told the Atlanta newspaper. Brian Kemp, Georgia’s governor is expected to sign off on the newly drawn district maps soon. Read the rest of the Atlanta Journal-Constitution’s coverage of McBath here. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Abené Clayton, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden announced he will renominate Jerome Powell as chair of the Federal Reserve board of governors. The president will also nominate Dr Lael Brainard to serve as vice-chair of the Fed board, on which she has served since 2014. At least three Senate progressives have indicated they will oppose Powell’s renomination. Democratic Senators Elizabeth Warren, Jeff Merkley and Sheldon Whitehouse have said they will vote against Powell’s nomination, but the chairman appears to have enough Republican support to overcome progressive opposition. Biden pushed back against the progressive criticism of Powell’s renomination, saying the Fed needs “stability” as the US economy continues to recover from the coronavirus pandemic. “At this moment of both enormous potential and enormous uncertainty for our economy, we need stability and independence at the Federal Reserve,” Biden said at an event with Powell and Brainard. Biden’s social spending package faces challenges in the Senate, after the House passed the Build Back Better Act on Friday. Senate Democrats are expected to make changes to the House version of the bill in the weeks to come, with the hopes of winning the support of centrists like Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema. Sean Parnell, a Republican Senate candidate in Pennsylvania who received Donald Trump’s endorsement, is dropping out of the race. Parnell’s announcement came after the candidate lost a custody battle with his estranged wife, Laurie Snell, who has accused him of physical and verbal abuse. Abené will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Sean Parnell, a Republican Senate candidate in Pennsylvania who received Donald Trump’s endorsement, is dropping out of the race. Parnell made the announcement after losing a custody battle with his estranged wife, Laurie Snell, who has accused him of physical and verbal abuse. A judge ruled that Snell would be awarded sole legal custody of the couple’s three children, while Parnell will have physical custody three weekends a month, per the Associated Press. “I strongly disagree with the ruling today and I’m devastated by the decision,” Parnell said in a statement. “There is nothing more important to me than my children, and while I plan to ask the court to reconsider, I can’t continue with a Senate campaign. My focus right now is 100% on my children, and I want them to know I do not have any other priorities and will never stop fighting for them.” Parnell, who was running to replace retiring Senator Pat Toomey, had been considered the frontrunner in the Republican Senate primary after receiving Trump’s endorsement. Joe and Jill Biden are now en route to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, where they will have an (early) Thanksgiving celebration with US troops and their families. “Our troops and their families give so much to this country – and we’re thankful for their service each and every day,” the president said on Twitter earlier today. Biden did not stop to take any questions from reporters as he left the White House to start the short trip to North Carolina. It must be the holiday season: Jill Biden was at the White House today to oversee the delivery of the first family’s Christmas tree. “It’s beautiful. It’s magnificent actually,” Biden told reporters as the tree arrived at the White House. The first lady cut off a small branch of the tree and offered it to one of her grandchildren, Hunter Biden’s son Beau, who was at the White House for the occasion. According to the White House, the 18 ft Fraser fir was grown in North Carolina by Rusty and Beau Estes, who are three-time winners of the National Christmas Tree Association’s 2021 grand championship. Today, a United Nations human rights expert said that electoral laws in some parts of the US have deprived millions of citizens, namely from minority groups, of having the equal right to vote, reported Reuters. Fernand de Varennes, the U.N. special rapporteur on minority issues, speaking on the final day of a two-week visit to the United States, decried a Texas law that he said resulted in “gerrymandering” and dilution of voting rights of minorities in favour of white Americans. “There is in fact what could be described as an undermining of democracy with a phenomenal number of legislative measures in different parts of the country ... which certainly have the effect of making the exercise of the right to vote more difficult for certain minorities,” he told a news briefing. “It is becoming unfortunately apparent that it is almost a tyranny of the majority where the minority right to vote is being denied in many areas,” he added. De Varennes called for a “New Deal” to overhaul legislation. There was no immediate U.S. reaction to his preliminary observations which de Varennes said he had shared with U.S. State Department officials earlier in the day. The Guardian’s Sam Levine also wrote about key voting rights legislation being blocked by Republicans in the Senate and if Democrats could address legislative obstacles: No, it’s not deja vu: Senate Republicans once again used the filibuster on Wednesday to stymie Democratic efforts to pass a significant voting rights bill. It’s the fourth time it’s happened this year, the most recent coming just two weeks ago. But Democrats and other voting rights advocates hope that this time is different. They never really expected 10 Republicans to sign on to the bill and advance it. Instead, they hoped to use the vote as a final chance to show the West Virginia senator Joe Manchin and Arizona senator Kyrsten Sinema, two of the staunchest filibuster defenders, that there is no hope of passing a voting rights bill while the filibuster remains in place. Read the full report here. Read the Guardian article here. Vermont’s only member of the US House, Democratic representative Peter Welch, announced today that he will run for the US Senate. “I’m running for the United States Senate to work for you, for Vermont, for our country, and for our imperiled democracy,” said Welch in an announcement video shared to Twitter. One week after 81-year-old Vermont Senator Patrick Leahy revealed that he will not be running for re-election, Welch, who is 74, announced that he will run for Leahy’s senate seat. “It’s just a critical moment in our democracy and in our country,” said Welch to the Associated Press today. “Are we going to continue to make progress facing climate change? Are we going to fight for reproductive rights and racial justice? Are we going to help working families?” Welch, who was elected to Congress in 2007, said that he promises to use his experience in the House to work across the aisle and get progressive policies like the Green New Deal passed. Welch has already been endorsed by Vermont senator Bernie Sanders who said he “has the knowledge and experience to hit the ground running as a strong advocate for Vermont’s working families.” Leahy’s retirement and Welch’s senate run would create the first open seats in Vermont’s congressional delegation since 2006 when Sanders became a senator and Welch took his seat in the House. Later today, Kamala Harris will announce that the Biden administration will be giving $1.5bn of coronavirus aid to address health care worker shortages in underserved communities, reports the Economic Times. The funding will go to the National Health Service Corps, Nurse Corps and Substance Use Disorder Treatment and Recovery programs, all federal programs that offer scholarship and loan repayments for health care students and workers if they pledge to work in underserved and high-risk communities. The money, which includes funds from the American Rescue Plan and other sources, will support more than 22,700 providers, marking the largest number of providers enrolled in these programs in history, according to the White House. It comes in response to recommendations laid out earlier this month by the White House’s COVID-19 Health Equity Task Force, which issued a report outlining how the administration could address systemic inequality in the health care system. The COVID-19 pandemic has both highlighted and exacerbated health care disparities for minority and underserved communities. Read more here. In other news, more than 90% of federal workers have received at least one dose of the Covid-19 vaccine by today’s deadline set by Joe Biden, the Associated Press reports. Previously in September, Biden announced that more than 3.5mn federal workers were required to get their Covid vaccine with no alternative testing option unless employees could get approved for medical or religious exemption. Since then, more than 95% of federal workers are either being vaccinated or have requested an exemption. Workers that are unvaccinated and do not have an exemption will begin a “counseling” process that will result in termination if they refuse to get a vaccine or do not have the proper exemption status. These statistics were confirmed by an official who agreed to speak to AP on the condition of anonymity as the official figures are set to be released later today. The current success of the federal worker vaccine mandate could be a sign of progress for the Biden administration’s efforts to encourage Covid-19 vaccinations despite previous pushback. Jerome Powell pledged that, if confirmed by the Senate, he would use his second term as Federal Reserve chair to drive down unemployment and confront inflation. “We know that high inflation takes a toll on families, especially those less able to meet the higher cost of essentials like food, housing and transportation,” Powell said. “We will use our tools both to support the economy and a strong labor market, and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched.” Dr Lael Brainard, who has been nominated by Joe Biden to serve as Fed vice-chair, similarly pledged to tackle inflation if confirmed by the Senate. “I’m committed to putting working Americans at the center of my work at the Federal Reserve,” Brainard said. “This means getting inflation down at a time when people are focused on their jobs and how far their paychecks will go.” After Powell and Brainard’s remarks, Biden concluded the event without taking any questions from reporters. Joe Biden pushed back against progressive criticism of his decision to renominate Jerome Powell as chair of the Federal Reserve board of governors. “Some will no doubt question why I’m renominating Jay when he was the choice of a Republican predecessor,” Biden said. “At this moment of both enormous potential and enormous uncertainty for our economy, we need stability and independence at the Federal Reserve.” Biden commended Powell’s independence as Fed chair, noting he “stood up to unprecedented political interference” during Donald Trump’s presidency. “It’s just one of the many reasons why Jay has support from across the political spectrum,” the president added. Several Republican senators have already indicated they will support Powell’s renomination, meaning the Fed chair will likely have the votes to win confirmation despite progressives’ criticism of him. Joe Biden used his speech on his nominations for the Federal Reserve board of governors to tout the country’s economic progress since he took office. “America is the only major economy — the only one in the world — where the economy is bigger today, and families have more money in their pockets today, than before the pandemic hit,” Biden said. “That’s even after accounting for inflation. None of our competitors internationally can say that. None. It’s a testament to the hard work and perseverance of the American people.” The president’s remarks come as the country grapples with the highest level of inflation in more than three decades, and more Americans are reporting that rising prices are a “major crisis”. Read more about Democrats’ concerns over inflation here: Joe Biden has now started his speech on his nominations for the Federal Reserve board of governors, which the White House announced this morning. Before launching into his prepared remarks, the president took a moment to reflect on the car attack yesterday at a Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin. “While we don’t have all the facts and details yet, we know this morning that five families in Waukesha are facing fresh grief,” Biden said. “An entire community is struggling to cope with a horrific act of violence.” The president expressed his gratitude to the medical personnel who are working diligently to save dozens of others who were injured in the attack. “My administration is monitoring the situation very closely,” Biden added. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden’s social spending package faces challenges in the Senate, after the House passed the Build Back Better Act on Friday. Senate Democrats are expected to make changes to the House version of the bill in the weeks to come, with the hopes of winning the support of centrists like Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema. Biden announced he will renominate Jerome Powell as chair of the Federal Reserve board of governors. The president will also nominate Dr Lael Brainard to serve as vice-chair of the Fed board, on which she has served since 2014. At least three Senate Democrats have indicated they will oppose Powell’s renomination. Senators Elizabeth Warren, Jeff Merkley and Sheldon Whitehouse have said they will vote against Powell’s nomination, but the chairman appears to have enough Republican support to overcome progressive opposition. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Joe and Jill Biden will spend some time with US service members this evening to mark Thanksgiving, which the country will celebrate on Thursday. The president and the first lady are flying to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, later today to “celebrate Friendsgiving with service members and military families as part of the Joining Forces initiative,” per Biden’s official schedule. Before flying to Fort Bragg, the president will deliver a speech on the his newly announced nominations for the Federal Reserve board of governors. Jerome Powell, who has been renominated as board chair, and Lael Brainard, who has been nominated as vice-chair, will also speak at the White House event. Progressive senator Elizabeth Warren confirmed she will oppose the renomination of Jerome Powell to serve another term as chair of the Federal Reserve board of governors. “It’s no secret I oppose Chair Jerome Powell’s renomination, and I will vote against him,” the Massachusetts Democrat said in a statement. Warren noted she will support the nomination of Dr Lael Brainard as vice-chair, adding that Powell’s “failures on regulation, climate, and ethics make the still-vacant position of Vice Chair of Supervision critically important”. At least two other Senate Democrats, Jeff Merkley of Oregon and Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island, have already indicated they will also oppose Powell’s renomination. But several Republicans -- including Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania, Mitt Romney of Utah and Kevin Cramer of North Dakota -- have said they will vote in favor of Powell’s nomination. So Powell will still likely have the votes to secure his confirmation, even if a handful of Democrats oppose his nomination. Although she will not have a vote in Jerome Powell’s Senate confirmation battle, House speaker Nancy Pelosi praised Joe Biden’s decision to renominate the Federal Reserve board chair for another term. “Chairman Powell has brought steady leadership and sound judgment to the Federal Reserve’s mission of promoting maximum employment, stable prices and a sound financial system, especially during a time of unprecedented crisis,” Pelosi said in a statement. “His proven track record and goal of achieving ‘broad-based and inclusive’ employment while lowering families’ costs will continue serve the country well, as America, under the leadership of President Biden, rebounds and Builds Back Better from crisis.” The scholars who penned the open letter specifically called on the Senate to pass the Freedom to Vote Act, which would require many states to overhaul their election rules to expand access. It would require 15 days of early voting, implement automatic and same-day registration and allow anyone to cast a mail-in ballot if they want to. It would also limit the kind of extreme partisan gerrymandering lawmakers are deploying across the country as they redraw electoral maps right now. The measure is one of two major pieces of voting rights legislation stalled in the senate. The second is the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, which would restore a key provision of the Voting Rights Act that require places with a history of voting discrimination to get election changes approved by the federal government before they go into effect. Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer has pledged to find a way to pass those bills and tasked certain senators with figuring out a path forward. But there is growing unease about whether Democrats will be able to do something before the end of the year. Senator Kyrsten Sinema, a Democrat who is one of the staunchest defenders of the filibuster, said she still favors the rule in an interview with the Washington Post over the weekend. “Defenders of democracy in America still have a slim window of opportunity to act. But time is ticking away, and midnight is approaching,” the scholars wrote. America’s democracy will be at “critical risk” if the US Senate fails to pass sweeping voting rights legislation, more than 150 scholars of American democratic systems said in an open letter published Sunday. The academics called on the US Senate to get rid of the filibuster, the rule that requires 60 votes to advance most legislation through the upper chamber. Republicans have used the rule to block voting rights legislation from advancing on four separate occasions this year. Preserving the filibuster, they said, would be a “blunder that future historians will forever puzzle over.” The letter was first reported by Axios. “Not only could this failure undermine the minimum condition for electoral democracy—free and fair elections—but it would in turn likely result in an extended period of minority rule, which a majority of the country would reject as undemocratic and illegitimate,” the scholars wrote. “This would have grave consequences not only for our democracy, but for political order, economic prosperity, and the national security of the United States as well.” At least two Senate Democrats -- Jeff Merkley of Oregon and Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island -- have already indicated they will vote against the renomination of Jerome Powell as Federal Reserve board chair. In a joint statement, the two senators argued Powell had failed to use the tools of the Federal Reserve to address the economic threat posed by the climate crisis. “Jerome Powell refuses to recognize climate change as an urgent and systemic economic threat,” the two senators said. “President Biden must appoint a Fed Chair who will ensure the Fed is fulfilling its mandate to safeguard our financial system and shares the Administration’s view that fighting climate change is the responsibility of every policymaker. That person is not Jerome Powell.” Jerome Powell’s handling of the economic fallout from the Covid-19 pandemic has won the chair of the Federal Reserve the backing of the White House for a second term running the world’s most important central bank. Despite speculation that he might sack Donald Trump’s appointee, Joe Biden cited the “decisive action” taken by Powell during the early stages of the crisis as a reason to reappoint the 68-year-old Republican for another four years. The White House said Lael Brainard – the only Democrat on the Fed board, whom some had tipped as a possible replacement for Powell – was its choice to become the vice-chair. The nominations hark back to a tradition of a non-partisan approach to the top job at the Fed that was broken by Trump. Some progressive Democrats had called for Biden to follow the same approach and appoint Brainard in Powell’s place. Both nominations are subject to approval by a Democrat-controlled Congress and come at a time when the Fed is grappling with an annual inflation rate of 6.2% – the highest level in more than three decades. Despite the bipartisan support for Jerome Powell’s renomination, there will likely be at least one Senate vote against the Federal Reserve board chair. Progressive senator Elizabeth Warren has criticized Powell’s leadership of the board, and she has previously indicated she would not support his renomination if Joe Biden appointed him to serve another term. “Your record gives me grave concerns,” Warren told Powell in September, when he testified before the Senate banking committee. “Over and over, you have acted to make our banking system less safe, and that makes you a dangerous man to head up the Fed, and it’s why I will oppose your renomination.” Warren has not yet commented on Biden’s announcement that he will renominate Powell. Stay tuned. The Democratic chair and Republican ranking member of the Senate banking committee quickly released statements endorsing Joe Biden’s renomination of Jerome Powell as chair of the Federal Reserve board of governors. “Chair Jerome Powell has led our economy through a historic pandemic, and under his and President Biden’s leadership, unemployment has fallen and workers are seeing increased bargaining power,” Democratic chair Sherrod Brown said. “I look forward to working with Powell to stand up to Wall Street and stand up for workers, so that they share in the prosperity they create.” Pat Toomey, the Republican ranking member of the committee, acknowledged he has had policy disagreements with Powell but commended his overall leadership of the Fed board. “When the pandemic hit in 2020, Chairman Powell acted swiftly and took extraordinary and necessary steps to help stabilize financial markets and the economy,” Toomey said. “While I have strongly disagreed with Chairman Powell’s decision to continue the Fed’s emergency accommodative monetary policy—long after the economic emergency had passed—Chairman Powell’s recent comments give me confidence that he recognizes the risks of higher and more persistent inflation and is willing to act accordingly to control it. I look forward to supporting his confirmation.” Treasury secretary Janet Yellen praised Joe Biden’s decision to renominate Jerome Powell as the chair of the Federal Reserve board of governors. “The steady leadership of Chair Powell and the Federal Reserve helped ensure that America’s economy was able to recover from a once-in-a-generation health and economic crisis,” Yellen said in a statement. “Over the past few years, Chair Powell has provided strong leadership at the Federal Reserve to effectively meet and address unexpected economic and financial challenges, and I am pleased our economy will continue to benefit from his stewardship.” She similarly commended Biden’s selection of Dr Lael Brainard to serve as vice-chair of the Fed board, describing her as “a respected economist with years of experience [who] has been instrumental in the nation’s recovery”. Yellen concluded, “As Treasury Secretary, I will continue to support a strong and independent Federal Reserve, empowered to pursue its dual mandate of stable prices and maximum employment to benefit American workers and families.” Joe Biden has just announced he will renominate Jerome Powell to serve another term as chair of the Federal Reserve board of governors. In a new statement, the White House noted Biden will also nominate Dr Lael Brainard to serve as vice-chair of the Fed board, on which she has served since 2014. “While there’s still more to be done, we’ve made remarkable progress over the last 10 months in getting Americans back to work and getting our economy moving again,” Biden said in the statement. “That success is a testament to the economic agenda I’ve pursued and to the decisive action that the Federal Reserve has taken under Chair Powell and Dr. Brainard to help steer us through the worst downturn in modern American history and put us on the path to recovery. ... “Fundamentally, if we want to continue to build on the economic success of this year we need stability and independence at the Federal Reserve – and I have full confidence after their trial by fire over the last 20 months that Chair Powell and Dr. Brainard will provide the strong leadership our country needs.” The president still has three seats to fill on the Fed board, including the position of vice-chair for supervision. The White House said Biden plans to announce those appointments “beginning in early December”. Democrats are worried that inflation could imperil their legislative agenda and their majorities in Congress as crucial midterm elections loom next year. While Joe Biden and fellow Democrats had previously sought to downplay rising inflation, it has become an unavoidable issue as prices continue to climb. The labor department has reported that prices increased by 6.2% over the past 12 months, marking the most rapid uptick since 1990. Gasoline prices have increased by 49.6% over the past year, while food prices have risen by 5.3%. As prices rise, more working Americans are noticing their bills have become more burdensome. According to a poll conducted by the progressive firm Navigator Research this month, 54% of Americans now say the cost of groceries and gas is a “major crisis”, marking a 17-point increase since September. Senator Joe Manchin, one of the key holdouts in Democrats’ negotiations over their $1.75tn spending package, has said he is hearing more from constituents who are concerned about their gas and grocery bills. “By all accounts, the threat posed by record inflation to the American people is not ‘transitory’ and is instead getting worse,” Manchin said in response to the labor department’s latest report. “From the grocery store to the gas pump, Americans know the inflation tax is real and DC can no longer ignore the economic pain Americans feel every day.” Manchin has previously expressed concern that Democrats’ spending package, known as the Build Back Better Act, could negatively contribute to inflation. Biden will need Manchin’s support to get the spending package through the evenly divided Senate, so the senator’s concerns could endanger the president’s top legislative priority. “Corporate” Democrats in the Senate imperil Joe Biden’s Build Back Better Act, a leading House progressive warned – but not just Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the targets of most leftwing ire. Such Democrats, Rashida Tlaib of Michigan said, are influenced by donors who “don’t have the best interests of the American people in mind”. At the same time, the New York Times reported that Manchin and Sinema are increasingly receiving money from corporate and conservative donors. In an interview broadcast on Sunday, Tlaib told Axios she was “fearful” that “corporate Dems” would “guide this agenda. It’s gonna be the people that are gonna continue to profit off of human suffering. “I know that they’ve been influenced and guided by folks that don’t have the best interests of the American people in mind.” Tlaib said she was referring to Manchin and Sinema, “but I think there are some others that ... have issues with the prescription drug negotiations there. “And so I can’t say it’s just those two. They seem to be leading the fight, but I wouldn’t be surprised if folks are hiding behind them.” Greeting, live blog readers. The House passed Democrats’ $1.75tn social spending package, know as the Build Back Better Act, on Friday in a vote of 220 to 213. The legislation now advances to the Senate, where the proposal will face many more hurdles. All 50 Democratic senators must support the bill in order to get it to Joe Biden’s desk. Senate Democrats have already indicated they plan to make changes to the House version of the bill, particularly when it comes to the revenue-raising provisions that will help pay for the package. And one of the centrist holdouts in the negotiations over the bill, Joe Manchin, has previously indicated concerns about how the proposal may negatively impact inflation. So the Senate needs to craft a version of the bill that can win the support of all 50 Democratic members, and then congressional leaders from both chambers need to come together to agree on a final version of the legislation. It’s going to be a long month of negotiations. Stay tuned.It was initially seen as an audacious enlistment by Joe Biden of Australia into the 21st-century struggle against China, elevating the country in the process to a significant regional military power and finally giving substance to Global Britain and its tilt to the Indo-Pacific. But since then the “ruckus” about Aukus, as Boris Johnson described it, has not stopped. If this was the start of a new “anti-hegemonic coalition” to balance China’s rise, it has not quite blown up on the launchpad, but nor has it taken off as smoothly as intended. At the heart of the matter is Australia’s announcement it was ditching its A$90bn (£48.5bn) “deal of the century” contract to purchase 12 diesel-powered submarines from France, and was instead buying eight nuclear-propelled submarines from the US and Britain. The duplicitous conception of Aukus has enraged France, once Australia’s 30-year trusted partner in the Indo-Pacific, and required an apology from Biden that raises worrying questions about how his administration operates internally. More importantly, as each day passes since the contract was announced with such fanfare on 16 September, the questions mount about the Aukus alliance’s ultimate purpose, and its implications for other countries in the south-east Asia-based Asean block. The risk is that Aukus, far from strengthening a regional alliance against China, leads to fracture, with big players such as Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand and India disturbed by the advent of a new inner Anglosphere core in their region. The concern is that it subtracts rather than adds. It has also raised legitimate questions among Pacific nations and thinktanks about a nuclear arms race and loopholes in the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. Some of those concerns have been echoed by Rafael Grossi, the head of the UN weapons inspectorate, as well as by the UN general assembly. A boost for Macron It has also sparked a debate in Europe. Emmanuel Macron’s plan to use the French presidency of the EU next year to relaunch proposals for stronger European defence have been boosted. Embarrassed by his betrayal of France, Biden has given Macron’s plans his broad endorsement. Macron has been able to argue that if Aukus was about anything, it was a signal that the US’s geostrategic centre of gravity is moving irrevocably from Europe to the east to counter Chinese expansionism. That in turn underlined how the old Eurocentric western security architecture essentially is in a mess, and needed reform, providing Paris with a chance to snatch a potential victory in Europe from the ashes of its humiliation in the Indo-Pacific. The EU after all, not just Paris, was unimpressed by Aukus, postponing free trade talks with Canberra. Gabriele Visentin, EU special envoy for the Indo-Pacific, admitted many saw it as deliberate, and not ineptitude, that Aukus was launched on the day the EU published its own strategy for the Indo-Pacific. Regardless of the timing, EU defence ministers are moving at a faster speed with their plans for stronger European defence, including the creation of a 5,000-strong joint military intervention force by 2025. Individual reputations may have also taken a hit. French intelligence and diplomats are facing searching questions as to why they did not pick up Australia’s months’ long deceit. But Kurt Campbell, the White House Asia director and chief advocate of the plan to share the US’s nuclear secrets with Australia, has fallen out of favour with the state department, where many say it would have been more astute if Campbell had told Australia to pause for 3 to 6 months after cancelling the French contract before announcing the new security pact. The Australian angle With inquiries under way in four national legislatures, the chances of Scott Morrison, the Australian prime minister, emerging with an enhanced reputation for plain dealing and diplomatic horizon scanning expertise seems unlikely. Biden himself has not come out of it unscathed. By saying he thought France had been informed of the loss of the submarine contract, he looks like a man that will either attempt to rescue his alliance with that country, or is out of the loop. Asked at an Aspen security forum whether it was credible that Biden did not know, the normally suave French ambassador to Washington, Philippe Étienne, paused awkwardly before saying it was important to look to the future. Johnson’s bona fides are in play too. Questions remain at least in French minds about the precise role the UK officials played in agitating for this decision that has lost Australia A$2.4bn in sunk costs, with further compensation to come. Senior British figures were on Morrison’s advisory panel from February this year, notably the former head of BAE Systems Submarines, Murray Easton, credited with turning around the British nuclear submarine programme. But one difficulty for Aukus is that it is largely a concept. A phalanx of recently hired former US naval advisers have been appointed to fill out the details over the next 18 months on behalf of Morrison, including where the submarines will be built. The purpose is to show Australia, a country with no civilian nuclear base, can co-produce new submarines, either the Astute built from the British design, or the Virginia class sub built in Connecticut or Virginia. Whatever the choice, no Australian nuclear-powered sub will be operating in the South China Sea until 2040, by which time the fate of Taiwan may be sealed. The first French submarine was by contrast supposed to be ready by 2034, meaning Australia’s ageing Collins class will have to be refit, or some interim solution found. Jean-Pierre Thébault, the French ambassador to Australia, spared no punches in pointing out the uncertainties of what he called a “giant leap into the unknown”. He said: “No amount of magical thinking could avoid the fact that Australia now had a capacity gap”. Jean-Yves Le Drian, the French foreign minister, said: “The Australians place themselves entirely at the mercy of developments in American policy. I wish our Australian partner, who made the choice of security – justified by the escalation of tensions with China – to the detriment of sovereignty, will not discover later that it has sacrificed both.” The other selling point of the Aukus security pact – intense cooperation over cyber, artificial intelligence and quantum computing – is also coming under scrutiny. Morrison is eager to show it is not a PR add-on, but a tangible step. If so it leaves more technologically advanced allies such as Japan and South Korea perplexed by their exclusion. The US had previously rejected a South Korean request to share its nuclear propulsion technology. That does not mean Aukus, however difficult the birth pangs, lacks military logic, or political support. It was legitimate for Australia, faced by China’s trade war and threats to Taiwan, to decide its strategic needs were changing, and France was never going to satisfy them. It wanted something that could travel large distances. It is about 3,500 miles from the Ran operating base in Perth to the South China Sea. Australia was attracted to the fact that the US technology meant a nuclear reactor in a submarine would not need replacement or additional nuclear fuel during decades of service. This was a vital difference with the French model. Australia would not need a large civil nuclear industry to maintain the vessel. But it also means a big change in how Australia views its range of influence. “It is about projecting power further up so shaping the security environment in which we operate,” said Arthur Sinodinos, the Australian ambassador to Washington. “By acting together you can change the calculus of the countries in the region that may think once they become a great power they can throw their weight around, and not have to follow any rules.” ‘From order to international disorder’ France does not altogether disagree about the changed nature of the Chinese threat. Admiral Pierre Vandier, chief of staff of the French navy, told France’s parliament in October: “We are in the process of moving, violently, from order to international disorder. The sea has once again drawn the spotlight. It demonstrates that the sea, common space to all humanity, has become the place, par excellence, of the competition, the challenge, the clash – or disunity – for states and organisations wishing to assert themselves, sometimes in defiance of agreements and alliances. “We are witnessing the Chinese naval awakening. The size of the Chinese navy increased by 138% between 2008 and 2030. My predecessor estimated that China launched the equivalent of our national fleet every four years. The simple Chinese coastguard patrol boats are in fact real first-rate frigates. They are 10,000-tonne boats – their size is larger than that of our frigates of the same size – armed with cannons. Their mission is to escort the fishing fleets and are even authorised to open fire since the modification of its naval law.” Vandier also warned, despite the betrayal of France, that it would be an error for France to mistake its true enemy. He said: “I invite you to reread Gen de Gaulle’s speech, delivered the day after the attack on Mers-el-Kébir in 1940. Despite the fatal nature of this episode, during which nearly 1,300 French sailors were killed while trying to counter the British assault, the general urged the target not to be mistaken: Germany remained the real enemy of France.” Emily Haber, the German ambassador to the US ironically made a similar point by quoting the German philosopher Nietzsche: “The purest form of stupidity is to forget what you really want.” But not everyone in Europe especially France is prepared to be so flexible and magnanimous as it reconsiders its role in the Indo-Pacific. It is tempting for France to present itself among countries in the region as the champion of a different, more supple relationship with China, contrasting itself with the bellicose “forever friends” rhetoric of Aukus. There have been hints of this. Speaking to the senate foreign affairs committee on 12 October, the French defence minister Florence Parly spelled out a different vision. “We propose to the actors of this region a strategy with clear objectives: to defend our vision of this space as a space of law and not to show any naivety about Chinese intentions, but to refuse to be hostage to the rivalry between China and the United States.” Le Drian also told parliament: “The United States apprehends the situation in the Indo-Pacific region according to a very confrontational logic, while the strategy of the French and Europeans is much more open: it takes into account the risks but is not limited to them. On the contrary, we are trying to offer an alternative model to the Chinese presence in the whole area. We intend to respect the sovereignty of all actors and our partners in the region, because it is not just Australia. “India, Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia are also great countries, with which we have strong, close and constant relations, which we will further strengthen as part of our Indo-Pacific strategy.” The idea he laid out is closer to the old policy of engagement with China that Campbell and Ely Ratner, Biden’s two senior China advisers, have explicitly rejected. France has a ready audience with this rhetoric. Many south-east Asian countries trade with both superpowers, and as much as they value freedom of navigation, they would prefer not to choose, but prefer instead to be somewhere in the middle on the question of US-China competition, valuing ties with both superpowers, and reluctant to be drawn into any arms race between the two sides. Thus in the words of Susannah Patton, a research fellow at the University of Sydney’s United States Studies Centre, the Aukus announcement provided a temperature check of where countries stood on the US-China divide. The political elite in Singapore, Japan and the Philippines are largely supportive of Aukus, but Michito Tsuruoka, an associate professor at Keio University, points out Japan is not enthusiastic about nuclear-propelled submarines. The new prime minister, Fumio Kishida, opposed them in the recent party leadership contest. The view from inside Asia Choi Jong-gun, the first secretary of the Korean ministry of foreign affairs, was circumspect during his visit to the US this week. “South Korea is a strategic partner of China and needs a partnership with Beijing in reality,” he said. Randall Schriver, a former assistant secretary of defence for the Asia-Pacific region, was not pleased, warning him that it was dangerous for South Korea to drift in this way, adding if it did not watch out it would end up in the same place as France. More obviously, the Malaysian foreign minister, Saifuddin Abdullah, and his Indonesian counterpart, Retno Marsudi, have both expressed their alarm. Retno said the situation would certainly not benefit anyone. She said: “We both agreed that efforts to maintain a peaceful and stable region must continue and don’t want the current dynamics to cause tension in the arms race and also in power projection.” With a population of 270 million people scattered over 17,500 islands, a long history of colonial subjugation and multiple experiences of foreign subversion and interference, Indonesia is a country that prides itself on its neutrality. But the initial hostile response was a blow to Australia that hoped Indonesia, on the basis of a warm response to the Australian defence strategic update last year, was open to a more assertive role. France is not slow to see the problem selling 36 Rafale fighters and showing diplomatic love. France is also fostering a partnership with Malaysia. India is also watching anxiously. Gurjit Singh, the former Indian ambassador to Germany and Asean, said: “The rise of partnerships in the region such as the Aukus and the Quad, which are not Asean-centric, causes them concern. The Asean sees the enunciation of the Aukus pact as increasing the geopolitical risks in the region, as the Aukus is aimed at countering rising Chinese belligerence.” New Zealand too continues to preach the centrality of Asean and nuclear non-proliferation. China is playing on those fears, in hope of inserting an unlikely wedge. China’s deputy chief of mission in New Zealand, Wang Genhua, recently told Australia’s pacific neighbours to be careful, saying Aukus was out to supplant Asean. “Australia is going to own nuclear-powered submarines. It will be almost necessary for them to equip nuclear weapons as the next step. The step just couldn’t be prevented,” Wang told the Wellington thinktank Diplosphere. “There will be more of a nuclear arms race across the Pacific region, more nuclear tests, and nuclear pollution.” He said this would be the first time in history that a country without nuclear weapons would receive technology with the precise isotope used to enrich uranium, offering new access to the technology used in atomic weapon construction. The main players in Aukus appear to have recognised they have at minimum a comms problem on their hands, and not just in Paris and Brussels. Both the Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, and the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, in recent days travelled to Malaysia and Indonesia offering reassurance that the Aukus alliance was neither bent on war with China, nor an exclusionary project. Tim Barrett, the former chief of the Australian navy, admitted the concept needed clarifying. John Richardson, former chief of US naval operations, tried to reassure allies saying Aukus would be more palatable if it was less exclusive. It would “have to have tentacles and intrusions to be successful,” he said. Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, also tried to woo doubters in the region, telling the Lowy Institute the US goal was to create “situations of strength”, Campbell went so far as to suggest Aukus could be extended to other powers and this required “building a latticework of alliances and partnerships globally that are fit for purpose for the 21st century”. He said: “All of this talk of the United States and China going into a new cold war, or that we’re on our way to conflict, or the Thucydides trap – we have the choice not to do that. “We have the choice, instead, to move forward with what President Biden has called stiff competition. Where we are going to compete vigorously across multiple dimensions, including economics and technology. Where we’re going to stand up for our values.” Ultimately, according to Rory Medcalf, author of the definitive Indo-Pacific Empire, the health of any Chinese containment security pact may come down to the French reaction, since France is not going to leave the region. Medcalf told the British foreign affairs select committee: “In a strange way, the real test for France is now. France was serious about the Indo-Pacific well before the submarine contract that France secured from Australia in 2016. In 2015 France was a heavily committed Indo-Pacific partner for Australia, so it should be now. In time it will be again. “In the meantime, it is important for the three Aukus powers to work with Europe and work with France where we can, to help them to fulfil the commitments of their Indo-Pacific strategies, manage the damage and try to help France help itself.”Indigenous mayors in Cape York and the Torres Strait have told the prime minister, Scott Morrison, that proceeding with the federal government’s proposed voter ID laws could be considered “an outright display of discrimination”. The new legislation would require voters to show identification before voting in federal elections and referendums to crack down on alleged voter fraud. Widespread concerns about the proposal include fears it would disenfranchise Indigenous people, including those experiencing homelessness and living in remote communities. On Monday, the Torres Cape Indigenous Council Alliance (TCICA) – a peak body for local government in Queensland’s remote north – wrote to Morrison, saying it “strongly objects” to the proposal on the basis it would limit the right to vote of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples living in remote communities. “Issues such as severely overcrowded housing, population transience, the lack of access to government services, and traditional adoption practices all compound the ability of First Nations peoples to obtain and/or retain identification,” the TCICA chair, Kowanyama Aboriginal shire council mayor Robbie Sands, wrote. “Even meeting the requirements for getting a driver’s licence is a major hurdle for some, taking many months to meet the identification requirements.” Sands said the parliamentary committee on human rights found there was “no evidence provided” that such measures were needed. “With no evidence to suggest the proposed legislation addresses a genuine, evidence-based need, along with the significant impact the laws would have on an already disadvantaged population, they simply do not make sense. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Rather, they will only serve to discourage people from exercising their right to vote. “If you and your government are serious about closing the gap for First Nations Australians, we ask that you stop this legislation from progressing any further. “To not do so could be read as an outright display of discrimination against the vulnerable Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples we represent.” Torres Strait and Cape York communities are in the marginal federal seat of Leichhardt, held by the LNP MP Warren Entsch. The seat is one of Labor’s main targets at next year’s federal election. The Queensland minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander partnerships, Craig Crawford, said the federal proposal was a “Trump-style attempt to suppress voting”. “It is aimed at the people that Scott Morrison and Warren Entsch know are unlikely to vote for them.”Kyle Rittenhouse sat down for his first interview since being cleared of homicide on Monday night, speaking with Fox News’s Tucker Carlson in a segment that sparked a fresh round of controversy after the teen said he was “not a racist person” and supported the Black Lives Matter movement. Rittenhouse, 18, was acquitted on Friday on charges stemming from killing two men and wounding another during unrest after the shooting of a Black man by a white police officer in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last year. Rittenhouse is white, as were the men he shot. In a nearly hour-long interview aired on Monday, Rittenhouse recounted his version the night in Kenosha when he shot and killed Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, now 28. He said the case was fundamentally about self-defense and denounced lawmakers and the media who he claimed had unfairly politicized the trial. “This case has nothing to do with race,” Rittenhouse told Tucker Carlson. “It never had anything to do with race. It had to do with the right to self-defense.” Rittenhouse has attracted support from conservative groups and lawmakers, some of whom, on the far right of the Republican party, have celebrated his acquittal and offered him internships. On Sunday, Christina Pushaw, press officer for the Republican governor Ron DeSantis, welcomed Rittenhouse to the “free state” of Florida in a tweet. Before his trial, Rittenhouse was photographed in a bar with apparent members of the far-right Proud Boys, where he is alleged to have flashed white power hand signs. While his attorneys have insisted Rittenhouse is not a white supremacist, others have said otherwise. On Saturday, the MSNBC host Tiffany Cross said: “The fact that white supremacists roam the halls of Congress freely and celebrate this little murderous white supremacist, and the fact that he gets to walk the streets freely, it lets you know these people have access to instituting laws, they represent the legislative branch of this country.” The civil rights attorney Ben Crump was equally scathing after Friday’s verdict. “If we were talking about a Black man,” he said, “the conversation and outcome would be starkly different. But we’re not. We’re talking about Kyle Rittenhouse, a racist, homicidal vigilante who, like so many white men before him, not only escaped accountability but laughed in its face.” Speaking to Carlson, who also made a documentary on the case, Rittenhouse said: “I’m not a racist person. I support the BLM movement, I support peacefully demonstrating.” Rittenhouse attacked state prosecutors, claiming they had “taken advantage” of him. “I believe there needs to be change,” he said. “I believe there’s a lot of prosecutorial misconduct, not just in my case but in other cases. It’s just amazing to see how much a prosecutor can take advantage of someone.” Rittenhouse also criticized coverage of the trial, saying: “I’ve never seen something so polarizing in my life ... this wasn’t a political case. It was made a political case.” The 18-year-old claimed he had spent time in a jail cell “without running water” and went weeks without showering. He said he was now focused on attending college and eventually wants to become a nurse or a lawyer. Rittenhouse’s lawyer, Mark Richards, told CNN he “did not approve” of Carlson filming a documentary with Rittenhouse, and “threw [the film crew] out of the room several times”. “I don’t think a film crew is appropriate for something like this,” Richards said. Rittenhouse was 17 when he traveled 20 miles from his home in Antioch, Illinois, to Kenosha, in the wake of the shooting of Jacob Blake on 23 August last year. That shooting, and the protests in Kenosha, became part of a national reckoning over police use of force against Black people, after the murder of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer in May. Rittenhouse was armed with an AR-style semi-automatic rifle when he joined others who said they were intent on protecting private property two days after Blake was shot. Prosecutors painted the teenager as a “wannabe soldier” who went looking for trouble. Rittenhouse claimed he was attacked and in fear for his life. A jury found him not guilty on charges of homicide, attempted homicide and reckless endangering in the deaths of Rosenbaum, and Huber. Derrick Johnson, the president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), said the verdict was hard for Black Americans to take. “Here you have a 17-year-old who illegally purchased a gun, traveled across state lines to protect property that was not his, for owners who did not invite him, and he put himself in harm’s way based on the rhetoric that he’s seen on social media platforms,” Johnson told CBS’s Face the Nation. He called the verdict “a warning shot that vigilante justice is allowed in this country or in particular communities”. On Sunday, several dozen protesters gathered at Kenosha’s Civic Center Park. Marchers traced the route Rittenhouse took, carrying signs that said “Reject racist vigilante terror” and “The whole system is guilty!” Protesters chanted, “No justice, no peace” and “Anthony and Jo Jo”. A couple carried long guns. The Rev Jesse Jackson, 80, was scheduled to appear but did not. Organizers said he was working with congressional leaders to ask that the Department of Justice investigate further prosecution. A release from Jackson’s Rainbow Push Coalition said the justice department should consider aiding and abetting charges for Rittenhouse’s mother. “The verdict of not guilty is very revealing of the state of criminal justice in America,” Bishop Grant, the Rainbow Push Coalition national field director, said in a statement.The city of Toowoomba requires little introduction. Located on the edge of a plateau on the Darling Downs west of Brisbane, it’s all boarding schools and spring flower festivals, right? Not quite. Look beyond its lush parklands and you’ll find a gourmet powerhouse brimming with history and culture, plus a local community as vibrant and colourful as the street art that adorns its walls. If you want to get to know the real Toowoomba, it pays to ask a local. Why? Because they’re the ones who bring life to the city’s broad streets, bridging the past and shaping its future. Jenny and Tony O’Reilly agree wholeheartedly. As owners of Quest Toowoomba, a beautiful property that blends the heritage-listed former church that houses its reception with a contemporary apartment hotel extension at the rear, they understand how important it is for travellers to have that local connection. To experience, not just to stay. The couple relocated from Brisbane last year and quickly embraced the local way of life. Every Saturday you’ll see Jenny strolling through Queens Park, stopping to exercise the dog in the off-leash area of what she says is one of the most beautiful parks she’s found, then stocking up on fresh, local produce at the Cobb+Co Museum farmers’ market. “There really is just so much to see and do now,” Jenny says. “They call it the ‘Garden City’, but I think it’s the ‘Gourmet City’ too. We have some amazing cafes, microbreweries and rooftop bars like The Brewhouse and Santé Cocktail Bar … there are also wineries only a short drive away. We’re quite spoiled.” With that in mind, now is a perfect time to shine a light on the treasures of Toowoomba – through the eyes and experiences of its locals. This article will “pay it forward”, with one local sharing a hidden gem, recommending another to share theirs, and so on. From where to watch a show to quenching your thirst … Although a devoted foodie, Jenny says it’s the Empire Theatre that has stolen her heart. “We have a beautiful art deco theatre,” she says. “They have some fantastic shows and it’s just so easy. My girlfriends will come from Brisbane to see a show. You can always find a park and there are great restaurants next door. It’s cheaper than Brisbane, too.” Just a few doors down from Quest is Jenny’s go-to pub: Fitzy’s. Owner Brad Fitzgibbons has lived in Toowoomba for 20 years and believes the city is really starting to come of age. Cork &amp; Lever wine bar has a local reputation for its creative cocktails and all-Australian gin collection “The culture and diversity of Toowoomba never ceases to amaze me,” he says. “There are some cool hidden bars around town too. Some of the best are Cork &amp; Lever, and Bodega, which is like a dive bar that you find through a hidden door. It’s quite quirky.” … to secret gardens and your morning coffee Peacehaven Botanic Park, just a stone’s throw out of town, in Highfields, is Fitzgibbons’s pick for a hidden gem. Despite his two decades in Toowoomba, he only discovered the park about six months ago. However, it’s fast become a family favourite and he feels its gardens and walking trails celebrate everything that’s great about life in Toowoomba. Peacehaven Botanic Park is Fitzgibbons’s pick for a hidden gem Micha Whitley at Cork &amp; Lever wine bar, which has a local reputation for its creative cocktails and all-Australian gin collection, is also a big fan of the great outdoors. Her hidden gem is Boyce Gardens, which she describes as an oasis tucked away in the suburb of Mount Lofty. The relaxed lifestyle and bustling hospitality scene drew Whitley to Toowoomba 12 years ago, but she feels the biggest reason to visit is the community. “There are so many reasons I love living in Toowoomba but the most noteworthy is the people,” she says. “There is very much a sense of community and connection here.” Adding to the city’s colour palette is Stephen Payton, owner of the social enterprise cafe Banter Coffee Kitchen. As well as making a great coffee, Banter offers employment opportunities to local migrant and refugee communities and provides a gallery exhibition space. An artist himself, Payton says: “Toowoomba is brimful of talented artists and young go-getters that, in recent years, have committed to staying here longer rather than migrating to Brisbane, a Toowoomba-born cliche. Moreover, the offerings for exhibitions, shows and screenings have never been brighter.” And don’t miss the art scene Speaking of art, it would be remiss to not explore Toowoomba’s incredible street art scene, which bloomed in 2014 and has since transformed the city streets into a riot of colour. Bank Lane, Duggan Street and Searles Walk are just a few of the vibrant canvases. Ready to take a trip to Toowoomba? There’s no time like the present. And remember, if you need any other recommendations, from restaurants to wineries and hiking trails, just ask a local. They’ll always steer you in the right direction. Travel as local as you like it with Quest Apartment Hotels.Facing decades-high cheese prices, cheddar-loving New Zealanders are being forced to chase specials, downgrade their flavour expectations, or abandon the blocks entirely in favour of grated substitutes. A mixture of inflation, Covid-19 supply pressures and high milk prices was sending prices for hunks of cheddar through the roof, with blocks ranging from $11 (£5.70, US$7.64) to over $20 a block. In online budgeting and community groups, New Zealanders were brainstorming how to overcome the price hikes, and eke out their cheese a little longer. “We started using the really small side on the grater – it’s amazing how far it goes now,” one user said. Others had abandoned hope of buying the blocks entirely. “Blardy [sic] disgusting. Have resorted to buying grated cheese,” one commenter wrote. Another speculated that consumers could create their own “Tasty” cheese – referring to the sharp aged cheddar that costs more – by simply keeping it longer. “Just wondering in view of the fact that Tasty becomes Tasty by ageing, would mild or Colby become Tasty if I just stored it for 18 months?” they asked. “Go nice and mouldy,” came a response. On one community social media page, users alerted one another to cheese discounts at the local supermarkets. Others called for a brief boycott to try to force prices down. One Maungaturoto business used the headlines to tout their own cheesemaking classes: “What better time now to come and learn to make your own cheddar – this is just getting completely ridiculous.” A block at the high end of the cheddar range – the much-beloved “Tasty” brand of aged cheddar – had been selling in recent months for more than $20 a kilogram. At the lower end, a kilogram of mild – the cheapest and least flavoursome of the cheddars – was selling for an average of over $11, its highest point in a decade, according to Stats NZ data published by the Herald. “We’re not talking about fine imported French brie here – we’re talking about stock standard kiwi edam, colby and tasty. If that’s been priced out of the reach of a significant sector of society, then we have a real problem,” says Jon Duffy, chief executive of Consumer NZ, an independent nonprofit which researches and advocates for consumers. “Supermarkets bear some responsibility for that,” Duffy says, “but the general cost of living and the income gap between not even wealthy, but middle class New Zealanders and those in precarity or hardship is something we should be really concerned about at a societal level – it’s really visible through the lens of what used to be a common staple, a block of cheese.” Just why cheese prices have risen so high is a complex question, Duffy says. Inflation has helped drive up food prices across the board. Most of New Zealand’s milk is exported, and the international milk price is now high – that means prices also go up domestically. Those factors are exacerbated, he says, by the country’s lack of competition among supermarkets. New Zealand’s grocery market is dominated by two huge supermarket conglomerates, Foodstuffs and Woolworths, which control about 85% of the total market. In July, the government announced it would consider breaking up the effective duopoly, or create third competitor. Consumer affairs minister David Clark said at the time that the businesses were making “extraordinary profits”. Emma Wooster, corporate affairs manager for Foodstuffs New Zealand, said a lack of competition was not affecting prices. “Any suggestion that a lack of competition results in high prices is simply wrong,” she said. Wooster blamed the price rise partly on Covid. “The impact of Covid-19 has added complexities to food prices, which are largely responsible for the continued rise over the past six months,” she said in a written statement. “Covid-19 knock on effects include an exponential rise in commodity prices, global demand, fuel and power prices worldwide, an international shipping crisis and a skills shortage in New Zealand … We expect the knock-on effects of Covid-19 to continue for some time and, like other commodities, we can anticipate the price of cheese to be impacted too.” “The international cheese market is booming,” Wooster said, “and we are competing for the same in-demand stock.” A spokesperson for Countdown, the chain owned by Woolworths, said in a written statement: “We have not increased cheese prices because of lockdown, but there are a number of factors putting additional pressure on the price of cheese here in New Zealand including global milk supply, rising labour costs and high farmgate milk prices.”Authorities in Wisconsin on Monday identified a 39-year-old man as the person who plowed his vehicle into a Christmas parade on Sunday night, killing five people and injuring another 48, including two children who remained in a critical condition. Darrell E Brooks was in custody, charged with five counts of intentional first-degree homicide, Daniel Thompson, police chief of Waukesha, a city 20 miles west of Milwaukee, said at an afternoon press conference. He said that the suspect was involved in an unspecified domestic disturbance immediately before the parade incident, and that further charges were expected. Thompson said that there was no evidence the bloodshed on Sunday was a terrorist attack or that the suspect knew anyone in the parade. Brooks had acted alone, the chief said. Thompson said Brooks “drove right through the barricades” to enter the parade route and then raced towards a collision with those entertaining the holiday crowds, including a marching band, a troupe of “Dancing Grannies” and a dance team of girls aged nine to 15 performing with white pom-poms and wearing Santa hats. Spectators and participants scattered as the red Ford SUV barrelled through at speeds estimated at up to 60mph. Videos posted to social media showed members of the crowd and first responders treating injured victims. Thompson identified those killed as Tamara Durant and Jane Coolidge, both 52; Leanna Owens, 71; Virginia Sorenson, 79; and Wilhelm Hospel, 82. The Milwaukee Dancing Grannies troupe said in a Facebook post that members were among those killed. “Those who died were extremely passionate Grannies. Their eyes gleamed … joy of being a Grannie. They were the glue … held us together,” the post said. “Our group was doing what they loved, performing in front of crowds in a parade putting smiles on faces of all ages, filling them with joy and happiness.” At least 10 children remained in intensive care on Monday afternoon, health officials said. Injuries ranged from broken bones to serious head wounds. Thompson, the police chief, said officers had been called to a domestic dispute near the parade route, but said Brooks fled before they got there. One officer fired his weapon to try to stop the driver as he sped away from the parade after he ran over the victims, but was unsuccessful. Nobody was hurt by the shots and the officer was placed on administrative leave, Thompson said on Monday. Brooks was arrested a short time after the incident and his vehicle impounded, Thompson added. Brooks has been charged with crimes 16 times since 1999 and had two outstanding cases against him at the time of the parade disaster – including one in which he was accused of deliberately running down a woman with his vehicle. The mayor of Waukesha, Shawn Reilly, said his town was grieving “a senseless tragedy”. “Many of us were participants in the parade and witnessed these horrific actions. We are all trying to process what we experienced,” he said. “For those of you who do not live in Waukesha, you need to know that Waukesha is a community that helps her neighbours. Waukesha is a community that takes pride in its identity and has a wonderful spirit. Waukesha looks after each other.” In an address from the White House in Washington, Joe Biden also paid tribute to the victims. “Five families in Waukesha are facing fresh grief of life without a loved one,” the president said. “At least 40 Americans are suffering from injuries, some of them in critical condition, and an entire community is struggling to cope with the horrific act of violence. “The people of Waukesha were gathered to celebrate the start of a season of hope and togetherness and thanksgiving. All of us pray that that same spirit is going to embrace and lift up all the victims of this tragedy.” Large crowds turned out for a candle-lit vigil in Waukesha on Monday evening, and Reilly said a community fund had been set up “to support the needs of the families”. Witnesses described terrifying scenes as the SUV burst through barricades at about 4.40pm on Sunday and sped towards the performers. One said the driver appeared to be swerving from side to side, apparently targeting those marching. Corey Montiho, a member of the Waukesha school board, told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel the driver hit his daughter’s dance team. “There were pom-poms and shoes and spilled hot chocolate everywhere. I had to go from one crumpled body to the other to find my daughter,” he said. “My wife and two daughters were almost hit. Please pray for everybody. Please pray.” Montiho said he made eye contact with the man driving the vehicle, the Washington Post reported. He described him as “calm and composed”. “I saw bodies and kids and dads not breathing,” he said. Tony Evers, the Wisconsin governor, ordered flags at half mast. “Kathy and I are praying for Waukesha tonight and all the kids, families and community members affected by this senseless act,” Evers said in a statement. “I’m grateful for the first responders and folks who acted quickly to help.” The Associated Press contributed reportingAustralia’s Bureau of Meteorology has declared a La Niña weather event is under way in the Pacific, bringing the country in line with other agencies, and underscoring the prospect of a relatively cool, damp and stormy summer for much of the north and east. The declaration, made at a media conference in Melbourne on Tuesday, confirmed a Guardian Australia report. The bureau said it had shifted its outlook for La Niña on its main climate drivers forecast. “Key atmospheric and oceanic indicators of the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) show an established La Niña,” the bureau said. It made the call based on sea-surface temperatures that were close to La Niña thresholds in a key region of the tropical Pacific, with models indicating further cooling was likely. The indicators they watch include the amount of cloud buildup and the strength of trade winds. “The current model outlooks suggest this La Niña will persist until the late southern hemisphere summer or early autumn 2022,” the bureau said, extending the longevity of the event from earlier predictions that it would begin to dissipate by the end of January. A majority of the models used by the bureau now predict La Niña thresholds will be met in February 2022. Andrew Watkins, head of the bureau’s Operational Climate Services, said the La Niña would also increase the likelihood of cooler than average daytime temperatures for large parts of Australia. “The last significant La Niña was 2010–12. This strong event saw large impacts across Australia, including Australia’s wettest two-year periods on record, and widespread flooding,” Watkins said. This year’s event is not predicted to be as strong as the 2010-12 event and may even be weaker than in 2020-21 La Niña event, he said. One difference compared with a year ago, however, is that soils are far more saturated, and many dams are close to or at full capacity. The declaration came a day after the bureau confirmed the season’s first tropical cyclone had formed in the Australian region. Cyclone Paddy developed near Christmas Island and reached category-one stretch on Monday but will weaken by Wednesday without making landfall. A declaration of a La Niña coincided with the bureau’s fortnightly update of the main climate drivers for Australia’s weather on Tuesday afternoon. It has had a La Niña alert in place for weeks. It also issued warnings of some flooding to come from rains later this week reaching eastern Australia. “You can see the pattern is already La Niña and you can see the impacts,” said Agus Santoso, a senior research associate at UNSW’s Climate Change Research Centre, ahead of the declaration. “It’s not strong but it’s not that weak either.” People living in eastern Australia, in particular, hardly need more confirmation that conditions have recently turned wet and cool. While the above-average rainfall endured by many areas during winter and spring had more to do with conditions in the Indian Ocean, the Pacific tends to have more influence in summer. During La Niña years, the east to west trade winds blowing across the equatorial Pacific strengthen. These effectively push rain systems westwards and raise the chance of flooding, and also lift relative sea level in the western Pacific. Such years also tend to have more cyclones than usual. Last month, the bureau estimated there was a two-in-three chance Australia’s region would have more than the seasonal average of 11. Last year also included a La Niña and experts say there is about a 40% chance of having back-to-back events. The last double bout covered 2010-11 and 2011-12. “I suspect it will be neutral next year,” Santoso said, adding “it’s not impossible to have three years in a row” as shown by the 1998-2000 period. Ben Domensino, a senior forecaster at Weatherzone, noted the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa) declared a double-dip La Niña last month. It uses a lower threshold to assess such an event, or its opposite, an El Niño. “Although it’s not technically been declared [in Australia], we’ve been in a very La Niña-like state for some weeks now,” Domenino said, also ahead of the declaration. Recent widespread and heavy falls have resulted in minor to moderate flooding in many inland rivers, notably in NSW. The Lachlan River, which last week threatened the NSW central west town of Forbes, remains at major flood levels in places. Another belt of rainfall – with moisture fed in part from Cyclone Paddy – is heading eastwards. That should bring 40-60mm of rain to a large area from Queensland into Victoria, with isolated falls of 100mm. Since catchments are already saturated, more flood watches will be issued, Domensino said. Farmers struggling to get crops in before fields become saturated are among those looking to the skies for relief from the rain. Insurers too will be watching closely since flood damage typically exceeds that from droughts and even bushfires. During the most recent La Niña and its aftermath from December 2020 to April 2021, the Insurance Council of Australia declared three catastrophes. These triggered about 65,000 insurance claims for damages totalling just over $1b, the ICA said.I did not indulge in many lockdown fads – no homemade sourdough, no DIY projects, and only a very limited dalliance with House Party before realising how depressing it was to drink cheap sauvignon blanc by the light of your laptop screen while talking to people whose lives were equally as uneventful as your own. But I did embrace two lockdown trends – buying a pandemic puppy and watching the slow motion destruction of my long-term relationship. Sometimes more time together is the solution to relationship woes but in our case, it highlighted and then became the problem. All that time locked in the same space amplified every irritation until a few crumbs on the bench, a couple of dirty dishes, the sound of the other chewing and eventually breathing become such heinous and offensive acts you wanted to scream loud enough to be heard beyond your 5km radius. So after six lockdowns, my partner and I ended our four-and-half year relationship just before the (hopefully) final one lifted. After the initial grieving period, soothed by the very affectionate puppy I managed to keep in the breakup negotiations, I emerged like so many others in the words of that horrible T-shirt slogan “Vaxxed, waxed and ready to climax”. No longer feverish with Covid symptoms, real or psychosomatic, Melbourne was now hot with pent-up desire. The dating apps and trendy bars flooded with people hungry for a hot vax summer even if the city’s notoriously fickle weather refused to deliver either the appropriate temperature or season. But suddenly the lockdown puppy who had been such a reliable companion during so much uncertainty became a reliable roadblock in a time of so much potential. Now, every date I bring home must first be accosted by the little bronze pooch who has no respect for personal space or dignity – his wet nose a heat-seeking missile drawn to crotches even more than his newly single owner and with considerably less decorum. His insatiable desire to always be on my lap, once endearing, is now a logistical challenge when I want to be in the lap of another. And unfortunately my desire for a make-out session is matched only by my dog, who tenaciously squeezes his face between mine and any potential suitor, his tongue – invariably smelling of something unspeakable he’s devoured from the compost bin – leading the way. Occasionally there’ll be a moment of reprieve as he leaves me and my date alone on the couch briefly to hump his plush toy giraffe beside us, but always maintaining the intense and unbreakable eye contact of a dog who wants only to be reassured that he’s a good boy. These are not the ménages à trois I’d envisaged for my hot vax summer. Maybe his behaviour is revenge for the early castration operation he had to endure, or he’s acting out post family break up, or perhaps I ruined him by smothering him to compensate for all the enforced social distancing I had to endure but he’s leaving me with no choice but to engineer every date to end up at someone else’s house. I hate abandoning him like that but after all we’ve been through in these two tumultuous years, I can’t let my pandemic puppy ruin my hot vax summer. I just need to make sure I’m always back in the morning to walk my good boy. In the meantime, he has his plush giraffe. The author is anonymous because she has a very important and serious jobAnother South Korean fantasy horror series from Netflix has become an overnight global phenomenon, with Hellbound toppling Squid Game as the most-watched TV show on the streaming platform. According to FlixPatrol analytics, Hellbound became the world’s most watched Netflix television series on 20 November, topping the streaming ratings in more than 80 countries within 24 hours of the show’s debut. The series centres around the graphically violent actions of a team of demons, who hunt down sinners who have been previously visited by a celestial being who has informed the victim of their date and time of death. The giant hairy creatures incinerate their victims and send them to hell, prompting an outbreak of public hysteria and religious zealotry. The pilot of the series, directed by Yeon Sang-ho, premiered at the 2021 Toronto international film festival in September. Squid Game, which premiered on 19 September, spent 46 nonconsecutive days in the top spot. An estimated 142m households in 94 countries watched the series, also known for its ultra-violence and gore, in October. It has generated an estimated $900m in profit for Netflix. Earlier this month the Squid Game’s director, Hwang Dong-hyuk, said a second season of Squid Game was on its way. “I’m in the planning process currently. I do think it’s too early to say when and how [season two is] going to happen,” he said.A secret report ordered by Channel Seven into allegations of war crimes against Ben Roberts-Smith will not be made available to a defamation trial, with a judge ruling that the document is legally privileged. In 2018, after three newspapers published allegations the former SAS corporal and Victoria Cross recipient committed a series of war crimes while on deployment in Afghanistan, Roberts-Smith’s employer, Seven West Media, commissioned a confidential report into the allegations against him. Roberts-Smith, who emphatically denies the allegations, is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation in the federal court. In a decision handed down on Tuesday, Justice Wendy Abraham said journalist Ross Coulthart, then an employee of the public relations firm Cato &amp; Clegg, was commissioned by the general counsel and commercial director of Seven West Media, Bruce McWilliam, to “prepare a report” on the Roberts-Smith allegations. The report was to consider and summarise “all of the known rumours and allegations that are circulating or have been published about Ben Roberts-Smith and get his response to each of them, as well as conduct investigations and make other enquiries as you see fit”. Coulthart was told to give the report directly to McWilliam, who would pass it on to legal counsel. McWilliam told Roberts-Smith the document would be useful for Seven West Media “as we will likely also be attacked for continuing to employ you”. “I also think a copy should be provided to the chairman [Kerry Stokes] so that he is in a position to obtain can get [sic] legal advice on where things stand and so that he can continue to back you.” Stokes was ultimately given a copy of the report. Roberts-Smith, whose defamation action was being bankrolled by Seven West Media at the time, was not. Lawyers for the three newspapers sought to subpoena Coulthart’s report, arguing that the “dominant purpose” of the report was not to assist in obtaining legal advice, but “the commercial and reputational concerns of Mr Stokes, and Seven West Media were the primary reasons for its commission”. Abraham did not agree, ruling that the document was legally privileged and did not have to be handed over. The dispute follows debate in court last week about whether the newspapers will be allowed to call an additional witness in their defence against Roberts-Smith’s defamation action. A former comrade of Roberts-Smith, who was serving on his patrol at the scene of an alleged war crime, has, subsequent to the trial starting, agreed to give evidence. The former soldier, known as Person 56, was a member of Roberts-Smith’s patrol in the village of Darwan, in Uruzgan province, on 11 September 2012. The newspapers’ reporting has alleged that on that day Roberts-Smith took a handcuffed non-combatant, a farmer named Ali Jan, and forced him to kneel on the edge of a 10m-high cliff, before kicking him off. Ali Jan was then carried to a different place and shot, either by Roberts-Smith, or by a subordinate soldier under his command, the newspapers allege in their defence. Roberts-Smith has consistently and strenuously denied the allegation as “completely without any foundation in truth”. The newspapers, seeking to defend their reporting as true, have been seeking to subpoena Person 56. Roberts-Smith has vociferously denied the newspaper’s account of Ali Jan’s death, telling the court the man purported to be Ali Jan was a “spotter” – a forward scout who reports soldiers’ movements to insurgents – shot after being discovered hiding in a cornfield. He says the man was in possession of a radio and was a legitimate military target. Roberts-Smith’s lawyers have opposed allowing Person 56 to testify, suggesting they had done a deal with the newspapers to only talk about specific issues. The newspapers deny any such deal but say they expect the witness to object if asked about matters other than Darwan. The court has reserved its decision on the issue. The defamation trial – which started in 2018 – remains part heard. It is likely to recommence early in the new year.Young people and women have taken the hardest psychological and financial hit from the pandemic, a YouGov survey has found – but few people anywhere are considering changing their lives as a result of it. The annual YouGov-Cambridge Globalism Project found that in many of the 27 countries surveyed, young people were consistently more likely than their elders to feel the Covid crisis had made their financial and mental health concerns worse. In France, nearly half (47%) of people aged 18 to 24 said the pandemic had taken a toll on their mental health, against only a quarter (25%) of those 55 or older, with many other countries in Europe and around the world showing a strikingly similar picture. In Germany 38% of young people said Covid had been bad for their mental health compared with 22% of older adults. In Sweden the splits were 42% to 19%, in Spain and Italy 51% to 39%, Britain 50% to 25%, Australia 51% to 28% and in Mexico 41% to 18%. Comparable proportions of young and older people said they were worrying more about money as a result of the pandemic, while across several measures, women were also consistently more likely than men to report a negative impact from crisis. Women in many countries reported being more concerned about personal finances, mental health and work stress than men, with 55% in Britain saying their professional life was more stressful compared to 36% of men, and 42% compared to 60% in Spain. Only small portions of the total population in northern Europe and the English-speaking west said the pandemic had hit their personal finances: 27% in France, 24% in Germany (24%), 15% in Sweden, 22% in the UK, 29% in Australia and 27% in the US. Consistently larger numbers, however, said the same elsewhere, including Spain (40%), Italy (43%), Greece (50%), Hungary (46%) and Poland (38%), and even more in countries such as Brazil (54%), Thailand (68%), Kenya (75%), and South Africa (59%). A similar geographic split was clear when people were asked if the pandemic had made people them worry more about money: 70% or more in Greece, Brazil, Mexico, Thailand, Kenya and South Africa, again with a third or less in the UK (31%), Sweden (24%) and Denmark (15%). Other aspects of life told a similar story. People in Spain (44%), Italy (47%) and Greece (58%) were more likely to say the pandemic had taken a negative toll on their mental health, as were those in Brazil (46%), Japan (45%) and Thailand (61%). People in Mediterranean countries – 41% in Spain, 50% in Italy and 61% in Greece – were again more likely to say the pandemic had blighted their plans for the future, with Turkey (51%), Thailand (57%) and South Africa (51%) also high. Optimism about the future was, however, highest outside Europe, with Brazil (63%), Mexico (57%), Egypt (55%), Saudi Arabia (70%), India (61%), Indonesia (73%), Kenya (81%), Nigeria (88%) and South Africa (63%) all recording high levels. In mainland Europe, about a third or less said they felt optimistic about their personal future: from France (29%) and Germany (34%) to Spain (34%) Italy (27%), Greece (24%), Hungry (34%), and Poland (32%). Britain, Australia, the US and Canada were slightly more upbeat on 42%, 45%, 43% and 44%. Contrary to many predictions made in the early stages of the pandemic, the survey also showed that for most people around the world, Covid-19 had not dramatiaclly altered their life choices or lifestyles, such as working from home. Among employees in roles where home-working was feasible, by far the larger portion in most countries surveyed said they would ideally choose to work from home just some of the time or not at all, rather than “most of the time” or “the whole time”. Asked if the pandemic had prompted them to make or seriously consider major life changes such as moving to another area or country, changing career or separating from a partner, a consistently small percentage around the world said it had. In a majority of cases, the figures were in single digits or barely larger: 10% or less said they had decided to move to a different part of the country in France (7%), Germany (7%), Denmark (4%), Italy (8%), Greece (10%), Hungary (5%), Poland (6%), Britain (4%), Australia (8%), the US (9%) and Canada (7%). The figures for each type of change were generally higher in the non-western world: around one in five had changed career as a result of coronavirus in South Africa (21%), Kenya (20%), Thailand (19%), Saudi Arabia (22%), and Brazil (22%). Other measures similarly painted a generally undramatic picture of most people mainly carrying on with life. Asked, for example, if they now sleep, exercise, drink or eat healthily more or less than before the pandemic, most people reported no overall change. The survey also found that the pandemic had had a more beneficial effect on relationships with close family and partners than with those with friends, colleagues or neighbours, with only tiny minorities around the world tending to report the crisis had made relationships “less close” with partners or offspring.It was last December that Panusaya Sithijirawattanakul, a Thai student activist, and her friends strolled into a shopping mall in Bangkok wearing crop tops. They ate ice cream and carried dog-shaped balloons. Phrases such as “I have only one father” were written in marker pen on their skin. Now, four of them are in pre-trial detention over the outing, which royalists say was an insult to the monarchy. Their clothing, as well their messages and physical expressions were an attempt to publicly mock the Thai King, Maha Vajiralongkorn, according to a legal complaint filed against the group. It alleged they had tried to make others lose faith in the institution, and accused them of breaching Thailand’s lese-majesty law, which can lead to a sentence of up to 15 years. The king is known for owning poodles, and royalists consider the monarch as the “father” of the nation. But it was also their choice of attire that offended royalists – images of the Thai king wearing crop tops have previously appeared online and in European tabloids. The legal complaint does not directly comment on the veracity of such images. “Initially, the young protesters thought Thai authorities would not accuse anybody of 112 for wearing crop tops,” said Panusaya’s lawyer Krisadang Nutcharut, referencing the section of the criminal code that includes the lese-majesty law. “I am telling everyone now that they should be aware it might lead to an indictment.” The legal complaint was acknowledged earlier this year, but it was last week that Panusaya was denied bail over the case in a judgment that, lawyers say, demonstrates the increasingly harsh stance taken by authorities. On Saturday, a small group of protesters gathered in central Bangkok wearing crop tops to show support for those detained. “We want to show that wearing a crop top is not illegal. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression,” said a speaker at the gathering. The numbers 112, crossed out with a line, were written on her stomach. The lese-majesty law was revived in November 2020 as the authorities sought to crack down on a youth-led protest movement that has called for reform of the monarchy. Initially, bail was offered, but the majority of protest leaders are now in prison. The number of cases filed against protesters has also escalated to record levels, adds Krisadang, of Thai Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR). Panusaya faces nine lese-majesty cases (up to 135 years in prison); fellow student protester Parit Chiwarak, known as Penguin, who is also in pre-trial detention, faces the highest number, with 22 cases (330 years). Krisadang said that in the 40 years since he was a law student, he has never seen such vast use of the law. “Three years ago I absolutely had no idea this would be possible,” said Krisadang. “This phenomenon is revealing to us what has been swept under the carpet.” More than 150 people are facing lese-majesty complaints. The alleged offences range from wearing fancy dress that are said to mock the royals, to making speeches calling for reform, or posting perceived criticisms of the monarchy on social media. Twelve children are among those facing charges. It was the filing of a lese-majesty case against a minor who had worn a crop top to a demonstration last year that prompted Panusaya and fellow activists to hold their shopping mall protest – called the #LetsWearCropTops parade. The minor, who was 16 at the time, was accused of lese-majesty for attending a protest wearing a crop top, and displaying a message on their back that said their father’s name was not Vajiralongkorn. . Panusaya – along with activists Parit, Benja Apan, Panupong Jadnok, and Phawat Hiranphon – wore crop tops to show support for the teenager. It is not clear how long Panusaya, 23, a sociology and anthropology student at Thammasat University, will be held. On Monday, her bail was also revoked in relation to a separate lese-majesty case, after the court said she had violated her bail conditions by continuing her activism. It cited a social media post in which she had invited people to wear black on 28 July, the king’s birthday, according to an account given by TLHR. Parit, a political science student at Thammasat, has been detained for more than 100 days. Krisadang believes Panusaya has not violated her bail terms, adding that bail is granted even in criminal cases with more severe sentences. The Thai government recently defended the lese-majesty law, after UN member states expressed concern about the sharp rise in cases. It argued the law protects the royal family and national security. Earlier this month, the constitutional court ruled that protesters’ calls for reform of the monarchy amounted to an attempt to overthrow it, a decision that human rights groups fear could lead to charges of treason against activists. At Saturday’s protest, the group of demonstrators said in a statement that people should not be jailed for expressing political opinions, and every citizen has a right to bail, the group said in a statement. “Before the judgment, the accused is presumed innocent and treated as innocent,” said one protest sign. “We don’t want an absolute monarchy system,” another placard read. One sign simply questioned: “How could the crop top be a threat?”A coalition of ethical investment funds have urged the Western Australian government to delay the passage of new Aboriginal heritage laws, which significant traditional owner groups say fail to provide the protections necessary to prevent another disaster like the destruction of Juukan Gorge. It comes as the state’s biggest land council has joined other Indigenous groups in requesting United Nations intervention to prevent the passage of the laws. Future Super, ex-local government fund Vision Super, Australian Ethical Investment, Verve Super and Cruelty Free Super are among 14 investment funds to sign an open letter calling for the Mark McGowan government to shelve the bill until it can be revised to represent the interests of traditional owners. It follows criticism of the proposed laws by the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors and others, which said poor engagement with First Nations people and a lack of cultural heritage protection represent “material financial risks” for investors. Traditional owners have complained for three years that they have not been properly consulted on the bill, and have requested in public submissions that it be redrawn or scrapped. The investors, which represent a combined $461m in assets under management, are calling on the government to restore the right of traditional owners to appeal ministerial decisions. A draft of the bill released by then Aboriginal affairs minister Ben Wyatt in September last year allowed for traditional owners to appeal ministerial decisions to the State Administrative Tribunal. But the revised version significantly limits the scope for independent appeal and gives the minister, currently Stephen Dawson, final say. Investors said they were “very concerned and disappointed that local Indigenous groups were not suitably involved in the writing of the bill”. “To ensure that the heritage protection laws provide the level of security required to avoid a repeat of the events at Juukan Gorge, we believe the perspectives and knowledge of Indigenous peoples must be included in the formation of a new edition of the Bill,” the open letter said. “Aboriginal heritage is world heritage with inherent value and First Nations have inalienable rights to self-determination, to access their land, and to determine how to manage it.” The legislation was tabled last Tuesday and, given the McGowan government’s overwhelming majority, is expected to pass the lower house this week. On Friday the Kimberley Land Council (KLC) wrote to the UN special rapporteur on the rights of Indigenous Peoples, Francisco Cali-Tzay, requesting “urgent attention to intervene” in the passing of the proposed legislation. It also put its weight behind a request made by the Aboriginal Heritage Alliance that the laws be reviewed by the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning That group, which includes Noongar academic Dr Hannah McGlade, wrote to the committee seeking a review in September. They wrote to the UN again last week seeking immediate assistance The West Australian campaign also has the support of the International Indian Treaty Council, which represents indigenous peoples from the Americas, the Caribbean and the Pacific. KLC chairman Anthony Watson said in his letter to Cali-Tzay that the legislation as written will not protect cultural heritage and “will continue a pattern of systemic structural racial discrimination against Aboriginal people”. CEO Tyronne Garstone said the land council decided to write to the UN “because the McGowan Government will not accept that the Bill in is in direct violation of our human rights”. “The McGowan Government is rushing through a Bill that Aboriginal people do not support,” he said. “We have not had our fundamental concerns addressed over the past three years during a severely flawed consultation process.”The prime minister, Scott Morrison, will introduce a revised religious discrimination bill to parliament this week, promising to refer it to a Senate inquiry to calm fears it could water down protections for gay teachers and students. Declaring the new bill balanced “freedoms and responsibilities” for people of faith, Morrison told MPs on Tuesday that he wanted to introduce the bill in the lower house to fulfil the pledge he made to faith leaders before the 2019 election. Debate and a vote on the legislation will not be held until next week – the final sitting week of the year, and potentially the last before the election. There is a growing expectation that Labor will also support the bill’s passage to the Senate, on the understanding the subsequent scrutiny in the upper house will see it amended. Morrison said that after prolonged consultation, the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, had landed a “sensible and reasonable bill”. “It is a religious discrimination bill, not a religious freedoms bill, and that is important in relation to it being a shield not a sword and to allow the freedoms of people to follow their faith,” he said. But Morrison’s reassurance that the bill would protect freedom of belief and expression, but stopped short of allowing discrimination against others, was disputed by some Coalition MPs, with many expressing concern in Tuesday’s partyroom meeting about its impact on minority groups. Equality advocates have also disputed the claim made by Morrison, warning it overrides state discrimination laws, particularly with protections for statements of belief. Liberal moderates expressed concerns, including Leichhardt MP Warren Entsch, Reid MP Fiona Martin; North Sydney MP Trent Zimmerman and Bass MP Bridget Archer, who raised concerns about the provisions on statements of belief; senator Andrew Bragg, who expressed concerns about gay teachers; and Wentworth MP Dave Sharma, who expressed concerns about gay kids. Bragg and Sharma both suggested that protections for gay teachers and students should be considered at the same time, not 12 months after the religious discrimination legislation. Martin, whose inner-city Sydney electorate has a mix of both socially liberal voters and religious communities, said that even religious communities were comfortable with the status quo. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning An evenly matched roster of speakers were in favour of the bill including Matt Canavan, Ben Small, Julian Leeser, Melissa McIntosh and Nicolle Flint. Canavan questioned if international law can be used to override states on religious discrimination why the same was not true of vaccine mandates, earning a rebuke from Scott Morrison that the contribution was off-topic. Small suggested it was absurd that religious groups would use legal changes to persecute minorities, while Leeser defended the right of religious institutions like a Catholic university to preference members of their own faith. Liberal senator Hollie Hughes sought reassurance that the bill would not have a detrimental effect on people with a disability. Angie Bell insisted the bill would need to go to a committee inquiry. Liberal MP Katie Allen, who had previously reserved her position on the bill, told Guardian Australia she was “very pleased” the bill removed the controversial Folau clause, and provisions allowing medical practitioners to conscientiously object to procedures. After much work the bill is in “the best possible place it can be”, she said. “It will go to a Senate inquiry to check there are no unintended consequences – it needs further checks and balances but it’s a reasonable first step.” Backbench MPs and the Labor party were provided with a copy of the revised legislation on Tuesday, which retains the protection for statements of belief and a clause that gives faith-based institutions the ability to discriminate on the basis of faith. The bill would give power to the federal government to override state laws on religious educational institutions’ hiring practices, a move directed at overturning proposed Victorian changes narrowing religious exemptions to anti-discrimination law. Equality Australia chief executive, Anna Brown, told reporters in Canberra that was a “dangerous and unprecedented” power grab by the federal government, that could see discrimination complaints to state tribunals forced into the federal court. Brown said advocates were also “deeply concerned” about statement of faith provisions that would allow a religious nurse to tell a person with HIV it was a punishment from god, or a queer waitress that their relationship was sinful. Just Equal spokesperson, Rodney Croome, said the bill went beyond “freedom for faith” and contained “legal privileges for some very harmful prejudices”. Earlier on Tuesday the One Nation leader, Pauline Hanson, said her party would not support the bill unless it went to a Senate committee. At the Labor caucus meeting, one member of the opposition asked whether anyone knew what was going on in the Coalition party room on the religious discrimination bill. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, responded: “When we receive a bill, we will deal with it in the normal way. I support religious freedom. “People need to be able to practise their faith. It’s extraordinary that there has been no attempt from the government to work with us on this issue.”It’s a November dusk on the allotment. My least favourite times of day and year. It’s cold and I’m wearing two pairs of socks and thick-heeled boots to stop autumn’s sog and rot leaching into me. I’m also, however, holding out for a peculiar magic that this damp, overgrown space holds. I work quickly to stay warm, but quietly to not disturb birds. I plant broad beans and garlic in uneven rows. Distantly, I can hear traffic, but I’m more tuned in to the closer late-day rush for food and roosts. Starlings gather in rooftop groups and chat excitedly. Eventually, there’s a sudden rush of wings above my head, as hundreds make their way to Brighton’s piers for murmuration, their big sunset dance in the sky. Sometimes, if I happen to be standing as they fly over me, I can feel their wingbeats on my face. I pack up, then sit on my makeshift bench by the pond. There’s a closeness to near-darkness. Do I feel more because I see less? A fluffed up magpie sits on a fence post; a thin plume of bonfire smoke drifts over silhouettes; midges dance. Then I hear it – what I’ve been waiting for. The low, rumbling croak of a male frog. It’s quiet at first, as if shy, then gains confidence and belts out its song as if there isn’t a grinning human two feet away. No one knows why frogs croak in autumn, but I see it as a party invite for spring shenanigans. Males overwinter near or at the bottom of ponds, presumably so they can be first to the party in spring. Why wouldn’t they make sure the females know which pond they’ve chosen? The grass around the pond is long. I could be sharing it with a thousand frogs and I wouldn’t know, except for this one, reminding me that it’s not just me dreaming of spring. I close my eyes and the world smells of damp grass and decay. But there will be frogspawn in this pond. There will be mating and eggs and tadpoles. New life. Spring will be here again. The frog says so. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiarySam Kerr’s star is showing no signs of fading after being named on the shortlist for Fifa’s Best Women’s Player award, off the back of a hat-trick for her club side Chelsea and ahead of Australia’s clash with the US this weekend. It is the fifth straight year the Matildas captain has been nominated for the prestigious award. Although she is yet to win it, Kerr is in the running again after a stunning period in which she claimed her first Women’s Super League golden boot with 21 goals. Kerr and Chelsea also claimed WSL title, the League Cup and the Community Shield, along with reaching the Women’s Champions League final for the first time. The 28-year-old was also a standout at international level, scoring six goals at the Tokyo Olympics as captain of the – who finished fourth for their best result at the Games – to become Australia’s all-time leading women’s goal scorer. Kerr will lead the line for Australia on Saturday afternoon when the Matildas take on world No 1 side the US in the first of two friendlies inside four days. Three of Kerr’s Chelsea teammates in skipper Magdalena Eriksson (Sweden), fellow forward Pernille Harder (Denmark) and playmaker Jo So-Yun (South Korea) are also on the player of the year shortlist. Barcelona stars Alexia Putellas (Spain), Caroline Graham Hanson (Norway), Jenni Hermoso (Spain) and Aitana Bonmati have been recognised after their side won the treble. Arsenal striker Vivianne Miedema, Manchester City’s Lucy Bronze, who won the award last year, and Ellen White (England), Portland and Canada captain Christine Sinclair and Sweden and BK Hachen star Stina Blackstenius round out the nominees. A public vote is now open on Fifa’s website and will remain so until 10 December, with three finalists announced in January. The winner will be revealed on 17 January. Meanwhile, the shortlist for the men’s award is headed by perennial finalists Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi and Chelsea duo N’Golo Kante and Jorginho. The others in the running are Manchester City’s Kevin De Bruyne, Real Madrid star Karim Benzema, Bayern Munich hot-shot Robert Lewandowski, Paris Saint-Germain’s , Kylian Mbappe and Neymar, Borussia Dortmund’s rising star Erling Haaland and Liverpool’s Egypt international Mohamed Salah.The Australian Bureau of Meteorology has declared a La Niña weather event is under way, with modelling predicting it “will persist until the late southern hemisphere summer or early autumn 2022”. So what is it, and what will this mean for our summer? What is La Niña and how often does it occur? Across most of Australia, El Niño or La Niña conditions have the strongest influence on how the climate varies year to year. They belong to a cycle known as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation, which has an irregular timescale of several years. “El Niño and La Niña arise due to atmosphere and ocean interactions,” said Dr Agus Santoso, a senior research associate at UNSW’s Climate Change Research Centre. During a La Niña event, strong trade winds blow west across the Pacific Ocean, pushing warm surface water towards Asia and the seas north of Australia. The warmer waters lead to increased rainfall across northern and eastern Australia. The second consecutive La Niña announced on Tuesday is the first time back-to-back events have occurred in a decade – since 2010-11 and 2011-12. But it isn’t that uncommon for multi-year La Niña events to occur, according to BoM. For example, La Niña affected three consecutive years from autumn 1998 to autumn 2001. What does it mean for this summer? According to BoM, the six wettest winter-to-spring periods recorded in eastern Australia have all occurred during La Niña years. The weather event is also linked to cooler daytime temperatures. Australia experienced a weak La Niña event last summer, resulting in the coolest summer in nine years and wettest in four years, with 29% more rain than average. Despite this, 2020 was Australia’s fourth-warmest year on record. The current La Niña is “probably not as strong” as the event of 2011-12, Santoso said. He expects “wetter-than-normal conditions this time around but hopefully not as impactful [an event]” as 10 years ago. The current La Niña may also be weaker than the one last summer. The strength of La Niña is determined by how much the sea surface temperature deviates from the norm. Typically, the stronger an event, the more rainfall. However, another climate driver, called the southern annular mode (Sam), is now in a positive phase, which is associated with increased precipitation over southeastern Australia. “If you only have a La Niña then there will be less of an impact compared to if you have a La Niña plus positive phase of the Sam,” Santoso said. La Niña is also associated with greater cyclone activity. BoM estimated in October that there was a two-in-three chance Australia’s region would have more than the seasonal average of 11 cyclones. The weather bureau confirmed on Monday the first tropical cyclone of the season had formed in the Australian region, which is expected to weaken without making landfall. BoM upgraded the El Niño-Southern Oscillation alert system from La Niña watch to La Niña alert in early October, meaning there was a 70% chance of a La Niña forming. The US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had already announced the return of La Niña on 14 October. The climate pattern results in more dry days across the southern third of the US, increasing the likelihood of drought in the south-west. “When you have a La Niña … moisture in the eastern side of the Pacific becomes reduced,” Santoso said. La Niña can also generate higher monsoon rainfall over the Indian subcontinent, Santoso said, raising the risk of flooding. What about the effect of climate change? Climate change has an impact on La Niña events, Santoso said. “Particularly if you get warmer sea surface temperatures surrounding Australia, that can enhance convective activities that can produce storms.” A recent review Santoso co-authored concluded that the frequency of El Niño and La Niña events would increase under business-as-usual scenarios of greenhouse gas emissions. Unless emissions are reduced, El Niño and La Niña events are projected to increase from 5.6 events per century in the present to 8.9 and 8.3 events per century in future, respectively.Employers in the UK are following the lead of their counterparts in the US by stepping up demands for staff to be vaccinated against Covid-19, analysis of recruitment adverts reveals. According to figures from the jobs website Adzuna, the number of ads explicitly requiring candidates to be vaccinated rose by 189% between August and October as more firms ask for workers to be jabbed before they start on the job. Out of a total 1.2m job vacancies in the UK on its platform, the number of adverts requiring vaccination increased from 805 in August to 2,161 in September and 2,324 in October. Employers specifying the need for vaccination include the outsourcing firm G4S, which has multiple vacancies where jabs are required – they include school cleaner in London, administrator in Essex, and healthcare assistant in Bridgend. G4S said it was not its own policy to require vaccination, but that of the employers it was contracted to. The sectors with the highest proportion of job adverts mandating vaccination are in social care, at 2% of all positions, followed by healthcare and nursing at 0.9%, charity jobs at 0.6%. Part-time roles, domestic help and cleaning jobs also featured. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, announced this month that health service workers in England would need to be vaccinated by next April or risk being sacked. The rule built on a July announcement that all care home workers in England must be vaccinated by 11 November. Mandatory vaccination rules do not apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Unions have argued that “no jab, no job” policies risk the collapse of care companies, with the government expecting the loss of up to 70,000 care home staff. Civil liberty campaigners have also warned against mandatory vaccination rules, instead urging ministers to focus on educating people about vaccines and helping people to make informed consent. Andrew Hunter, co-founder of Adzuna, said the figures could illustrate the start of a wider trend in Britain. “A taboo appears to be breaking where large corporations are putting a stake in the ground and saying, ‘Right, you have to be vaccinated by certain date,’” he said. He said the UK appeared to be following the lead of firms in the US and Canada, a trend that was not yet evident in European countries such as France, the Netherlands and Germany. “Earlier this year you could count the number of job adverts asking for vaccinations on one hand, but it seems to be growing exceptionally as the year goes on.” The development comes as growing numbers of US companies request that their staff are double-jabbed amid a push by the president, Joe Biden, to increase vaccination rates. The White House announced this month that businesses with 100 or more workers would need to be vaccinated by 4 January or face mask requirements and weekly tests, although the rule has faced legal challenges and opposition in some states. Some large US companies, including Facebook, Goldman Sachs and Google, have announced that they would require workers returning to their US offices to be vaccinated against Covid. The investment bank Citigroup told its US staff last month either to get the Covid vaccine or get fired. Adzuna said the proportion of US job adverts requiring a vaccine had risen to 0.9% by October, with about 69,000 positions on its website out of a total 7.9m vacancies, led by sectors such as healthcare and nursing, hospitality and catering, and social work. In the US, the jobs website – which is tracked by the Office for National Statistics for early warning signs from the employment market – is also seeing employers offering vaccine bonuses as incentives. These are not currently trends in the British figures. A spokesperson for the UK government said: “While we welcome employers who support their staff to get vaccinated, those who propose to check the vaccination status of new or existing members of staff will need to consider how this fits with their legal obligations under employment, equalities and data protection law.”The reissue of an “almost impossibly difficult” literary puzzle from 1934, which has only ever been solved by four people, is flying off the shelves after a popular TikTok user began charting her own attempt to crack the mystery. Cain’s Jawbone is a murder mystery invented by the Observer’s first cryptic crossword inventor, Edward Powys Mathers, who was known as Torquemada. The story sees six people die – but in order to discover whodunnit, readers must reorder the jumbled 100 pages. The number of possible combinations is a figure with 158 digits, and to date, just four people have found the solution. Two of these were in the 1930s, Mr S Sydney-Turner and Mr WS Kennedy, who both won £25. The mystery, which is named after the first recorded murder weapon, was then out of print for years, until the Laurence Sterne Trust was presented with a copy of The Torquemada Puzzle Book, which contains its text, and Shandy Hall curator Patrick Wildgust set out to solve it. Once he’d done so, publisher Unbound reissued the title with a £1,000 prize in 2019. There were 12 entrants, with British comedy writer John Finnemore the only one to get the answer right. Unbound and the Laurence Sterne Trust decided to keep the solution secret, and published Cain’s Jawbone as a paperback this July. Sales have gone through the roof in the last week, after American TikTok user Sarah Scannell began charting her attempts to solve the puzzle, papering her room in the book’s pages as she tries to crack the code. Scannell, a communications assistant at a non-profit documentary production company in San Francisco called Citizen Film, is known on TikTok as @saruuuuuuugh and has more than 60,000 followers. “I’ve decided to take this nearly impossible task as an opportunity to fulfil a lifelong dream and turn my entire bedroom wall into a murder board,” said Scannell, in a video which has been viewed more than four million times, and received more than 5,000 comments. Her subsequent attempts to solve the puzzle have seen copies of Cain’s Jawbone sell out on the Unbound site and Amazon. The publisher, which is fielding foreign rights queries from around the world, says that orders in the US have topped 10,000 copies, and in Canada are more than 3,000 copies. It is now reprinting 10,000 copies in the UK, and plans to have them in shops by mid-December. Scannell was at a local independent bookshop near her house, Green Apple Books, when she spotted the title. “I figured $10 wasn’t too big a loss if I couldn’t figure it out,” said Scannell. “Like I say in one of my TikToks, I have never read a murder mystery book before but I do love logic puzzles, which is why I bought the book in the first place.” She has now read the book twice, and while she believes she will be able to put the pages in the correct order, she’s not as confident about then solving the mystery. “I can already tell that the language and cultural differences between not just 1934 and now but also England and American will be very difficult to navigate. But I put it all up on my bedroom wall so that it would be easier for me to work on it in short bursts,” she said. “I officially started on 2 November, but am really taking my time because my goal is just to get in an answer I’m happy with before the deadline next December. I really didn’t expect 4.5 million people to be joining me in this activity, but I genuinely don’t care if someone solves it before me. I’m just here to have fun on my own time.” “What makes me most happy about the TikTok success is that half the profits will go to the Laurence Sterne Trust. Sterne would have loved everything about this story,” said co-founder and publisher of Unbound, John Mitchinson. “He adored setting literary puzzles and finding clever ways to market his books. People forget that Tristram Shandy was a huge bestseller in 1759: Sterne literally laughed all the way to the bank.” Mitchinson said that Cain’s Jawbone was “almost impossibly difficult” as a puzzle. “It took … the comedy writer John Finnemore four months of research. The number of possible combinations of individual pages generates a figure with 158 zeroes. It is full of red herrings and blind alleys,” he said. Although the main prize of £1,000 has already been claimed by Finnemore, Unbound is still accepting and marking entries, and anyone who solves the puzzle before 31 December 2022 will receive £250 to spend supporting other book projects on the Unbound site.A screeching U-turn to save northern homeowners’ inheritances, or plunging his bulldozer through his own “red wall” seats? Regardless of the vote on how much people will pay for the government’s social care reforms, Boris Johnson has never had a plan to rescue England’s stricken social care system itself. After this vote, not a penny extra will be put towards helping the 2,000 frail people whose requests for care are refused every day. Nor is there any strategy to integrate social care with the NHS. That great opportunity has been blown away. Indeed, the health and social care bill stumbling through the Commons this week seems curiously irrelevant to the oncoming NHS crisis. With the whole system sinking fast, the bill puts the health service through yet another re-disorganisation, while social care slides into collapse. Deckchair-shifting on the Titanic comes to mind. Covid is not the only reason the health service is on a trolley in the corridor, even though a pandemic was foreseeable and foreseen, but never prepared for. Let’s take the pulse of the NHS: waiting lists, so low in 2010, have just hit 6m and are rising fast (remember they had already reached more than 4m by the time Covid struck). Why are they so high? The answer is that for a decade, annual NHS funding increases have been at their lowest levels ever, far below what’s required of the population increase (especially of elderly people). The result has been “efficiency” cuts of 17,000 beds and more than 100,000 unfilled vacancies for doctors and nurses, whose training places fell under the axe of George Osborne’s first budget. That’s why ambulances queue outside A&amp;Es that can’t admit patients, with beds blocked by people waiting for social care. Nor is there any plan to restore the 24% that has been cut from the public health budget since 2015-16, which reduces the number of people getting ill in the first place. Nor has there been any restoration of the thousands of lost Sure Start centres which cut children’s hospitalisations by a remarkable 18%, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies. Such preventive measures take time to have an effect, but the emergency is now with hospitals and GP surgeries – already into what Chris Hopson, the head of NHS Providers, says is “the most difficult winter in its history”. He’s not crying wolf: the wolf is already in the wards and causing deaths on trolleys and in ambulances. This bill addresses none of that. Its original purpose was a good one – to undo the vandalism done to the NHS by David Cameron’s 2012 act, which blew the service into marketised fragments which were forced by law to compete rather than cooperate. The 2012 act opened up all contracts to private tenders. The irony was that, due to the plundered state of a half-starved NHS, the private sector has been less tempted by marketisation than the Tories initially hoped, only prowling around the periphery picking off tasty scraps in community and GP services. Simon Stevens, the former chief executive of NHS England, spent much of his seven years at the head of the health service finding ways around competition law so services could work together. The current bill, which he originally designed, divides England into 42 integrated care systems (ICS), each with its own budget to rationalise and plan local services. The idea was to include local authorities and combine social care with health. But with no plan to make social care free at the point of use, and no machinery to force the NHS and local councils to pool their budgets, there is no way the bill will marry social care and health. Councils and the NHS may cooperate in some places, but both will remain separate silos that are strapped for cash. The original purpose of Stevens’ bill has been sabotaged. The health secretary has seized power to overrule the independence of any ICS so he can upend their decisions on mergers or appointments according to political whim or cronyism. The government has sinisterly refused an amendment that would firmly establish the NHS as preferred provider – one of the original purposes of the bill’s removal of competition. That means there is no protection against a reprise of Covid contracts for cronies. What’s more, the government refuses to bar private providers from sitting on the boards that oversee each ICS. Appointments of all directors fall under the absolute power of the health secretary. The government’s rejection of these protections is a symptom of that perennial Tory tic, which hankers after any form of NHS privatisation they can manage to sneak through. The Conservatives dare not promote insurance systems or publicly announce their desire to privatise the health system, but they try it on anyway. The Ayn Rand admirer Sajid Javid displays this same instinctive distrust of public service, with his warnings to GPs and his threat to sack trust managers who fail to clear impossible waiting list backlogs. He is bringing in a business supremo and even an army general to second-guess the work of NHS trust CEOs. Everything about his behaviour, like that of so many Tories, suggests the gut ideological inability to believe the overwhelming evidence. Listen to their fringe meetings, read Tory papers or magazines and they seem simply unable to digest near-universal research that shows a state-run NHS does remarkably well. Despite its reduced funding and beds, and the fact it has fewer doctors and nurses per capita than equivalent countries, the health service nonetheless keeps producing good results for a country that has always taxed and spent less than its comparators. This bill, warped from its originally benign intent, contains unstated opportunities to bend NHS principles Torywards. Yet Johnson has still managed to aggravate his own backbenchers. The most serious loss is the great opportunity to at long last pull together the NHS and a national social care service, enabling them to work together seamlessly with pooled local budgets and a united career and pay path. That will take some future re-disorganisation, with everyone reapplying again for their old jobs under new logos and new brass plates. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistPriti Patel is being put under “immense pressure” from Downing Street and Conservative MPs over government efforts to halt Channel crossings in small boats, with No 10 refusing to say the home secretary had done a good job. As figures revealed, the number of people making perilous crossings has tripled since 2020, Boris Johnson’s spokesperson twice declined to praise Patel’s strategy on Monday. He said the prime minister had “confidence in the home secretary” but would only say she has “worked extremely hard and no one can doubt this is a priority for her”. A ministerial colleague of Patel said he had witnessed No 10 putting her in an “incredibly difficult position” and subjecting her to “immense pressure” when, in reality, stopping crossings by people seeking asylum in the UK was an intractable problem that could not be easily solved. The government has repeatedly promised to make such crossings “unviable” and pledged tens of millions of pounds to France to help tackle the issue but more than 25,000 people have made the journeys this year. The Home Office confirmed that last week the number of refugees who had to be rescued reached 1,131 on a single day – the second highest daily figure since the current crisis began in 2019. The home secretary has mooted various solutions including the controversial “offshoring policy”. Johnson has now given Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, responsibility for a cross-government review. One Tory MP said Johnson faced more anger from colleagues about small boat crossings when he addressed the 1922 Committee last week than over the handling of the sleaze scandal. Supporters of Patel said they did not recognise claims she has been targeted by Downing Street, and insisted her team is “very supportive” of Barclay’s taskforce. “The only real plan on the table is the new plan for immigration,” the source said. The source also hit back at MPs who claim she should step down, accusing them of “sniping’ without coming up with alternative policies. “I’ve seen lots of sniping from the sidelines but no real solutions from anyone else other than the home secretary,” a Home Office source said. It is understood that Whitehall staff have been told Barclay has been brought to examine why the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office has yet to move forward with agreements with other countries to let new arrivals be returned immediately. The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Governmentis set to be asked to help find accommodation while the Ministry of Defence will be asked about the use of barracks to house asylum seekers. In the Commons, several Tory MPs pushed for progress on Australian-style offshore processing centres, to which migrants would be flown within seven days of arriving in the UK. Richard Holden, MP for North West Durham, said: “We must now adopt an Australian approach to stopping these small boats in the channel. Offshore processing, towing them back, whatever it takes to secure our borders and stop the awful human trafficking.” Sir Edward Leigh, a veteran Conservative backbencher told Patel that the government has “lost control” of the number of people crossing the Channel and described the situation as a “national emergency”. “We told the people at the referendum, us Brexiteers, that we would take back control, it’s clear that in this we have lost control,” he said. “If you tell the most desperate economic migrants in the world that we will provide a free border service, taxi service across the Channel, we will never deport you, will put you up in a hotel as long as you like, is it any wonder that more and more come? “This is now a national emergency. Will the home secretary bring in [an] emergency powers act to override the Human Rights Act if necessary and put these people in secure accommodation now?” Patel said the Nationality and Borders Bill currently passing through parliament would help the government to crack down on crossings. “These changes are pivotal to absolutely bring a comprehensive reform to the entire system. There is no single solution to this and that is why this bill is so important,” she said. The number of people who have made the journey across the English Channel in small boats this year is now three times the total for the whole of 2020. At least 886 people arrived in the UK on Saturday, bringing the total for the year to more than 25,600, according to Home Office statistics. Despite the increasing numbers of small boat arrivals, the UK continues to see far fewer boat arrivals and asylum claims than many of its European counterparts.For the past year and a half, people everywhere have been in the grip of a pandemic – but not necessarily the same one. In the affluent world, a viral respiratory disease, Covid-19, suddenly became a leading cause of death. In much of the developing world, by contrast, the main engine of destruction wasn’t this new disease, but its second-order effects: measures they took, and we took, in response to the coronavirus. Richer nations and poorer nations differ in their vulnerabilities. Whenever I talk with members of my family in Ghana, Nigeria and Namibia, I’m reminded that a global event can also be a profoundly local one. Lives and livelihoods have been affected in these places very differently from the way they have in Europe or the US. That’s true in the economic and educational realm, but it’s true, too, in the realm of public health. And across all these realms, the stakes are often life or death. The three countries I mentioned have a median age between 18 and 22 years, and the severity of Covid-19 discriminates sharply by age. A big way that Covid can kill is by hampering the management of other diseases, such as HIV, malaria and TB. In Africa alone, 26 million people are living with HIV and, in a typical year, several hundreds of thousands die of it, while malaria, which is especially deadly to infants and toddlers, claims almost 400,000 lives. Those are big numbers, and yet they used to be much bigger – a major healthcare effort brought them down. Amid the pandemic, though, people stopped visiting clinics, in part because it became harder to get to them, and healthcare workers had to curtail their own movements. According to a Global Fund survey of 32 countries in Africa and Asia, prenatal care visits dropped by two-thirds between April and September 2020; consultations for children under five dropped by three-quarters. Public-health experts predict that, as an indirect consequence of the Covid pandemic, twice as many people around the world could be at risk of dying from malaria. There could be 400,000 extra deaths from TB in the next few years, and half a million extra deaths from HIV. Across much of the world, in short, the response to the coronavirus has ushered in a shadow pandemic. The coronavirus’s real death toll, then, has to be calculated not just in deaths from Covid, but also in deaths that would otherwise have been prevented, from malaria, TB, HIV, diabetes and more. This shadow pandemic isn’t simply a story about disease – it’s about poverty, hunger, truncated education and stunted lives. A suggestive comparison can be made with the climate crisis. In the affluent world, some people think of climate breakdown as a matter of how long the air conditioning stays on, but for many in the developing world, it’s already a matter of floods, droughts and famine. These disparities between the global north and south are likely to be a feature of crises to come. The tale of two pandemics, then, is a tale of two international orders. The post-pandemic challenge, in turn, is to take seriously the rhetoric of an “international community”, and integrate the two into one. * * * The economies of rich nations have, of course, been buffeted by the pandemic as well. But these nations have been able to spend enormous sums toward relieving the financial distress that has resulted from lockdowns and social-distancing protocols. Lower-income nations don’t have those resources. Borrowing money is costly for them, and their tax base in the formal economy is a shallow, narrow plinth. Country by country and village by village, there’s little to cushion the blow. Not long ago, a team of researchers studied living standards during the pandemic via household surveys across nine developing countries in Africa, Latin America and Asia. They found that the direct health impact of Covid in these relatively youthful countries was less than in richer (and, invariably, older) countries, but that economic vulnerability was decidedly greater. Households typically reported a drop in income – people lost jobs or had a harder time selling their goods. Half of the rural households in Kenya they surveyed had to skip meals or shrink them; in Sierra Leone, that number was nearly 90%. When the pandemic came to India, meanwhile, 140 million migrant workers found themselves effectively stranded or simply shipped back to their home villages, plunging their dependents into dire circumstances. “For those who were living from hand to mouth to start with,” the eminent India-based economist Jean Drèze observed as it was happening, “lockdown is almost a death sentence.” The number of people in extreme poverty around the world has risen for the first time since 1997, and analysts don’t expect a quick toggle back once the health crisis subsides. Africa was on track to see economic growth of 3.2% in 2020; now that’s estimated to have been 0.8%. When you’ve got a population growth rate of about 2.5%, that means less food on the table for many, and outright malnutrition for some. In rich countries, Covid’s medical consequences killed elderly people. In developing countries, Covid’s economic consequences killed the poor. Taleni Ngoshi, a softly spoken 32-year-old businesswoman in Namibia, described the situation to me precisely: “The gap between the rich and the poor here is quite huge. The line between the middle class and the poor is very thin.” Her people are Ovambo, from northern Namibia, where she was born in a town without electricity, eventually got work in a nursery, and found she had a green thumb. Down in Windhoek, the nation’s capital, she started a small business helping people with their gardens. Stories like hers help to explain why, a dozen years ago, the World Bank reclassified Namibia: it went from being a lower-middle-income country to an upper-middle-income one. With the pandemic, though, business came to a standstill: most of Ngoshi’s regular clients cancelled their contracts, fearful of any visitors. When she looks around, she sees people losing their houses and cars along with their jobs. Her husband’s small government salary at least puts food on her table. So mainly she worries about the three people who work for her part-time – and the six or seven people who depend on each of them. The story is different from place to place, and also the same. The low-income nation of Mozambique, which has been identified as the African country most vulnerable to climate change (extreme weather events cost it billions in 2019), found its economy contracting in response to the pandemic, with depressed markets for its commodities and, of course, for tourism. In the lower-middle-income nation of Kenya, where, in 2020, GDP shrank for the first time in almost 30 years, millions of families, living close to subsistence, were squeezed hard. Women there have been especially stricken, in part because they’re heavily involved in retail, hospitality and tourism. (Global tourism losses have been estimated at $8tn.) To get a proper sense of how the pandemic roiled a country like Kenya, though, bear in mind that one of Kenya’s biggest exports is cut flowers – lilies, carnations, baby’s breath and roses. In fact, Kenya has, in recent years, emerged as the main exporter of rose stems to the EU, supplying almost 40% of the market. Floriculture employs perhaps 2 million Kenyans, directly and indirectly. Dozens of large flower farms can be found around Lake Naivasha, an hour’s drive north-west of Nairobi, and about 1,800 metres above sea level. It’s sunny there, and well supplied with water for irrigation. Despite transport requirements, the carbon footprint per stem was a fraction of that for flowers grown in heated Dutch greenhouses. Over the past year and a half, as you might guess, those sales wilted. Social distancing meant fewer functions – wedding, funerals, celebrations of all kinds – and fewer functions meant fewer flowers. Millions of rose stems were dumped into pits as flower farms found most of their orders cancelled. Workers were furloughed or saw wages reduced. Once the pandemic settled in, those sales disappeared. * * * In west Africa – in Ghana and Ivory Coast, in particular – the big story wasn’t about roses; it was about chocolate. Cocoa trees are picky about temperature, humidity and soil, and large swaths of these west African countries hit their sweet spot. Together, the two countries account for about two-thirds of the global cocoa supply. It’s Ivory Coast’s biggest export. In Ghana, gold and oil exports are greater in monetary value, but they don’t matter as much to the country, because they don’t employ as many people and they don’t generate as much public revenue. Economists have estimated that as much as a third of Ghana’s workforce depends on cocoa, directly and indirectly. During the pandemic, though, chocolate consumption declined. Not mine, and maybe not yours. But it turns out that a lot of chocolate is bought at retail shops and vending machines. They’re gifts or impulse buys: the pre-ribboned box you pick up at the airport, the KitKat bar that pleads for release from its plexiglass prison. Then there’s all the chocolate bought for gatherings at Christmas, Easter, Halloween – or, more to the point, all the chocolate not bought when those festivities don’t take place. Both countries had big plans for 2020. Ghana and Ivory Coast have state-run boards in charge of buying and selling the cocoa harvest, and had jointly agreed to impose a new surcharge on cocoa exports, amounting to $400 per tonne. It was dubbed a “living income differential”, and was meant to benefit the farmers. Chocolate is a $130bn-a-year industry, but only a few percentage points go to the millions of west African smallholders who do the cocoa cropping. And they have a tough time of it: on average, each cultivates about 3.5 hectares, while trying to support half a dozen or more family members. It’s hard work. The trees are susceptible to sun scald, and those beans arrive inside pods a little smaller than rugby balls. They take months to mature – during which time they can be afflicted by various pests and pathogens, like “black pod” rot. Just in the past half decade, the swollen-shoot virus has forced the destruction of hundreds of thousands of hectares of cocoa trees. Many cocoa farmers barely eke out a living; a 2018 Unicef report calculated that the average west African cocoa farmer made between $0.50 and $1.25 a day. (When my father was a member of Ghana’s parliament, in the 1960s, he had a lot to say about cocoa farmers getting shafted by the government board that set their prices.) In fact, the growers now tend to be middle-aged, because their kids see how bad they have it, and find other ways of making a living. When the new “living income differential” programme was announced in 2019, growers increased their output, hoping for a sweeter deal. Instead, they found themselves stuck with beans they didn’t have the capacity to store. As Covid shrank the chocolate market, buyers in the west asked for their deliveries to be suspended. Local middlemen, known as pisteurs, demanded deep discounts to take the bean off the growers’ hands. * * * Wilting flowers, mouldering cocoa – when you hear stories about how poorly served the global south has often been by the systems of international trade, it’s not surprising that some people have been tempted to urge withdrawal from those systems. Among certain African and Asian scholars, there’s been a revival of interest in arguments from the late great Samir Amin in favour of “déconnexion” – unplugging from an unjust order in which development and underdevelopment were just two sides of a coin. Amin, an Egyptian economist who spent much of his career in Senegal, urged that development be “national and popular”, and directed toward greater autonomy, or what he termed a strategy of self-reliance. Real political independence called for economic independence, in his view. Although he denied that his plans amounted to “autarky” – the aim of total self-sufficiency – he insisted that a nation’s “external relations” submit to the requirements of internal development: autarky-lite, then. Alas, there is little encouragement to be found in those postcolonial African regimes, such as Guinea under Sékou Touré, that attempted something like this. In fact, the story of rising global interdependence is also one of rising equality among the nations. Over the past two decades, more than 30 countries have moved from the lower-income category to the middle-income category, to go by the official World Bank designations. Certainly, the 21st century saw enormous advances in the country of my childhood. GDP per capita in Ghana rose fivefold between 2002 and 2016. In recent years, most of the world’s fastest-growing economies were in Africa. And many of the pandemic-linked economic shocks are short-term ones: the market for flowers and chocolate – and timber and bauxite – is rebounding. All the same, there are morals to be drawn from the vulnerability of the global south amid the pandemic. One is that self-directed programmes of national development don’t work when they simply ignore market realities or leave internal impediment unaddressed. Here, Ghana’s cocoa conundrum is an illustrative instance. In February 2020, Ghana’s president, Nana Akufo-Addo, travelled to Switzerland and announced that his country wouldn’t be dependent on the export of raw materials. Instead, it would get into the business of manufacturing chocolate and ascend the manufacturing chains, soaring high like Ghana’s animal mascot, the tawny eagle. A couple of generations earlier, Ghana’s leaders were intent on building up a steel industry: that’s what they thought modernisation looked like. Akufo-Addo has pinned his hopes on bars of a different sort. Why shouldn’t Ghana have vast Toblerone-type factories, with temperature-controlled vats and conveyor belts and wrapping machines? True, the country lacks a dairy industry, and has a rather paltry sugar sector, but it has no shortage of cocoa beans. Yet Ghana, like most developing nations, has been trammelled by conflicting demands and interests. A fascinating recent paper by a Soas economist and an Accra-based cocoa analyst lays this out. Because Ghana’s central bank needs US dollars – foreign-exchange reserves – the state cocoa boards must sell the commodity to multinational companies. In the meantime, the country is stifling local production by imposing a 60% tax on domestic sales of chocolate and “semi-finished” cocoa products. Special tax exemptions are reserved for firms that export most of their production, hindering those that would first build skills and capacities by developing local markets. All these statutory legacies run contrary to Akufo-Addo’s hopes of ascending the manufacturing chain. If Ghana’s cocoa policy had a mascot, it wouldn’t be the tawny eagle; it would be the pushmi-pullyu. There are other impediments. A patchwork-quilt land-ownership system makes it hard for smallholders to gain title to their farms. (In Ghana, where so much terrain is in the hands of the traditional chiefs, land reform is a huge, and hugely complicated, issue.) And west African cocoa yields have scarcely improved in the past century. There are now programmes that promote more sophisticated and sustainable cocoa-growing methods – including “smart irrigation” – but they’ve had a late start. These quandaries are typical of developing nations. Countries throughout Africa and Latin America have economies organised around the export of fairly raw commodities from fishing, farming or mining. Most go through minimal processing before being sold on – the “value add” is meagre. You see a lot of subsistence entrepreneurship, and a lot of vulnerability associated with informal labour and low savings rates. Meanwhile, the climate crisis makes everything worse. When you farm inefficiently, you need more land, which worsens deforestation, which worsens climate change, which worsens your farming efficiency. (West Africa’s seasonal Harmattan winds – hot, dry and dusty – have been growing more expansive over the past couple of decades.) In truth, the turbulences of climate change are akin to those of Covid in slow motion. The price is paid by those least able to afford it. * * * In the shadow pandemic of the global south, the most lasting consequences could relate to schooling and skills – to what economists call human capital. School closings have obviously been a big problem everywhere. Around the planet, schooling has been interrupted for 1.6 billion students. Yet classrooms in Africa have been shut longer than the global average – and this is a continent where the median age is under 20. (In South America, it’s 31.) Low-income countries, World Bank researchers say, “could lose more than three full years of their investment in basic education”, exacting a commensurate loss in future labour earnings. For many families, the problem isn’t access to the internet – it’s access to electricity. Between April and August of last year, a team from Human Rights Watch conducted interviews with people across Africa, and found plenty of children receiving no instruction at all. Even when a school had managed to put its lessons online and a parent had a smartphone, the parent might not have a sufficiently generous data plan to make use of them. A teenager in Garissa, Kenya, told the HRW team that lessons were offered on a local radio station, “but I never tuned in because we don’t have a radio”. When classrooms close, researchers say, female students are hit especially hard: they’re at an elevated risk of child marriage, early pregnancy, domestic abuse and child-labour exploitation. For all these reasons – along with the simple fact that girls are regularly asked to take on child-rearing duties and household chores – Unesco researchers fear that 11 million girls around the world may never return to school. Think of it as another way of being a Covid “long-hauler”. That gender disparity is worrisome for a variety of reasons. It has been estimated that women’s wages go up by 11.5% for each additional year of schooling, a couple of percentage points more than for men. As the notably unsentimental economist Lawrence Summers once observed, “investment in the education of girls may well be the highest-return investment available in the developing world”. When women are more highly educated, they have fewer children but invest more in each child; their children are healthier and, in turn, better educated. Civic participation is higher among educated women, too, and, as the Nobel prize-winning academic Amartya Sen has suggested, expanding female education may help reduce gender inequality within families. For men and women alike, all these things matter to a society’s prospects of freedom and wellbeing. When development experts say that the pandemic-linked interruptions to education threaten to push 72 million students into “learning poverty”, then the consequences aren’t simply financial. This represents an immense squandering of human potential. * * * ‘Covid is the tide that went out and exposed our nakedness,” a well-known Lagos-based business consultant, Sanyade Okoli, told me. “It revealed all the weaknesses in our health system, educational system, governance structures etc.” Those regional weaknesses can be seen in the spreadsheets; they can also be seen in the streets. A woman with a communications firm in Windhoek offered me a very specific view of the situation: “Ten people a day are at my doorstep asking for food or for work.” According to World Bank economists, more than 80% of the 120 million people whom Covid ushered into extreme poverty – defined as having earnings equivalent to $1.90 a day or less – are from middle-income countries, a capacious category that encompasses India, Indonesia, much of west Africa and much of Latin America. That shouldn’t be a surprise. People who live in middle-income countries are peculiarly vulnerable to global contractions; they buy from you and they sell to you. They’re thoroughly enmeshed in a globalised economy. That enmeshment has allowed for some marvellous advances, but lately it feels as if they’re trying to climb an escalator moving down. The solution is not to get off, or stay home. Even if all you want to do is cultivate your own garden, you’re hardly independent from others when it comes to your seeds, your fertiliser, and – as we’ve all learned – your weather. The way to rebuild a post-Covid world is not to withdraw from internationalism, but to strengthen it. Catastrophes are fractal. They have to be understood – and addressed – in macro and in micro ways. When affluent nations in Europe and North America shut down in order to slow the pandemic, their governments offered their citizens targeted relief. (A comparable programme in Nigeria was scantily funded and – Nigerians I spoke to maintained – opaque to the point that it largely benefited government cronies.) In the US, Paycheck Protection Program loans were made to distressed business, which would not need to be repaid if certain conditions were met. In the UK, Bounce Back Loans and the like allowed financing on easy terms. These programmes – an ad-hoc method of social insurance – were imperfect, but they helped a great deal. Something like this approach is needed on an international scale. The affluent world, in the aggregate, gains enormously from globalisation. We cherish our chocolate and roses, not to mention the aluminium, lithium, tantalum, yttrium and neodymium on which our mobile phones depend. In many respects, it’s a common enterprise – a system of cooperation – from which we all benefit. Yet, as we all know, its yields are greater for some than for others. If the trading partners of the rich nations lose faith in the system, they might be tempted to give up on it. That would be costly to them, but it would be costly to those rich nations, too. That’s why the system is sustainable only if it involves a sense of shared responsibility. When things go wrong, we who benefit from the system have a duty to do internationally what we do at home: help the vulnerable weather the storm. When public-health measures to “flatten the curve” in rich countries can push people elsewhere on the planet into penury, it’s our problem, too. An integrated global system is imperilled when risk is shifted to those most vulnerable. Our international responsibilities in the age of Covid have often been discussed in absurdly narrow ways – as if we just needed to ship more vaccines to the under-vaccinated populations. Yes, programmes such as Covax, the international vaccine distributor, need to be better supplied, but all the vaccines in the world won’t remedy the moral and practical perils of inequality. In richer nations, economic turbulence puts more people on the dole. In poorer ones, it puts more people in the grave. If the gains in alleviating global poverty over the past generation were heartening, they have also proved perishable. Okoli, in Nigeria, recalled that, early in the pandemic, people with means took care to feed those in need. “There was a sense,” she added mordantly, “that if we don’t feed them, they’ll eat us.” * * * The Covid pandemic is, in the words of the eminent economic historian Adam Tooze, “the first truly comprehensive crisis of the Anthropocene era”. In his view, it has put paid to the notion that globalisation will move the whole world toward greater economic and social equality – what he calls the “millennial vision”. The question is what will replace it. To come to grips with global inequality on a post-pandemic planet, we’ll need more sensitive measures of fragility. No simple jab will resolve the vulnerabilities and inequities that arise from our global interdependence. Still, people in the public and private sectors will do well to think hard about a range of issues: ways of restructuring, forgiving or otherwise mitigating debt burdens when indebted governments have put the money to good use; ways of promulgating smarter and more sustainable agriculture (and other forms of resource exploitation); ways of encouraging better governance at regional and national levels; ways of building and maintaining supple and inclusive global institutions. And, of course, ways of targeting assistance to do the most good. When, earlier this year, the UK decided to cut foreign aid by $4bn, it was signalling a retreat at a time when history is calling for an advance. The most thoughtful critics of foreign aid make an important point: we want governments that are principally accountable to their people, not to foreign donors and lenders. But the right kind of assistance (including the Covid-related financing and debt-service suspension organised by World Bank Group over the past 18 months) needn’t have this distorting effect on governance. And the expansion of human capabilities is never a money hole. As the climate crisis was telling us long before Covid blared the message, what happens in one place can have repercussions in many places. That’s why the pandemic must be understood not as an anvil-from-the-sky medical crisis, but as something far more encompassing. “Science is the exit strategy,” the head of the Wellcome Trust famously said, early in the pandemic. But, though science is necessary, it’s hardly sufficient, particularly when we’re interested not simply in exit but in re-entry. As raucous, inward-turned nationalisms continue to claim followers, we’ll need to resist the go-it-alone fantasies of autarky. Rather, a post-pandemic era calls for a richer sense of our mutual obligations. I think of what Taleni Ngoshi, in Namibia, told me about how she was affected by those whose livelihoods depend on hers. “There are days when you wake up in bed and you think to yourself, ‘I’m tired of this,’” she said. “And one minute later you think, ‘I have to do something. If I stay in bed and wallow in misery, what will the others eat tomorrow?’” They depend on her, just as, ultimately, she depends on them. Around these small, local circles of reciprocal caring, we need to build larger, global ones. Resilience shouldn’t be reserved for the rich. An international conjuncture that’s fairer and more secure requires that we keep track of systemic risks conceived in the broadest possible way. And trade without responsibility is itself an unaffordable risk – as tempting as a box of chocolates, as perishable as a cut flower. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.The Democratic Republic of the Congo is now, after the splitting of Sudan and South Sudan, the second-largest country in Africa after Algeria. It is also the 11th-largest nation in the world – almost 10 times the size of the UK. Despite its huge size, most of the country has an equatorial or tropical climate. Annually, rainfall ranges from roughly 1,200 to 2,000mm (48 to 80 in), though some parts of the country – notably the coastal fringe and the extreme north and south – are drier than this. The variation comes in the form of either one or two distinct wet seasons. The city of Kisangani, very close to the equator, has two periods of high rainfall: the first, from March to April, and the second, from August through to November. The capital, Kinshasa, has one long rainy season, from October through to May; outside these months there is hardly any rainfall. Throughout the country it is often cloudy and very humid, with rain most afternoons. This is also the world’s lightning capital, with more strikes each year than any other nation. In the mountainous north-east of the country, Africa’s third-highest peak, Mount Stanley, reaches over 5,100 metres (almost 16,800 ft); here, snow falls regularly, and there are glaciers near the top.A month after giving birth, Divya tried to suffocate her new daughter with a pillow. “There were moments when I loved my baby; at other times I would try and suffocate her to death,” says the 26-year-old from the southern Indian state of Kerala. She sought help from women’s organisations and the women’s police station, staffed by female officers, in her town. But Divya was told that the safest place for a child was with her mother. Divya was suffering from postpartum psychosis – a severe mental health condition characterised by difficulty in responding emotionally to a newborn. It can lead to thoughts of harming the child. There are no figures on the prevalence of postpartum psychosis in India, where there is also very little awareness or support for those with postnatal depression. The stigma around mental health and the shortage of professional psychological support in the country has forced many women to deal with it alone. Postnatal depression is a global problem – an estimated one in seven women can develop some form of postpartum depression (PPD). But in India, the figure is closer to one in five. The need is “overwhelming in the entire country”, says Dr Prabha S Chandra, head of perinatal psychiatry at the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (Nimhans) in Bengaluru, one of India’s leading mental health institutions. Covid-19 has exacerbated the problem. “We have been asking the government to mainstream perinatal mental health for a long time, even before the pandemic. Sadly, it hasn’t happened,” she says. About 46% of women who phoned a Nimhans helpline during the pandemic were exhibiting symptoms of postpartum psychosis. I can understand how Divya felt. A month after giving birth to my beautiful son in June, I thought that it wouldn’t be so bad if I ended things. I not only thought about harming myself, but also had fleeting thoughts about hurting my newborn. What if I dropped his tiny, frail body while rocking him to sleep? Would it be so bad? I was shocked and ashamed of myself but I could not control my feelings. My son was born at the end of India’s brutal second wave of Covid, which reportedly killed almost 1.5 million people. To protect me from the virus during pregnancy, my husband and I had isolated ourselves. I had not seen my parents or sister and when we brought my baby home from the hospital, it was just me, my husband and the continuing isolation of the pandemic. I tried to get counselling but there were long waiting lists for therapists in Delhi. One said she could schedule me for an appointment after eight months. The shortest wait was three weeks and I jumped at it. The extreme shortage of psychiatric and psychotherapeutic support makes it next to impossible to access help urgently. The mental health workforce is severely understaffed, with an estimate in 2019 suggesting India needs another 27,000 psychiatrists for its population. This year, India allocated just 1.2% of its GDP on healthcare and the budget for National Mental Health Programme is 400m rupees (about £4m). Amid chronic underinvestment in the health sector, perinatal mental health is not even on the radar. “I don’t think that anyone in the government is thinking that our mothers are struggling and need help. It is not even understood as a big problem,” says Dr Ashlesha Bagadia, a perinatal psychiatrist and co-founder of the Green Oak Initiative, a community mental health centre in Bengaluru. “Having a mental health screening policy for perinatal women would make a huge difference,” says Bagadia. “We are so far behind that we don’t even have a mapping of perinatal mental health services available, unlike the US and the UK.” For me, regular counselling with a trained therapist, where I could express all my feelings of exhaustion, depression and rage uninhibitedly, along with the support of my spouse, were very helpful. Going through this process helped me bond with my baby and we are both doing well now. Sadly, things did not turn out as well for Divya. Her condition worsened with each day; with no support from her family or any institution, she reached her breaking point. “One afternoon we were all alone. I took my baby and started drowning her in a bucket of water,” says Divya. She realised what she was doing almost immediately and pulled her out of the water, dried her and lay down with her for hours. “Then suddenly my mood changed again and I attacked her with a pillow.” This time she killed her. Divya was arrested and sent to a mental health institution for 42 days. She is now living with her father and undergoing psychiatric treatment. “I am not even allowed to visit her grave,” she says, through tears. “Everyone calls me a killer.” • In India, NIMHANS perinatal psychiatric national helpline is (+91) 81057 11277. The Doula Collective Postpartum Support Initiative also offers a free support group. The Green Oak Initiative: Chiguru perinatal mental health initiative can be contacted on (+91) 9972 665 268 and (+91) 8042 40411 In the UK, advice and support for postpartum psychosis can be found at Action on Postpartum Psychosis. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. The charity Mind is available on 0300 123 3393 and ChildLine on 0800 1111. In the US, Mental Health America is available on 800-273-8255.Writing a novel shouldn’t have been high on Diana Gabaldon’s list of priorities in the late 1980s. She already had two jobs, as a university professor at Arizona State, with an expertise in scientific computation, and as a software reviewer for the computer press. And she had three children under six. But she’d known since she was eight years old that she was “supposed to be a novelist”, so she decided it was time to give it a try. With three degrees – a bachelor’s in zoology, a master’s in marine biology, and a PhD in quantitative behavioural ecology (her thesis was on “nest site selection in pinyon jays”) – Gabaldon says she “liked science, I was good at it. But I knew that was not my vocation, that’s not my calling. So when I turned 35, I said to myself, well, you know, Mozart was dead at 36. If you want to be a novelist, maybe you’d better start.” More than 30 years later, it is clear Gabaldon had her priorities right. The Outlander author, whose blockbuster historical fantasy series about Claire, a married woman from the 1940s who accidentally time travels back to 18th-century Scotland and falls for outlaw Jamie, has sold 50m copies around the world. She is in London after a cruise from Basel to Amsterdam accompanied by more than 100 of her fans, here to talk about Go Tell the Bees That I Am Gone , the eagerly anticipated ninth novel in the series. Fans have been waiting for it since 2014, when Written in My Own Heart’s Blood left them hanging, but Gabaldon has been somewhat delayed by the television adaptation of her series, which kicked off that year and on which she is a consultant. Go Tell the Bees, in which Jamie and Claire have finally been reunited with their time-travelling daughter Brianna and her family in 1779 North Carolina, only for the American revolution to cast its shadow over their lives, also runs to more than 900 pages. “It was definitely more of a challenge to write, mostly because of the chronology, which was very complicated,” she says. In any event, seven years is less time than fans of George RR Martin have been holding on for the sixth Game of Thrones novel; Gabaldon has, incidentally, included a chapter in her latest doorstopper called The Winds of Winter – a “nod or a dig, depending on how you want to interpret it” at Martin’s writing speed. “Poor George, I feel very sorry for him,” she says. “What happened is that his show caught up with him, and he then met with the showrunners and he told them what he was planning to do in that book, so that they could then write accordingly. Only they didn’t write accordingly, they took his stuff, and distorted it and wrote their own ending, which wasn’t at all what he had in mind but used all the elements that he told them.” This won’t, she says, happen to her: she has one more Outlander novel to write and the popular TV series, starring Sam Heughan as Jamie Fraser and Caitriona Balfe as Claire, is only up to the sixth, which is due to air next year. “They’ll never catch me,” she says. “I will certainly finish the 10th book before they finish the show.” Gabaldon began writing novels in absolute secrecy: she knew her husband would have raised an eyebrow at her desire to add writing to her packed schedule, so she’d get up and work between midnight and 4am, before getting on with her day. “He would have said, wait till the kids are in school and you have more time, wait till my business is doing better and you can quit one of your jobs. It would all have made perfect sense, and he would have succeeded in stopping me because my grip on it was very tenuous to start with.” Gabaldon read everything, voraciously – she didn’t have a particular genre she was drawn to. So she decided that she might as well put her academic research skills to use in writing historical fiction. “Also, if I turned out not to have an imagination, I could steal things from the historical record.” The only question was, with all of history laid out before her, where to start. “I was just casting around mentally for a time and place to set this novel – Roman times, the American civil war, Venice under the Borgias. And in this malleable frame of mind, I happen to see a really old Doctor Who episode.” This serendipitous viewing, much recounted, was of Jamie McCrimmon, a kilt-wearing 18th-century Scot played by Frazer Hines. Gabaldon was an instant fan, but had never been to Scotland, so she went to her university’s library and started checking out books about its history, culture and geography. “The only thing I knew about novels was that they should have conflict, so I was thinking, well, what kind of conflict was going on in Scotland in the 18th century? That’s an easy one to answer, it’s the Jacobite risings. That sounded cool, and it’s this doomed cause that’d have a lot of openings. So I said OK, we’ll do that,” she says. “It looked to me, at this point, not knowing the subtleties, that it was essentially the Scots, the Jacobites, versus the British army. I had to have a lot of Scotsmen because of the kilt factor, but I thought it would be good if I had an English female to play off these guys. We’d have sexual tension, that’s conflict, and maybe they’d fight over her or want to kill her or whatever.” But when she wrote her Englishwoman into a scene, she just didn’t sound as if she came from the past. “I sent her into a cottage full of Scotsmen to see what she’d do. They all turned around when she came in and stared at her, and one of them stood up slowly, and he said, ‘My name is Dougal MacKenzie, and who might you be?’ Without my stopping to think, I just typed ‘My name is Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp, and who the hell are you?’” says Gabaldon. “I fought with her for several pages, trying to beat her into shape and make her talk like an 18th-century person. She wasn’t having any of it, she just kept making smartass modern remarks. And so by the end of three pages, I said, ‘OK, I give up. I’m not gonna fight with you all the way through this book. Go ahead and be modern. I’ll figure out how to get there later.’ Plainly, she was a time traveller, so then the question was, where did she come from?” It took Gabaldon 18 months to write Outlander, which runs to almost 650 pages – all of it in secret, apart from a group of online friends she made on a literary forum (she’d got a free CompuServe membership thanks to writing for Byte magazine). After getting into an argument with a man online over what it felt like to be pregnant, she posted a section from Outlander in which Jamie’s sister Jenny evocatively describes the experience; her forum friends liked it, and one eventually introduced her to a literary agent. He took her on, and landed her a three-book contract. Outlander was published in 1991 – pitched firmly at the romance market, something to which Gabaldon objected. “The problem with writing a book that nobody can describe is marketing, and I agreed that we could sell it as romance provided that I had tasteful covers.” (No bare-chested men.) Her proviso was that if it did well, the series would be moved to general fiction, and after “a whole lot of pushing on my part”, by the fifth in the series, The Fiery Cross, it was. While she’s since published an article on the Gabaldon theory of time travel in the Journal of Transfigural Mathematics, Gabaldon admits that the passion between Jamie and Claire – forever thwarted as it is by pesky time travel, by the dangers of the 18th century, and by evil antagonists – is what fans love about the books. Fortunately for her readers – and viewers – she’s still not tired of writing explosive sex scenes for them, even as the couple enter their late 50s/early 60s in Go Tell the Bees. “Let’s put it this way, since my husband’s left the room,” she says. “We will have been together for 50 years in February, and it is possible to have a rewarding sex life, even if you’re not young newlyweds.” Along with passion, Go Tell the Bees is packed with everything readers love about the Outlander series: the delicious clash between modern and historical life (there are particularly delightful moments when Jamie and his 18th-century compatriots are given copies of The Lord of the Rings and Green Eggs and Ham, or when Claire fulfils her quest to make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich). The epic sweep of history, in this case the American revolution, set against the smaller tragedies of everyday life (a mother is mauled to death by a bear in a scene that had me weeping buckets). Love – for friends, romantic partners, family – abounds, as does conflict, danger and derring-do. Gabaldon has also written a handful of mysteries starring Lord John Grey, a protagonist in the Outlander series who is forced by the times to conceal his homosexuality, and is considering whether the intriguing character of Master Raymond is due his own novel. For now, though, there is the 10th and final novel to write – but at least she knows the end point she’s heading towards. “It was about 20 years ago that I saw the ending, and I got up in the middle of the night and wrote it down with tears rolling down my face,” she says. “And no: I’m not telling you what it is.” Go Tell the Bees That I Am Gone by Diana Gabaldon is published by Century and available at the Guardian bookshop.The team behind popular satirical news site The Betoota Advocate say they have rejected multiple offers to produce sketch comedy for television in the past because they won’t be “put in a box”. But now they have teamed up with Warner Bros International Television Production Australia (WBITVP) for a major television project which seems to defy description. The Betoota Advocate presents itself as an independent regional newspaper from far-west Queensland which prides itself on reporting “fair and just news with the authenticity that rivals only the salt on the sunburnt earth that surrounds us here in the Queensland Channel Country”. They boast that their cheeky news stories, like Tuesday’s “Pope Francis Walks Out Of Interview With Ch7 After Reporter Admits He Hasn’t Read The Bible”, reach four million readers each month. The Betoota stories are so close to the truth they have been picked up as real news by major media outlets more than once, including by the Today show which reported on a (fake) parking officer who gave himself a ticket. Warners and Betoota are now in development for a slate of “premium, unscripted productions” which do not involve Chaser-style stunts and will definitely not be a scripted series like TV news satire Frontline. All we know is Warner will bring the TV experience and Betoota will bring the jokes. So what will fans of the Betoota Advocate website and the Betoota Advocate podcast expect from the show? “Ever since we started, the pitch we always get is ‘hey, do a sketch comedy show or do a weekly panel show’,” says Antony Stockdale, the director of Diamantina Media, a digital media company formed by the five guys behind Betoota. Diamantina Media produces podcasts for other clients including Chat 10 Looks 3 for Annabel Crabb and Leigh Sales. “I don’t think we’re in the same box as people like the Chaser, we wanted to do something different. “We don’t do stunts. We don’t try and gotcha people.” The managing director of WBITVP Australia, Michael Brooks, said the distinctive and “bitingly satirical” Betoota Advocate has won a huge following and they want to craft a TV show from their unique style. Stockdale says the approach from Warner Bros was successful because it didn’t come with any expectations of a formula. The team behind “Australia’s oldest newspaper”, which includes the fictional characters Clancy Overell and Errol Parker, who prefer to remain anonymous, want to step away from the daily news fare they currently write about and tell broader stories about the Australian character. “We think there’s some great stories to be told about Australia in particular: iconic moments in Australian history and how they all played out, or probably played out” Stockdale says. “It’s Betoota, so it’s not going to be exactly how it played out. “There’s great stories like [business men Christopher] Skase and [Alan] Bond and really sort of iconic things like that, and just sort of revisiting some of these iconic Australian moments. “And it’s also just what is Australia. What ties us together what sets us apart? We are 25 million people, 120 religions, 1800 towns and one Big Banana.” The TV show will be a lot like the news stories which, Stockdale says, are all about “trying to cut through what Australians are really thinking but maybe no one in the media is actually saying”. Warner Bros in Australia produces The Bachelor, The Masked Singer, Celebrity Apprentice, Selling Houses Australia and Dancing with the Stars.The Great British Bake Off: The Final 8pm, Channel 4 It’s time to put the spatula down, succumb to a sugar-induced coma on the sofa, and see who’s going to be crowned this year’s Bake Off winner. Here’s what the three finalists need to do to impress Prue and Paul: put a signature twist on carrot cake, master a technical based on a Belgian recipe, and serve a showstopper banquet fit for a Mad Hatter’s tea party. Hollie Richardson Matisse: From Tate Modern &amp; MoMA 9pm, Sky Arts This generous documentary on Tate Modern’s landmark 2014 exhibition of Matisse’s cut-outs (which then travelled to New York’s MoMA) comes to the small screen for the first time. Gallery workers and art historians provide insight into the French artist – including his productive competition with friend and rival Picasso. Henry Wong Insecure 9pm, Sky Comedy Following Issa and Nathan’s heart-to-heart, where they both admitted to wanting something more with each other (followed by that perfect romcom kiss), the pair continue to get closer. And Molly finds herself dealing with a shock family emergency. HR Impeachment: American Crime Story 9.10pm, BBC Two Misogyny once again abounds as the FBI corner Monica Lewinsky in a hotel room in the latest instalment of Ryan Murphy’s glossy retelling of the Clinton affair. While Beanie Feldstein’s panicking Lewinsky looks even more like a rabbit in the headlights than usual, the pressure’s on not to call her mum. Hannah Verdier Miriam and Alan: Lost in Scotland 9.15pm, Channel 4 Miriam Margolyes and Alan Cumming continue to rediscover their “Scottish bits” on this three-part campervan adventure. Journeying along the west coast, they make pit stops to concoct a midge repellent, take on one of Glencoe’s famous mountains, and meet a witch. HR Stath Lets Flats 10.15pm, Channel 4 Multiple treats here for Stath fans: the discovery of a grainy, old home movie prompts an episode almost entirely set eight years ago, when Michael &amp; Eagle Lettings formed and the gang first got together. Their patter’s just as bad and the hair is much, much worse. Then, back in the present, something truly lovely occurs. Jack Seale Film choice Maurice (Merchant Ivory, 1987), 11.10pm, Film4 EM Forster refused to publish the novel during his lifetime due to its then controversial depiction of homosexuality, and it was not until 1987 that James Ivory and Ismail Merchant managed to make this finely crafted film adaptation. Another of the director-producer duo’s opulent studies of the upper-middle class – all country houses and comfortable living – it follows the sexual awakening of James Wilby’s Maurice, initially falling in love with fellow Cambridge student Clive (Hugh Grant) but then struggling with his feelings, and their illegal status. Simon Wardell Live sport Uefa Champions League Football: Villarreal v Manchester United 5pm, BT Sport 3. From Estadio de la Cerámica. Chelsea v Juventus is on BT Sport 2 from 7.15pm.Top story: Problems pile up for Johnson Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories today. Boris Johnson is facing serious questions about his competence and drive from Conservative MPs after he gave a rambling speech to business leaders yesterday and was accused of losing his grip over a series of policies from social care to rail. After a backbench rebellion over the controversial social care cap continued a run of chaotic policy U-turns and embarrassments, dismay increased after his performance at the CBI conference in South Shields. Johnson lost his place for an excruciating 20 seconds, and diverted into a lengthy tangent about his trip to Peppa Pig World and being motoring correspondent for GQ, complete with car noises. A former cabinet minister said there was “an accumulation of things building up, really relating to his competence and that is beginning to look very shaky”. One of the government’s growing problems is how to stem the flow of migrants across the Channel and it has emerged that home secretary Priti Patel is coming under “immense pressure” from No 10 to do more on this touchstone issue. * * * Care rebellion– MPs have passed a controversial amendment to England’s social care cap which will disproportionately hit poorer pensioners, despite a rebellion from backbenchers. The change means that council contributions to care fees would not go towards the cap, meaning that people who receive means-tested help would end up paying the same as wealthier people if they needed care for a significant amount of time. The exchequer stands to save £900m a year by 2027, but analysts say it could be “catastrophic” for poorer homeowners, who might be forced to sell their homes to fund care. The vote passed by 272 to 246, a majority of 26. * * * Depression therapy – Millions of people with mild depression in England should be offered therapy, exercise, mindfulness or meditation before antidepressants, according to the first new NHS guidelines in more than a decade. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) recommends the “menu of treatment options” be offered to patients by health professionals before medication is considered. Currently, those with mild depression are offered antidepressants or a high-intensity psychological intervention, such as cognitive behavioural therapy. * * * Workforce shrinks – The economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic has made Britain’s workforce smaller, younger and more female after a sharp rise in people leaving work during lockdown. The Resolution Foundation said the number of people who had exited the workforce and were no longer looking for a job had increased. Around 586,000 older workers had opted for early retirement. Young people and women have taken the hardest psychological and financial hit from the pandemic, according to a YouGov survey taken in 27 countries. In Britain, France and Australia, for example, around half of young people said the pandemic had taken a toll on their mental health, against only a quarter of those 55 or older. * * * Bulgaria crash – At least 45 people have been killed after a bus travelling from North Macedonian plates caught fire on a road in western Bulgaria on Tuesday. The victims included children, and seven people with burns were taken to hospital in the capital, Sofia, officials said. Most of the victims were from North Macedonia. * * * Waukesha charges – A 39-year-old man has been charged with five counts of homicide over the deaths of five people who died when a driver ploughed a car into a Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin on Sunday. Another 48 people were injured, including two children who remained critical. Darrell E Brooks was involved in an unspecified domestic disturbance immediately before the parade incident, police said, and further charges were expected. * * * Horror show – First there was Squid Game. Now there’s Hellbound. Another South Korean fantasy horror series from Netflix has become an overnight global phenomenon, with the latter toppling the former as the most-watched TV show on the streaming platform. The series centres on a team of demons, who hunt down sinners who have been previously visited by a celestial being who has informed the victim of their date and time of death. Squid Game was watched by an estimated 142m households in 94 countries and has made $900m in profit for Netflix. Today in Focus podcast: World of woe Qatar says it has reformed conditions for workers building its World Cup facilities, but, less than a year out from the competition, change is hard to see on the ground, reports Pete Pattisson. Lunchtime read: Diana Gabaldon on writing Outlander Diana Gabaldon wrote the first of her time-travelling Outlander novels in secret while her husband slept. Now she’s published the ninth in the hit series. She talks to Alison Flood about explosive sex scenes – and where George RR Martin went wrong. Sport Michael Carrick, Manchester United’s temporary manager, will be watched closely despite little time to prepare for the Champions League encounter with Villarreal after Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s sacking. The International Olympic Committee has been accused of engaging in a “publicity stunt” over the wellbeing of the Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai, amid growing momentum behind a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics. Eddie Jones believes mental fatigue caused by Covid restrictions was a significant reason why the major southern hemisphere rugby nations failed to stay the distance in the autumn series in Europe. Lewis Hamilton will go into the crucial penultimate round of the Formula One season with a vital advantage in his Mercedes car after team principal Toto Wolff confirmed he would be reverting to his newest engine in Saudi Arabia. A whistleblowing hotline launched by Yorkshire to allow people to safely report discrimination has been contacted by 36 individuals in its first week. Mavys Álvarez, a Cuban woman who had a relationship with the late footballer Diego Maradona two decades ago, has alleged the Argentine player raped her when she was a teenager. Mark Cavendish suffered a collapsed lung and two broken ribs in a crash during the Ghent Six Day track event on Sunday night, his Deceuninck-Quick-Step team announced. And in an interview with the Guardian, Milan and Sweden striker Zlatan Ibrahimovic has spoken about barging César Azpilicueta, the Premier League, and the secret of his longevity. Business Bulb Energy has gone bust and will be placed into an untested bailout process that will rely on public money to manage the biggest collapse yet from the energy market crunch. The company will be handed to a “special administrator” that could cost the taxpayer £2bn to keep supplying Bulb’s 1.7 million household customers. Analysis of recruitment data shows employers in the UK are stepping up demands for staff to be vaccinated against Covid-19. Markets picked up in Asia overnight after Jerome Powell was handed another term as Fed chief but the FTSE100 will dip a touch at the open. The pound has slid to $1.339 although it’s up to €1.192 as the euro wilts amid the threat of lockdowns. The papers The Guardian leads with Boris Johnson’s CBI speech fallout – “Johnson is ‘losing the confidence’ of Tory party” – while the Mirror questions the government’s social care policy: “That’s rich”. The Yorkshire Post also looks at the CBI story – “Government ‘too fixated on the South’” – and the Express has another headache for Johnson: “It’s a ‘national emergency…’ Anger at migrant crisis”. The Scotsman chips in with “Patel: SNP refuses to help with asylum seeker crisis”. The Mail leads with “Parole shake up to keep public safe” and the Times says “Britain ‘put at risk by civil service groupthink’”. The Telegraph has “Cut taxes or Brexit will fail, says Frost” and the i goes with “Take a Covid test before Christmas shopping”. The FT splashes on “Biden chooses continuity in picking Powell to lead Fed”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendAfter almost two years of consultation the Coalition has released a new draft of its religious discrimination legislation. While some of the hardest edges have been knocked off, Liberal moderates and equality advocates remain concerned it could water down protections for minority groups. So what’s in and what’s out of this third draft of the legislation and do the changes mean it can be used as a shield against discrimination or a sword to discriminate against others? What is the bill about? The religious discrimination bill prohibits discrimination in certain areas of public life on the ground of religious belief or activity. The bill prohibits both direct discrimination, treating another person less favourably based on religion, and indirect discrimination, where an apparently neutral condition has the effect of disadvantaging people because of their religion. Why did anyone object to that? Earlier drafts of the bill protected religious expression and practice in a number of controversial areas such as allowing medical practitioners to object to procedures and limiting employers’ policies to regulate employees’ speech. What has changed? The third draft, released by attorney general Michaelia Cash on Tuesday, removes several of the most contentious sections: The so-called Folau clause preventing employers sanctioning employees for religious speech. Sections allowing health providers to refuse treatment on the basis of “conscientious objection” to particular procedures. What are the remaining protections for religious speech? Although employers can set codes of conduct regulating employees’ speech, the bill still prevents qualifying bodies, such as a professional association, setting rules that would have “the effect of restricting or preventing [a] person from making a statement of belief”. The bill also states that statements of religious belief do not constitute discrimination under state and territory anti-discrimination laws, including section 17 of the Tasmanian Anti-Discrimination Act, which prohibits speech that “offends, insults or humiliates” people based on other characteristics such as race, age, sex or disability. Advocates have suggested this would allow religious people to say things like women should submit to their husbands, or disability is a trial imposed by God. What about religious institutions such as schools? Religious institutions are allowed to engage in conduct that “a person of the same religion … could reasonably consider to be in accordance with the doctrines, tenets, beliefs or teachings of that religion” and “to avoid injury to the religious susceptibilities of adherents of the same religion”. This could allow educational institutions to discriminate against gay teachers and students – but to do so they must first publish a publicly available policy about their practices, which was one of the recommendations of the Ruddock review. Clause 11 of the new bill states that schools may “give preference, in good faith, to persons who hold or engage in a particular religious belief or activity” if they publish a public policy. The attorney general may also use regulations to specify certain state or territory laws that can be overridden by this section of federal religious discrimination law, if he or she believes the law prevents the institution giving preference to members of their faith. This means, if the bill passes, the federal government could override the Victorian government’s reforms seeking to narrow religious exemptions to prevent schools discriminating against staff on the basis of personal characteristics such as sexuality. In a related bill containing “consequential amendments” this section specifically targets the Victorian law for override. What about protecting gay students? Before the Wentworth byelection in 2018, Scott Morrison committed to reform the law to prevent religious schools expelling gay students. The reform never passed because Labor was concerned the government’s proposal still allowed schools to punish gay students in other ways; the matter was referred to the Australian Law Reform Commission for review. After concerns expressed by Liberal moderates, Cash has reinforced that the government’s position is that no child should be suspended or expelled from school on the basis of their sexuality or gender identity. But protections are not included in the religious discrimination bill – instead Cash has asked the ALRC to draft protections in a wider reform of discrimination laws to be considered 12 months after the bill passes. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In the party room on Tuesday, Liberals including Dave Sharma and Andrew Bragg suggested the two issues should be considered together. What happens now? Scott Morrison will introduce the bill to the House of Representatives this week, where it is expected to pass next week before being referred to a Senate committee, most likely the legal and constitutional affairs committee. Labor’s support is likely to be critical, as several crossbench senators have questioned the need for the bill or oppose it outright. Anthony Albanese has said he “absolutely” supports religious freedom and would “always support faith communities” but protecting that right should not involve “taking away the freedom of others”.When Tasneem Noor got on the stage at the Women’s Mosque of America in Los Angeles, she felt butterflies in her stomach. Facing about fifty women on praying rugs, ready to deliver a sermon – khutba in Arabic – she took a deep breath. During the prayers, the women would follow Noor’s lead, but several would pray four more times after it ended, to make up for any potentially invalid prayers. That is the result of a 14-century-old disputed hadith that leads some to believe women are forbidden to lead prayers and deliver sermons. “I don’t mind,” Noor told me later. “Some people function better with rules.” Noor, 37, is part of a quiet revolution in America: at the all women’s mosque, she was celebrating its five year anniversary of practicing the female imamat, a rare and often controversial practice in Islam. Women aren’t even allowed to pray in many mosques across the world. In some mosques in the US, women may enter, but are often forced to pray in separate rooms – leading some to call it the “penalty box”. Spiritual leaders who have pushed boundaries – by running mixed congregation mosques or running an LGBTQ mosque – have received death threats. But at the Women’s Mosque of America, women are using their sermons to cover previously untouched topics like sexual violence, pregnancy loss and domestic violence. One of Noor’s most memorable sermons happened in 2017 – a surprise, considering it was largely an improvisation. After a scheduling hitch left Noor with less than half of the 45-minutes she should have had, she shortened her talk and changed tack: leading the congregation in a meditation. “She asked us to track our emotions in our bodies, and let them run their course,” recalled Nurjahan Boulden, who was in the audience that day. “I didn’t know it was even possible to own and control your emotions like that, but it worked.” Boulden had come to Noor’s sermon that day not knowing what she would find. Before that sermon, she was haunted by a destructive guilt she carried. She grew up with a love for belly-dancing – a practice inherited from her Baloch mother – but also hearing a lot of “if you do this, you’ll burn in hell”. That belief took hold inside her, and began to grow. Then, she was shot in the leg in a nightclub in Toronto in 2006. Boulden, a college student at the time, overheard one of her aunts say, “She was out dancing, what did she expect?” Then, she conceived a child out of wedlock with her Christian partner. After they married, they had several miscarriages, and so the guilt grew again. She got to a point where she believed her misfortunes resulted from not conforming to religious traditions. Noor offered Boulden another frame. “I didn’t tell her she was wrong for feeling punished,” Noor said. “I helped her to look at it differently and asked, ‘What else is true?’” Noor told her that God had given her the talent of dancing and that it wasn’t a shameful practice, like many thought. She told her that her intentions – what’s in her heart – is what mattered. If she felt happiest belly dancing, , then dancing was how she was meant to connect with God. Boulden was in disbelief. “You’re the guide I had been waiting for,” Boulden told her. Noor was also in disbelief. She had never seen herself as someone that people had been waiting for. ••• Noor grew up in a pious family in Karachi, Pakistan. Everyone in the house prayed five times a day. At the time, women weren’t allowed in the mosque in Karachi (although that is now changing). But Noor also had women to look up to: her mother Naima had memorized the Arabic scriptures and was usually the designated prayer leader in the house. In the summer of 2000, when Noor was 16, her family migrated to the US and moved into a townhouse in Culver City, California. On their street, in this upper middle-class suburb of about 40,000 people, old ficus trees formed an archway. There were few Muslims in the town – they represent only about 1% of the population even now – but in the first couple of months after settling in to her California home, she went to a giant prayer for an Eid celebration at the Los Angeles convention center. She was amazed. It was the first time she would pray in public. Noor wore a blue and yellow salwar kameez she had brought in her suitcase from Karachi, silver earrings with small blue stones that hung down to her chin and two dozen bangles around her henna tattooed wrists. The teenager was mesmerized by the ethnic and gender diversity in the crowd. She saw the power of praying outside the house, in communion. Her new life was already teaching her what kind of religious leader she wanted to be – although she had not yet realized she wanted to become one. At UCLA, she stopped wearing the headscarf on campus and felt uneasy at the comments from other Muslim students. “As if wearing the scarf made you some sort of Muslim goddess,” Noor reflected later. She saw it as an attempt at oppression and she was defiant against it. After graduating, Noor worked at California State University in student affairs for five years. During a social justice workshop, she helped a young gay student come out. She reflected on how, in Pakistan, being gay was portrayed as a deviant “lifestyle” choice. “I believe that they were who God made them to be,” she said. In 2013, Noor’s sister Samia Bano, then 27, had bought a ticket for a business conference in downtown LA, as a birthday gift for Noor. Noor wasn’t overjoyed at going to a business conference for her birthday, but they both went, and there, Noor had a revelation. When the speaker talked to the audience about everyone’s “fascination factors, the thing that lights you up”, Noor immediately thought about her faith. She stepped outside to breathe. Her sister sat next to her on a bench. “It was my calling,” Noor said, the moment she realized she wanted to be a spiritual leader. That night, in her prayer, she begged God to guide her. “She speaks about faith in a really powerful way that inspires people,” Sheila Merchant, a young Californian lawyer who has been influenced by Noor’s guidance, said. “She created that safe space for me where I could really share and open up and be my whole self.” Noor’s sister Samia Bano, now 39, was having similar revelations. Unlike Noor, Bano wore a tight scarf over her ears and would never miss a prayer. Certified as a happiness coach, Bano believed her calling was to share with people how she had learned to “find peace and happiness in my life”. But there was a journey before she arrived at that happiness. At the age of eight, Samia was sexually abused by a relative in Pakistan. The little girl, once bubbly, shut down. She found refuge in silence and in Anne Frank’s diary, a book found unexpectedly at a local market in Karachi. “I realized I wasn’t alone,” she said. Bano kept the secret. She didn’t receive help until she started college, also at UCLA. On campus, she saw a counsellor and practiced yoga. On her mat, she learned how to stand straight, tall, high like a mountain. She wanted to provide the same for others and became a certified counsellor, working at a hotline for victims of sexual abuse. “I had guessed something like that had happened,” Noor replied in anger, when her sister finally told her of the assault in 2014. “All of a sudden, you were not the same,” she added. Noor also told her she had guessed who the perpetrator was. Bano, who carried the guilt for years, was relieved. “Tasneem was instrumental in my process of healing,” she said. When the Women’s Mosque of America opened a year later, Noor and Bano signed up and soon became among the most active members. During her first khutba in July 2016, Noor was so nervous, her voice was shaky. In between many deep breaths, she talked about fear of judgment by others and “ugly stereotypes”. Bano was hired as operations director for setting up prayers. Bano’s first khutba, a year later, was about doing no harm and loving yourself – the Ramadan values that mattered most to her. The sisters had always meditated together at home. Now, on her praying rug, before prostrating, Bano stood strong on her feet, rock solid, and was committed to challenging the patriarchy she saw in Islam. “It’s not women’s duty to hide, but up to men to lower their gaze,” she said. ••• Noor and her sister have faced many questions about their choices to become imams. “Samia, we heard you lead prayers. Did you really do that?” asked a group of women one day outside the Culver City mosque. Bano confirmed it was true. “Oh, so you think it is allowed in Islam?” They challenged. “Yes it is, I actually looked into it,” Bano replied. Excited to share the information, she took her phone out. She offered to send them videos on the female imamat, if they wanted. They raised their eyebrows and walked away. Muslim feminists who advocate for female imamat in mixed and non-mixed congregations point to Umm Waraqah – one of prophet Mohammed’s female companions, who led prayers in her house. They say that Mohammed asked Waraqah to turn her house into a mosque, therefore legitimizing the practice of being a female imam today. For some, it is simply not a convincing argument. According to the Fiqh Council of North America (FCNA), female imamat is perfectly permissible in women-only mosques. Noor, despite changing the lives of many – including Boulden, who is now a full-time belly-dancing teacher – is sometimes less certain about using the word imam, which has traditionally referred to a man. “I don’t know if I can call myself an imam,” Noor told me recently over the phone. “Of course you are an imam!” Bano yelled in the background. “Well, there you go, maybe I am one,” Noor said, laughing. “This is not a career. It is not something I do to make money. This is my calling, my responsibility, as the creation of the ultimate creator.” In August, I met with Noor at the Islamic center of southern California for the 1pm prayer. It was a Monday and the praying room was almost empty, with only two elderly men praying in the front and a young woman wearing a black abaya in a back corner. We picked a spot near her. Noor and I stood side by side. We waited for someone to lead the prayer but no one volunteered. I asked if Noor could lead me. “Sure,” she said as she straightened her back and took a deep breath. This story was funded by the Pulitzer Center. Amel Brahmi is writing a book on the rise of female imams in the US.My kids’ dad has a rule that nobody can discuss Christmas until his birthday has passed at the end of November. It has a folkloric inarguability, like “ne’er cast a clout till May is out”, except it is much more strictly observed. Nobody really knows what casting a clout means, and everybody knows what discussing Christmas sounds like. I think the kids might have some residual fear from early childhood that a breach will result in the cancellation of Christmas; my daughter cleaves to it so closely that she gets the heebie-jeebies even when her friends start talking about the festive season too early, and I always wonder, should I explain how this works? That not everyone’s dad is born on 21 November? Or would that be considered patronising, her being 12? Christmas preparations are often dressed up as a question of what is classy, where in fact it is an issue of class with a side-order of gender. The most elegant MO is to affect not to notice it’s happening at all, to wander round town going “why is everyone so drunk?”, to roll your eyes at the fake holly festooning the supermarkets, to affect disgust at the choral muzak, until 18 December, when you will finally acknowledge that the arrival of the Christ child is almost upon us. To pull this off, however, you need both money and leisure in considerable quantities; you’ll have done nothing to spread the cost of the event, and you have only seven short days to do a month’s emotional labour, which, even if you don’t have a job, is not enough. It might just work if you have a wife, but then it doesn’t count. So, to spread the many burdens manageably, you really want to start in late September, but then you’ll crash into Halloween, and you’ll also have eaten all the tiny Toblerones you bought as stocking fillers by 1 November. Ideally, you want to realise it’s nearly Christmas shortly after WH Smith does – for they have been the hallmark of the unclassy, since the decline of Hallmark – but before Lidl takes delivery of its mini panettones, otherwise you’ll definitely miss them. Round about now, in other words. So maybe my kids are right.Covid-19 is no longer a disease of the vaccinated, the head of the Oxford jab programme has said. The “ongoing horror” of patients gasping for breath in hospital is now “largely restricted” to people who are unvaccinated, according to Prof Sir Andrew Pollard. Even though the more transmissible Delta variant continues to infect thousands, most of those who are fully vaccinated will experience only “mild infections” that are “little more than an unpleasant inconvenience”. Writing for the Guardian, Pollard said: “Among the general public, the pandemic is still regarded as a silent pestilence, made visible in the images of patients fighting for their next breath … This ongoing horror, which is taking place across ICUs in Britain, is now largely restricted to unvaccinated people. “Generally, Covid-19 is no longer a disease of the vaccinated; vaccines tend to limit its suffocating affliction, with a few exceptions.” Scientists are hopeful that the booster jabs rollout and immunity from the summertime spread of the Delta variant should help the UK escape the surge in infections seen in parts of Europe. The UK, which saw measures eased in the summer and has higher vaccination levels than some European countries, will probably not be hit as hard, Pollard said. “In countries with lower vaccination rates, the impact of the current wave in hospital ICUs will be far worse than in Britain.” However, Pollard, one of those behind the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, said Covid would still pile pressure on the NHS this winter – with unvaccinated patients requiring intensive care and double-jabbed patients who are older and frail still at risk of “life-threatening” health issues. “The latest wave of the virus in the UK, which is now rising rapidly in parts of Europe, will directly translate into a stream of mostly unvaccinated patients entering ICU,” he said in the article jointly authored with Prof Brian Angus, professor of infectious disease at the University of Oxford. “To prevent serious illness, these people need first and second doses of the vaccine as soon as possible. “For those of us fortunate enough to have already been vaccinated, the story now seems very different. For most vaccinated individuals, these mild infections are little more than an unpleasant inconvenience.” But for those who are very frail, immunocompromised or have underlying health conditions, Pollard and Angus said, Covid infections can still be “enough to destabilise them” and cause “serious, life-threatening health problems that add to the pressure on the NHS”. Prof Peter Openshaw, of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), told BBC Breakfast on Monday he was pleased that the UK could currently avoid measures being introduced in Europe. However, he added: “I am concerned that we do have really quite high levels of transmission in the UK. My personal preference would be that we should really try to get these rates down – we know that masks do work … because there are people who are unvaccinated for various reasons, and we do need to try and reduce the level of circulation of the virus, as well as getting up vaccination rates. “No single measure by itself is going to be successful; we need the combination of measures, which includes re-vaccination, third doses, but also wearing masks and being very careful not to transmit the virus.”More than ever before, we must look behind the reported Covid-19 numbers in hospitals and communities to understand what is happening in the pandemic. We also need to better understand how the pandemic is playing out among unvaccinated people, and those who have been vaccinated. To the public, the pandemic was and still is a silent pestilence, made visible by the images of patients fighting for their next breath and reporters at intensive care units talking about the fear of patients and the exhaustion of doctors and nurses from behind their fogged visors. This ongoing horror, which is taking place in ICUs across Britain, is now largely restricted to unvaccinated people. Generally, Covid-19 is no longer a disease of the vaccinated; vaccines tend to limit this suffocating affliction, with a few exceptions. If the protection that vaccines offer against severe Covid-19 began to wane, given that tens of millions of people are now vaccinated in the UK and only a fraction of the population have not received the jab, ICUs would be filled to the brim with vaccinated people. But they are not. Vaccines still seem to give almost complete protection against this form of life-threatening cases of Covid-19. The latest wave of the virus in the UK – with cases rising rapidly in parts of Europe – will directly translate into a stream of mostly unvaccinated patients entering ICU. In the short term, boosters and social restrictions will help prevent Covid-19 from spreading among people who are unvaccinated this winter. But in the long run, the pressure of Covid-19 on ICUs won’t be solved through these measures. The virus will eventually reach unvaccinated people. To prevent serious illness, these people need first and second doses of the vaccine as soon as possible. It is therefore obvious that governments with doses to spare should be making every effort to ensure vaccines urgently reach people who are undecided and unvaccinated. Some countries are already hoping to drive uptake among this group by imposing social restrictions or introducing vaccine mandates. But understanding and dealing with people’s underlying objections to vaccinations would be a visionary project to secure the public’s health, during the pandemic and beyond. In countries with lower vaccination rates, the impact of the current wave on hospital ICUs will be far worse than in Britain. As a proportion of the whole population, vaccination coverage in the UK is 69%, but in Bulgaria it is only 24% and in Slovakia 43%. It is also important to address pockets of unvaccinated people in countries where vaccine uptake is otherwise high. In the US, for example, fewer than 50% of people have received both jabs in certain states. In other states, the rate is 70%. In this context, it is shameful that in some low-income countries only 5% of the population have received at least one dose, almost a year since the first licensed dose was given in Britain. The director general of the World Health Organization expressed his deep concern last week that there are now six times more booster doses being administered every day than first doses. We are still not doing enough to end the pandemic for the world’s unvaccinated, and governments and manufacturers urgently need to work together to get doses to those in low-income countries, keeping an eye on the long-term gains of global vaccination, despite the challenges posed by the current Covid spike in Europe. For those of us fortunate enough to have already been vaccinated, the story now seems very different. For the most part, we are protected from very severe cases of Covid-19. But it is now clear that even the fully vaccinated can get mild infection with the virus: the effectiveness of two-dose vaccines against mild symptomatic infection now ranges from 44% to 63%, according to the UK Health Security Agency. This lower level of protection is partly a feature of waning immunity against mild infection. It’s also a result of the Delta variant, which is better at infecting people than its predecessors, even when they have vaccine immunity. For most vaccinated individuals, these mild infections are little more than an unpleasant inconvenience. But for those who are very frail, immunocompromised or have underlying health conditions, these infections are enough to destabilise them and lead to hospital admissions, which is what happens every winter with other viruses, including flu. For some, these are serious, life-threatening health problems that add to the pressure on the NHS. But this situation is not the same as the one we faced last year. It’s also worth remembering that while daily hospital admission data includes people with Covid-19, these numbers may also include people admitted for an unrelated illness, an accident or indeed for elective surgery who happened to have tested positive for Covid. It is difficult to know the true burden of disease in hospitals when the background rate of infection in the community continues to be high. Booster doses drive up the antibody levels that are needed to prevent infection. According to recent figures from the UKHSA, they appear to increase protection against Covid-19 to at least 93%. As a consequence, they will help to drive down the number of Covid-19 cases in the community, and reduce the chance that milder infection will occur among vulnerable people that result in hospital admissions. In highly vaccinated regions where the supply of doses is not limited, this is good news. But we don’t yet know how long this boost to protection will last. We need better and cleaner clinical data to understand fully which patients are being admitted to hospital, to improve our assessment of how effective vaccines are at preventing hospital and ICU admission, and to assess who would be most likely to benefit from boosters. It is also important to monitor and assess the duration of the top-up protection afforded by boosters to then inform the best long-term strategy for future control beyond this winter. What this means for people who are vaccinated is that we have our first glimpses of what “living with the virus” might look like, though it will be some time before it is clear where or when this will all level out. There are still questions over whether we will need regular boosters, and who these should target. But the horrors of the pandemic continue unabated for the unvaccinated, who remain at risk wherever in the world they live. We have to do better at delivering first doses to these people by addressing the unequal access to vaccines across the world, and the barriers that exist to vaccine acceptance among some communities. Prof Sir Andrew Pollard is a paediatrician and director of the Oxford Vaccine Group, University of Oxford Brian Angus is professor of infectious diseases at the Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of OxfordUnlike his surrealist contemporaries, René Magritte tended to keep Freud at a distance from his work – though few artists offer as much scope for armchair analysis. Speaking in 1961, he observed that “psychology doesn’t interest me. It claims to reveal the flow of our thoughts and emotions. Its efforts are contrary to what I know; it seeks to explain a mystery. There is only one mystery: the world.” One conclusion in reading Alex Danchev’s recreation of Magritte’s formative years, in this diligent and insightful biography (almost complete at the time of Danchev’s death in 2016), is that he was in denial about being in denial. In their village, 30 miles west of Brussels, at the turn of the century, the Magritte family was notorious for its chaos. The artist’s father, a tailor, was also a gambler and drunk who sometimes sold pornography to make ends meet. His mother was severely depressive (“neuraesthenic” was the contemporary term) and apparently had to be locked in the family home overnight for her own safety. The three sons – Magritte was the oldest – were known locally as “Cherokees”; there were widespread rumours of them mistreating animals, even starving a donkey to death in their backyard. This village chatter was compounded when eventually, one night when Magritte was 13, his mother did slip out of the house and drowned herself in the nearby River Sambre. Her body was discovered by bargemen some days later. Magritte subsequently refused to discuss the tragedy even with his childhood sweetheart and lifelong partner, Georgette Berger, though it surfaces in more than one of his paintings; in The Musings of the Solitary Walker of 1926, for example, a ghoulish and naked female figure floats in the air behind a characteristic faceless bowler-hatted figure who is turned away from the viewer, staring at the bridge near where his mother’s body was found. “He did not speak about things that touched him deeply,” Berger said. “He painted them away.” In place of nightmares, it seems, in Danchev’s telling, that Magritte found a way to exist in a world of objects, somewhat dissociated from extremes of emotion. He was a compulsive voyeur, sometimes seen at the keyhole of bathrooms in friend’s houses in which he stayed. Looking back on his own childhood, he frequently claimed to have been haunted by two singular images that he was ever after trying to explain. One was a locked chest that was apparently next to his cot as an infant (the longing to know what was inside never left him, he insisted). The other was a hot air balloon that he claimed had once crashed into the roof of his childhood home before it was dismantled and carried away, deflated (Danchev can find no record of any such accident). Magritte, typically, refused any symbolic reading of those images when they appeared in his early paintings, insisting that along with his pipes and apples and nudes they were an effort to “restore to objects their value as objects”. The drama of his painting came to lie in the way these objects refused to exist in mimetic exterior space, but in worlds of the artist’s imagination. Magritte did his best to tether himself to Earth in his relationship with Berger, whom he first met at the local fair in 1913, when she was 12 and he 14; a juvenile crush that was interrupted when Germany invaded Belgium a year later but never forgotten. The pair were eventually reunited six years later in Brussels and thereafter hardly apart. Danchev suggests that the steadiness of Magritte’s marriage was a viable substitute for the alpha male antics of the avant garde. Among the Paris surrealists, with their penchant for clubbiness and manifestos, the painter was at once a hero and an outsider. Salvador Dalí noted with approval the philosophical subversion of Magritte’s Ceci n’est pas une pipe in January 1929 (though there were no buyers for the painting for 25 years) and by the end of the year Magritte had been invited to contribute his latest thinking on words and images to the group’s house journal, La Révolution Surréaliste. At a party the night before publication, however, André Breton loudly insisted that Berger remove a cross – “something we abhor” – that she wore on a necklace. She refused and husband and wife silently left the party, beginning a rift between Magritte and his peers that was never properly resolved. The second world war separated René and Georgette once more – this time only for three months – and it was not until the 1950s that the painter was able, for the first time, to stop worrying about finding a market and an audience for his pictures. Having settled in the US (conjured in Paul Simon’s nicely dispassionate song René and Georgette Magritte With Their Dog After the War), Magritte was adopted as a master by a generation of New York-based artists that included Jasper Johns, Roy Lichtenstein and Andy Warhol. Danchev proved an indefatigable researcher, and Sarah Whitfield does full justice to his labours in completing this final chapter of Magritte’s life. Here as elsewhere, however, the artist seems to resist coming to full corporeal life on the page. Still, you can’t help feeling that the persistent sense of René being there and not being there might have been exactly as he would have wished it. • Magritte: A Life by Alex Danchev (with Sarah Whitfield) is published by Profile Books (£30). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThousands of students who have lived in the UK since childhood are being subjected to a regime described as even harsher than the Home Office’s “hostile environment” tactics when they apply for study loans, according to a report. About 8,000 students a year with an immigration status known as limited leave to remain (LLR) apply to Student Finance England (SFE) for funds to enable them to take up university places. The students are often people of colour from countries including Jamaica, Nigeria, Pakistan, India, Bangladesh and Ghana. They have lived in the UK for much of their lives with their families. Many come from low-income backgrounds, have excelled at school, are seen as the brightest and best of their generation and have secured university places to study subjects such as law and medicine. Under limited leave to remain rules students are eligible for loans if they have lived half their lives in the UK and have had LLR for at least three years. But according to the report they sometimes find that even evidence provided by the Home Office confirming their eligibility is rejected by SFE. The report, The Deintegration Generation, from We Belong, a youth organisation that campaigns for the rights of young migrants, documents dozens of examples of high-achieving students either wrongly rejected for loans by SFE or subjected to damaging delays in accessing these loans, which sometimes leads to them having to abandon their studies or not being able to embark on them at all. Chrisann Jarrett the CEO of We Belong, said: “We are seeing instances where SFE is being more demanding and more hostile towards young migrants with limited leave to remain even than the Home Office. “It is surely common sense that a Home Office letter should be accepted as proof that a student has lived in the UK for long enough to qualify for a loan. Evidence that is good enough for the Home Office should surely be good enough for Student Finance England.” SFE is a partnership between the Department for Education and the government-owned Student Loans Company (SLC) to provide financial support for students. A spokesperson for SLC admitted that sometimes they had got things wrong and apologised. Cases identified in the report include: A young woman who had to submit 200 pages of evidence of how long she had lived in the UK before a loan was finally granted six months after she had started her studies. A 17-year-old whose loan application was rejected due to a 17-day break between his first and second periods of LLR due to a mistake made by his lawyer. The Home Office accepted it was not his fault and granted a renewal of his immigration status on a “continuous basis”, but SFE said it was “an unlawful” break so he did not qualify for a loan. A 21-year-old Jamaican man who came to the UK aged three and had his loan applications repeatedly and wrongly rejected by SFE. He was threatened with eviction from his student accommodation and blocked from attending lectures. The error was corrected after five months after intervention from a lawyer and a We Belong caseworker. A spokesperson for SLC said: “SLC does not set the eligibility criteria for student finance. We process applications in line with the requirements set out by government in legislation. For residency cases the regulatory requirements are complex and while we strive to process every application correctly, we acknowledge that in a small number of cases mistakes do happen. “In such instances we apologise and seek to resolve matters as quickly as we can in line with the regulatory requirements. “In the last year we have invested significantly in improving the support we provide to customers for whom the application process is most challenging, and are working with We Belong to improve the information provided online and at our call centres, to ensure we provide the right support to applicants.”In May of this year, six city council members in Lebanon, Ohio, a city located just north of Cincinnati, voted on an ordinance that would effectively outlaw abortion for the 21,000 people that call it home. As in countless council meetings in small cities across the country where mask mandates, teaching about race in schools and access to reproductive healthcare have become politically charged in America’s current climate, the night unfolded in a series of near-Shakespearean acts. On the morning the meeting was scheduled, Krista Wyatt, a former firefighter elected to city council in 2018 and the only member expected to vote against the ordinance, formally resigned. In an accompanying statement, Wyatt wrote: “There is a core group of people who have hijacked the council to force their personal, political and religious views on the entire citizenship of Lebanon. It is not fair to the citizens and is not the role of a City Council member to be a moral compass.” Dozens of people spoke at the meeting later that evening. Some sang, many shared deeply personal experiences of rape or miscarriages and a few even led prayers. Just outside the doors of city hall, pro-choice and anti-abortion groups similarly squared off, shouting at each other and urging passersby to honk in support of one side or the other. Ultimately though, the vote was a resolute 6-0, making Lebanon the 29th city in the nation, and the first city in Ohio, to pass an enforceable ordinance outlawing abortion within their city limits. As the nation waits for a supreme court ruling on abortion rights, pro-choice advocates and activists across the US know first-hand that any upcoming national ruling might be almost irrelevant given what’s already taken place in Ohio and beyond. For the last few months, small municipalities – many without any standing abortion clinics – like Lebanon, Mason and soon maybe others, have outlawed abortion. Though women in those cities can still travel to get an abortion, the bans send an intimidating message. Bypassing statehouses and targeting smaller towns and cities governed by council has emerged as a successful strategy for anti-abortion advocates in recent years. In July, a report from the Guttmacher Institute revealed that at least 30 towns in six states – Arkansas, Indiana, New Mexico, New York, Ohio and Texas – have approved municipal abortion bans in the last three years. Some of these ordinances also target specific abortion funds and organizations providing other types of practical support to abortion patients. Today, pro-choice advocates are preparing for the supreme court to hear arguments in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Scheduled for December, the hearing marks the first time since Roe v Wade that the court will rule on the constitutionality of a pre-viability abortion ban and will determine whether all state laws that ban abortions are unconstitutional. If the court were to overturn Roe, the consequences would be felt widely and immediately, as several states have “trigger laws” in place that would automatically go into effect and outlaw most or all abortions. Ohio is on the brink of passing its own trigger ban, Senate Bill 123, and has recently introduced House Bill 480, the most extreme abortion ban in the country, a copycat of Texas’s Senate Bill 8 (SB 8). This would be a total ban on abortion in the state, without exceptions for rape, incest or the safety of those who are pregnant and would also empower private citizens to sue anyone that provides abortion or helps someone access an abortion. The tactic of outlawing abortion by city began in Texas, due mostly to the traveling preacher and director of the non-profit Right to Life of East Texas, Mark Lee Dickson. Since 2019, Dickson has traversed the country encouraging municipalities to pass ordinances outlawing abortion – including laws that defined abortion as premeditated murder and others that made it illegal for anyone to help someone obtain an abortion within city limits – and declare themselves “sanctuary cities for the unborn”. His first success story was Waskom, a city of under 2,000 residents in east Texas, in June 2019. In the year and a half that followed, despite an enduring, evolving pandemic, Dickson did the same in 22 Texas municipalities. Ultimately, SB 8, which banned almost all abortion in Texas and landed before Scotus – which did not intervene – heeded the Waskom model in terms of how the law is enforced. Dickson’s initiative, Sanctuary Cities for the Unborn, has now helped 41 cities – 37 in Texas alone – create custom-tailored ordinances that outlaw abortion based on the state’s law and the city’s charter. First to follow Texas’s suit were Ohio and Nebraska with two cities respectively. But how? The president of Ohio Right to Life, Mike Gonidakis, has referred to Ohio as “the bedrock of the pro-life movement”. Veronica Strevel, a military veteran, social worker and reproductive justice activist in Lebanon, agrees, asserting that Dickson has a pattern when it comes to determining which cities to target for these ordinances. While Dickson has said in more recent interviews that he doesn’t approach city leadership, rather they reach out to him for help, this wasn’t always his story. Strevel points to interviews like this one in 2019, wherein Dickson admits to initiating contact with the mayor of Waskom, as he felt the city was “vulnerable” to pro-choice advocacy. “He doesn’t bring these ordinances to a city unless he knows that he has enough people there to support them,” explains Strevel, who has been actively protesting against anti-abortion ordinances at city council meetings throughout Ohio. “Dickson and advocates like him aren’t looking for towns that have just a conservative church or a Republican city council. They’re looking for one with an extreme Republican city council and Trump supporters.” In October, just five months after the ruling in Lebanon, a second Ohio city passed the same ordinance. Like Lebanon, Mason – which is located just 14 minutes away – is known as a solidly conservative city. The Mason city council received the ordinance draft from Sanctuary Cities for the Unborn and Dickson confirmed he was in talks with officials in Mason before the Lebanon ordinance was even finalized. “A lot of people do not think Ohio is as red or as right as Texas, but these anti-abortion groups just copy and paste policy from statehouse to statehouse and city to city,” says Jordyn Close, Ohio state coordinator with Urge: Unite for Reproductive and Gender Equity. “In city council meetings, the people that are testifying in favor of these bans and unconstitutional bills are not from here. They’re there representing anti-abortion organizations, forcing these things on our communities when they’re not always what citizens actually want.” Strevel, who has lived in Lebanon for the last 10 years, says the effects on the community have been palpable. Within two months of the ordinance taking effect, a survey was conducted by Main Street Lebanon and led by University of Cincinnati professor Michael Cook. It revealed local businesses were already seeing decreased sales, leaving their owners, who were already struggling with a pandemic, questioning if it was a good thing for the community after all. Lebanon business owners reported sales in June 2021 suffered in comparison with 2020 and 2019. “This is just a natural side-effect of instituting an abortion ban,” Cook told the Cincinnati Enquirer. “I haven’t seen evidence of a formal boycott, but there are people boycotting. And socially, Strevel says dynamics have become so contentious between locals that whisper societies of anti-abortion residents are thriving behind closed doors and it’s not uncommon for strangers to find ways to quietly thank her for her outspoken advocacy. “One of my friends spoke at last night’s city council meeting and a sitting councilman told her, ‘this is a conservative town and you should have done your research before you moved here,’” said Strevel. “I’ve had friends who’ve been followed home from council meetings and many of them won’t go on record. I definitely have felt targeted, not only in Lebanon but also in Mason.” Apart from Ohio, Nebraska has also followed Dickson’s ordinances – first in Hayes Center in April and again just weeks after in Blue Hill. Two more cities, Dunning and Curtis, are considering outlawing abortion for their collective 1,000 population. But Andi Curry Grubb, executive director of Planned Parenthood in Nebraska, is confident those who identify as pro-choice in the state will prevail. “I think folks are recognizing the threat to abortion rights in a new way and the immediacy of an impact to abortion rights and access is being understood differently,” said Grubb. “When you combine that with local municipalities trying to bring ordinances like this forward, it just is a bit of a continuation of what we’re seeing across the state, which is folks saying, ‘this is not who we are in Nebraska. This is not what we want.’” As for Ohio, in the coming weeks two more city councils – in Celina and London –will consider similar measures. While many pro-choice advocates and activists remain confident like Grubb, others, such as Strevel, are resigned to the fate of their own city and are instead focusing on others. “I didn’t go to last night’s council meeting. There’s nothing I can do for Lebanon in the next two years. If all I’m going to get is resistance from a now completely white male extremist rightwing council – because that’s what this city elected – I’m not wasting my time on Lebanon. Y’all want that for yourself? Fine. Everybody knows who I am and where to find me.”Thank God no boozy poet or philandering painter was born or buried in Llandeilo in the heart of Carmarthenshire. If there were, it would probably be flooded with pilgrims. As it is, the small inland town on the mighty Tywy (or Towy) – the longest river that has its source and outlet in Wales – has a degree of quaintness, but not too much, and only a handful of gawpers admiring the pastel-painted facades. Most are, like me, on road trips, as the A40 which runs through Llandeilo is a greenery-fringed alternative to the busier Heads of the Valleys road just to the south, and there are coffees and buns and bowls of cawl (a local lamb and veg stew) to be had here. Carmarthenshire – or Sir Gâr – known as the Garden of Wales, is one of the 13 historic counties. Still largely agricultural, it’s criss-crossed by quiet back roads and is where the M4 runs out. It’s one of many places in Wales people pass through without stopping and is something of a Cinderella county. But the shiny English SUVs dashing for the beaches of Pembrokeshire are missing out. Close to Llandeilo is the Black Mountain range at the western end of the Brecon Beacons; here the national park is taken up by the 300 square-mile Fforest Fawr Geopark, which contains mountains and moorland, woods, meadows, towns and villages and some small lakes. Beloved of locals but attracting nothing like the numbers who clamber around the likes of Pen y Fan, the peaks here are a little lower and smoother; the sense is of great age and a brooding, sombre calm. I spend a glorious half-day on an eight-mile hike from the village of Llanddeusant, which takes me up past a trout hatchery and weir, then on to a steeper path along a ridge above the glacial lake of Llyn y Fan Fach. The terrain is semi-rugged but not at all technical. A brisk breeze ships in weather and the temperature dips, but this is more than compensated for by the dance of clouds over pale-green slopes. The route continues via Picws Du; this peak, along with neighbouring Fan Foel, are the highest in the area, and while they rise only to 730 metres-plus (2,400 feet), they look much loftier due to their dramatic contours. There’s a bronze age barrow at the top of Picws Du, from where I can see back to the Cambrian Mountains and south to Swansea and the silvery shimmer of the Bristol Channel. From here it’s down to Llyn y Fan Fawr, another, slightly larger lake surrounded by peaty land, where I swing back to the starting point. One of the reasons I like South Wales is that its open spaces abut industrial and post-industrial landscapes. The better-known and perhaps rougher-looking areas are around Merthyr and down by Port Talbot, but the Carmarthenshire coast played its own part in Wales’ gritty recent history. I ditch the car to start a coastal jaunt at Llanelli, which looks out at the gorgeous Gower, but is all the things that the picturesque peninsula is not. Once known as “Tinopolis”, it used to produce huge quantities of tin and tin-plate, as well as coal. A westbound walk along the Wales Coast Path (WCP), from the bridge that crosses the tidal waters and treacherous mudflats of the River Loughor, takes in views of the Tata-owned Trostre steelworks, the twittering edges of a Wildfowl and Wetland Trust nature reserve, the former heavy industry hub of North Dock – overlooked by a Grade II-listed former hydraulic accumulator tower built around the 1900s – as well as patches of brownfield, marsh and scrub. In front of Llanelli’s Furnace Theatre, in town, a monument called Industrial Symphony honours male and female workers; the title could be used equally for the mix of landscapes. It’s a little over 18 miles from Llanelli and Ferryside. Most of it is flat and there’s plenty on the way to look at. The Gower is always there, of course, pretty and pastoral in the haze, or drizzle. Closer by, Burry Port is where Amelia Earhart and her co-pilot and mechanic touched down in 1928 after crossing the Atlantic. Stretches of sand dune, salt marsh and old military installations lead to the verdant parkland and pine forest at Pembrey country park. At Kidwelly I head inland and up a little to admire the imposing walls of the Norman castle. Ferryside is one of Carmarthen’s best-kept secrets. It faces on to one of the many estuaries that cut deep into the coast and over to Llansteffan and another castle. A community-based tourism project has made it the natural place to break a long walk. In 2015, seeing no one in officialdom helping to put Ferryside on the map, 10 trustees took out a 99-year lease on a disused ex-county council building. First they opened the lovely Pryd o Fwyd (A bite to eat) cafe and, in summer, they opened a new five-room hotel, Calon y Ferri. A post office, art gallery, restaurant and “Men’s Shed” share the same space. Locals still know the building, which has solar power, as The Billets in reference to an RAF air/sea rescue base that used to occupy the site. Ferryside is an unmanned stop on the main London/Cardiff-Milford Haven/Pembroke line – just in case you want to speed up your walking. Founded by the Romans, Carmarthen has never received the kind of attention that York and Chester, or even Peterborough have enjoyed – because it’s in Wales. Chosen because of the Tywi and its raised position, the city of Moridunum had public baths and a temple. Fought over by the Normans and Welsh princes in medieval times, it was here that Henry VII’s father, Edmund Tudor (a family of Welsh origin), died from the bubonic plague in 1456 during the War of the Roses. This tussling for power is a reminder that the so-called Landsker line – the once-fortified division between Anglophone and Welsh-speaking Wales – passes close to here. I heard plenty of Welsh spoken in the lovely little market. There’s plenty of good picnic grub and pubs here, but I had lunch out at one of my favourite places not only in Wales but in the UK: Wrights Food Emporium, in Llanarthne – 8.5 miles east of the town centre – which has successfully reinvented itself post-Covid-19 as an outdoor eatery with a limited but lovely menu of pork rillettes and chicken cooked in perry. Just nine miles away is the National Botanic Gardens of Wales. As well as a Norman Foster-designed glasshouse (toasty in the cold months), it recently concluded the Regency Restoration project – a community-led £7m scheme to return the site to its position, 200 years ago, as one of the UK’s finest waterparks. The five-year project, which included a large lake, waterfall, cascades, bridges and a dam set in 300 acres of wooded parkland, has just been nominated for a prestigious ICE People’s Choice engineering award. Carmarthenshire has intriguing horticultural and herbal connections. A bed in the Apothecary’s Garden contains plants that might have been used by the “Physicians of Myddfai”. Folk legend has it that, in the 12th or 13th century, Rhiwallon and his three sons dispensed natural remedies and started a line of doctors that lasted till the 18th century. Flukily, one of the tales relates how the family received their initial commission from a mysterious lady of the lake – and the lake was Llyn y Fan Fach, which I had skirted two days earlier. Today, Prince Charles, who has a house at nearby Llwynywermod, keeps up the local tradition with his Duchy plant extracts and his homeopathic leanings. Laugharne, 13 miles south-west of the county town, is Carmarthenshire’s one truly famous township – thanks to its boozy poet (Dylan Thomas) and, to a lesser extent, its philandering painter (Augustus John, a frequent visitor). It is possessed of a natural beauty that still stuns me – I lived there for three years – thanks to a glistening estuary, skeletal castle ruin and lovely sloping main street of Georgian houses. Visitors from all around the world come here to see the former homes and the grave of the poet. His descriptions of Laugharne as the “strangest town in Wales” and his evocations of its “heron-priested shore” are earworms for local residents, but Laugharne has survived Thomas as much as it has memorialised him; it has its own poetry, thanks to the people, the topography, the enduring remoteness. As well as the obvious pleasures of enjoying a pint in Brown’s (an old pub turned boutique hotel), the so-called Birthday Walk (after a Thomas poem) up to Sir John’s Hill is a joy; from the top of the headland there are views over to Worms Head on the Gower and to the white silken beach of Cefn Sidan – places I passed on my coastal hike. For many, such a prospect would be a natural conclusion to a Carmarthenshire tour, but I preferred to wind up the trip on Pendine Sands. This seaside resort – all chalets, fish and chips and windbreaks – is understated, and underrated, in the way Tenby and Saundersfoot, a few miles to the west, are not. But the beach is a remarkable seven-miles long and, at high tide, gapingly wide strand. Used for numerous attempts to break the land speed record and for the Welsh TT in years gone by, it’s now a great empty beauty, too windy and exposed for delicate folk. After a bracing walk back into the cooling westerly, I find a cuppa at the top of the coast path walkway set into the cliffside. If Pembrokeshire is Little England, then perhaps Carmarthenshire is Little Wales: a patchwork of all the key elements, untainted by tourism. Let the smart SUVs roll on by; this is as good as anywhere. All the coastal sections can be undertaken without a car; trains and buses connect all points. Good buses connect Carmarthen with Llanarthne/Wrights Food Emporium. For the Black Mountain range and National Botanic Gardens of Wales, local taxis are your best bet Chris Moss is the author of Wales Coast Path: Tenby-Swansea (Aurum Press) • This article was amended on 23 November 2021 to remove a mention of the Cambrian period in relation to the Llandeilo area.I moved house at the end of March and applied to transfer our new electricity and gas accounts to our old supplier, Octopus. While the electricity switch was fine, moving the gas account has slowly become a nightmare. It has emerged that E.ON, the previous provider, has continued to provide the gas to our home, despite us paying Octopus. Our account has seemingly been assigned to the wrong property. I have had numerous communications with Octopus over the past few months but this remains unresolved, and E.ON is now threatening penalty payments alongside a visit from bailiffs in the coming days. I’m very frustrated, as we have been recommending the company to many others, as until now it has been great. HW, Finsbury Park, London Octopus Energy has very good customer scores and has been repeatedly named as a Which? recommended provider. However, it has taken a long time to resolve this case. The company blamed your “incredibly rare” problem on the fact that you had new smart meters installed when you arrived at the property. It seems that the gas meter that was removed was linked to a slightly different address on the national database. This meant that E.ON kept billing this (now removed) meter, rather than the new one. Happily, Octopus has “forced’ that old meter point to be switched over, and it has removed its details from the database. The company has said it will cover E.ON’s charges if it can’t get the company to drop them. That should be the end of the matter as far as you are concerned. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsWe welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.Thirteen camels amble their way across the dusty, drought-stricken landscape, accompanied by seven men in bright yellow T-shirts and three nurses. The camels are loaded with trunks full of medicines, bandages and family planning products. It’s a mobile health clinic on legs. When the camels arrive at their destination, men, women and children form a line as they wait for the handlers to unload the boxes and set up tables and tents. Among those waiting is Jacinta Peresia, who first encountered the health visitors six years ago after she nearly died giving birth to her 11th child, a daughter called Emali. No roads, no problem. Communities Health Africa Trust (Chat) delivers health care to hard-to-reach areas of Kenya Peresia’s husband had been hesitant to allow her any reproductive healthcare but the near-death experience prompted him to encourage her to speak to the nurses, and she was given contraception. “Growing up, I didn’t know it was an option to plan my family and have the number of children that I could comfortably look after. Poverty and my continued weak health have forced us to make this choice. Money went a long way in the past. Now we tell the girls not to get tricked into early marriage.” Jacinta Peresia brings back water from the river. She first encountered health visitors after she nearly died giving birth to her 11th child Peresia lives in Lekiji, a remote village set between the Ewaso and Nanyuki rivers in thorny scrubland in central Kenya, about 50 miles from the nearest town, Nanyuki. It is a place of natural beauty and a rich prehistoric heritage dating back millions of years, but the area’s natural resources are diminishing. It is not uncommon for people to come into contact with elephants as they compete for water and pasture. More and more people are looking for dwindling resources such as firewood, water and grazing for their animals. Lack of economic opportunities is putting more pressure on people and the fragile ecosystem. There is no secondary school, which means that most children end their formal education at primary school level and teenage marriage is common, particularly for girls. Access to healthcare is expensive and, in an emergency, villagers are forced to walk for hours to the nearest health facility. For women, the lack of facilities, combined with patriarchal attitudes, means they have had no control over their reproductive health. But Communities Health Africa Trust (Chat) organises mobile healthcare outreach to poorly served communities such as Lekiji. Chat identifies vulnerable communities with limited access to health facilities and significant family planning needs, and brings health provision and education to their door. Chat identifies communities with limited access to health facilities and brings healthcare to their door Lack of roads is no barrier to their work. If they cannot reach the communities by car, they switch to an older form of transport: camel. In the past three years Chat has reached more than 100,000 people with behaviour-changing messages that focus on family planning but include TB, HIV and Covid prevention services across 14 counties in Kenya. About 37,000 women have chosen longer-term family planning methods. Elizabeth Kibatis (left) with Susan Oyan and her youngest child, Rehema. Kibatis works with Chat and has been teaching friends about family planning, creating ‘a ripple effect’, she says Susan Oyan, 23, is a mother of three children under six. Her best friend is 19-year-old Elizabeth Kibatis. Kibatis is trusted in the community, especially among her peers. She meets friends to teach them about the options they have to plan their family. “In the beginning, people did not want to have conversations about family planning. I started with three friends, including Susan, and it created this ripple effect. The realities of life – not enough food, firewood, water and people [forced] to take menial jobs to make money – are making people think differently about the choices they can make for their families.” The main reason women do not explore family planning is generally because of men, she says. “If a husband finds out, they do bad things to the women. That’s why we try to get men involved, make them understand that reproductive health services benefit everyone, and improve their wives’ wellbeing. Rampant misinformation has not made it easy. They say that birth control makes you sick.” Access to healthcare is expensive in such remote areas and, in an emergency, villagers are forced to walk for hours to the nearest health facility Despite the misleading claims, Kibatis has become a role model for the other young women in Lekiji. She works with Chat providing information, dispelling myths around family planning and then convincing other women and girls of the benefits of having control over their own bodies and being able to afford to take care of their children. Everyone is included in these conversations so that men and boys can’t brush off family planning as “women’s business”. She has been taking birth control and is planning to have children in four years, after completing her catering studies in Nanyuki. She has clearly had an impact. When schools shut down due to Covid only one schoolgirl from Lekiji got pregnant, bucking a national trend: over a period of three months in lockdown, 150,000 teenage girls in Kenya became pregnant, a 40% increase in the country’s monthly average. Kibatis is among the women waiting patiently for a three-year birth control implant from the mobile clinic. At the centre of Chat’s approach is linking people’s health needs to nature, raising awareness of how poor natural resources can worsen health, and how poverty can have a negative impact on the environment. Everyone is included in conversations about family planning, so that men and boys can’t brush it off as ‘women’s business’ Peresia has noticed that people are sick more often than they used to be. Children are getting stomach problems, which she believes is from the muddy water they are forced to drink from hand-dug wells in dry riverbeds. Stress levels are high because there is no more pasture for the livestock. “The environment has been destroyed. We have fewer trees [because of the need for cooking fuel], minimal grass, and sometimes the river dries up. We often have to try to dig for water in the dry riverbeds, but the water is dirty. I now know why it’s getting worse. It’s because of climate change. During the day, it feels like the sun has come lower in the sky and is closer to us. The trees are starting to die. If trees disappear, what else is left?” Chat focuses on family planning but also educates people about TB, HIV and Covid prevention, across 14 counties Today, Peresia encourages her children to only have the family they can support. Her eldest son recently got married and his wife is about to have their first child. She says: “I tell all of my children, particularly the boys, ‘Two is enough!’” She thinks it’s not environmentally sustainable for the planet to have more than two children. She has learned to recognise the interconnection between people, their health and the natural resources on which they depend. “As the world changes, we need to change too,” Peresia says, and proudly shows off 11 trees she has planted to help with reforestation efforts in her community. Wanjiku Kinuthia is a conservationist with Maliasili. Ami Vitale is a photographer and film-maker. Jacinta with two of her children. She says she encourages her children to only have the family they can support Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Energy giant Woodside has sought to play down concerns about the company’s decision to push ahead on controversial plans to develop the Scarborough gas field in Western Australia. Woodside chief executive Meg O’Neill faced questions during an investor update on Tuesday about the company’s $16.2b bet to open up the 800 sq km gas field in north-west Western Australia – an area larger than Singapore – and expand its onshore production capacity. While the company has billed the project as “transformative”, O’Neill was challenged on whether it would live up to its hype. She was also asked about its environmental impact, which has been described as a “disaster”. But O’Neill rejected defended the company’s commitment to the environment, saying Woodside would cut its carbon emissions by 30% by 2030 through improving the efficiency of its processing plants. “Designing our emissions is always our first preference, and one of the three key pillars of our carbon strategy,” O’Neill said. “I want to emphasise the point that we can both develop Scarborough and achieve our emissions reductions targets.” O’Neill also said the gas extracted from Scarborough would serve as a transition for its customers in Asia who are increasingly moving away from coal. The International Energy Agency said in May that limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop this year. Woodside has already faced concerns about the cost of cleaning up and dismantling 180 existing gas wells on WA’s north-west shelf – an existing gas field that is now running thin. Mark Ogge, principal adviser at The Australia Institute, said the company was being selective about how it counted its emissions. “If you burn fossil fuel, it creates emissions,” Ogge said. “Scarborough gas is not a transition fuel, it is displacing renewables, not coal.” A report by the Conservation Council of Western Australia and the Australia Institute released in June found the project would release 1.6bn tonnes of greenhouse gases across its lifetime – or the equivalent of 15 coal-fired power plants. Under the company’s carbon abatement plan, Woodside will be allowed to increase its emissions over the next decade before attempting to reach net zero by 2050. O’Neill also rejected suggestions the Scarborough gas project was a risky investment. “We have great confidence in the quality of the project,” she said. “It starts at the resources, so we have great confidence in the quality of the resource. All of the technical work, the execution planning, the detailed design is well underway. “Now we have [a final investment decision] we have a clear message to the market that this is a de-risked project.” Woodside is also depending on the price of liquified natural gas remaining high until 2026, when the field is expected to enter production . That will be at a time when competitive projects will have come online as the world shifts away from its reliance on fossil fuels.That’s where we will leave the live blog for Tuesday. Here’s some of what made the news today: The government released the long-awaited and highly-contentious religious discrimination bill, with LGBTQ+ advocates warning it will lead to discrimination based on a statement of belief, and state discrimination cases ending up in federal court. Liberal party MPs and senators have called for the bill to be referred to a parliamentary committee after it is introduced into parliament. The Bureau of Meteorology has declared a La Niña event, meaning rain will blanket much of the east coast, northern and central parts of Australia over summer. Labor announced it would vote against the Coalition government’s voter ID bill. Victoria reported 19 Covid deaths and 827 new cases, while NSW reported two deaths and 173 cases. Affirmative consent laws passed NSW parliament. LNP MP Andrew Wallace was elevated to the speaker in the House of Representatives following the resignation of former speaker Tony Smith. A Liberal-led Senate inquiry into the complaints process at the ABC will be delayed until the next parliament after the Senate passed a motion putting the brakes on it. The United Australia party will give first preferences to the Liberal Democrats at the next federal election. Amy Remeikis will be back with you again in the morning for the third day of this first week of the last sitting fortnight. LNP senator Gerard Rennick was on ABC’s Afternoon Briefing earlier, and he told host Patricia Karvelas the government was providing him with constitutional lawyers this afternoon about what he sees as constitutional issues with vaccine mandates being issued by the states. He argues it could go against the constitution. The meeting was at 5pm, and he will say more about what his position is on voting on government legislation tomorrow. Just on the ABC inquiry vote, the office of One Nation leader Pauline Hanson says both her and fellow senator Malcolm Roberts were not abstaining from voting on it, but were paired. The pair are beaming in remotely into parliament, so they cannot vote, but they can use their pairing on votes to influence the final numbers. I’m told they paired to vote against the motion to delay the inquiry, but that is not currently reflected in the Dynamic Red of the Senate. We will let you know if we find out more. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has defended the government’s pandemic record, after emails suggested authorities ignored health advice despite promises to follow it. Emails released on Monday show Covid-19 restrictions were implemented weeks after they were recommended in some cases, and other measures were selectively applied to 12 LGA Covid-19 hotspots despite advice to be “consistent”. While admitting the government hadn’t always “got everything right”, Perrottet said it had struck the right balance between a variety of economic and health concerns. “Sometimes, particularly in a pandemic, governments are going to get it wrong. “We haven’t got everything right ... [but] we seek to get the balance right and I believe that we did,” he told reporters on Tuesday. He rejected accusations from Labor that the messages – between chief health officer Kerry Chant and health minister Brad Hazzard – showed the government defying health advice. “That email is not the health advice, it’s an email,” the premier said. But opposition leader Chris Minns said if the emails weren’t the real health advice, the government should prove it. “If they’ve got further information to release, we’re all ears.” “I suspect we’ll never see it.” Just to update you on a story I wrote last week regarding YouTube ads from the United Australia Party that were pulled by YouTube for allegedly violating advertising policy. Nine of the 12 videos that were pulled have been restored now. There are three that remain pulled. Google didn’t provide a response initially as to why they had been removed in the first place, but I understand it has to do with how the ads were set up. Google hasn’t provided any detailed explanation as to what changed, but I will let you know if that changes. Given social media advertising will be a key component of this election, hopefully Google will be a bit more transparent in the future about why things are left up or taken down. Jodi McKay leaves politics with “what-ifs” but no regrets, the former NSW Labor leader told the parliament as she gave her final speech as an MP. AAP reports there were tears and laughter in the Legislative Assembly as the member for Strathfield called time on her career, with almost 15 years in parliament and experience spanning nine portfolios under her belt. Her decision to leave parliament comes months after the 52-year-old relinquished her position as NSW Labor leader, after a damaging byelection loss in the Upper Hunter in May. In a tearful news conference at the time, McKay – the first democratically elected NSW Labor leader – said she felt forced to quit, claiming she was destabilised by some of her colleagues. Giving her valedictory speech on Tuesday, McKay took one final, thinly veiled shot at her successor Chris Minns. She noted her inaugural speech in 2007 had ended with a quote from French revolutionary Georges Danton, who was arrested, tried and executed by a handful of his fellow rebels. On Tuesday, she quoted him again. “As Danton also said, ‘I would rather be guillotined than the guillotiner’.” “I leave my office with a few what-ifs but certainly no regrets. “I leave with my head held high,” she said, crying. McKay thanked premier Dominic Perrottet for his kind words when she announced her resignation, acknowledged the leadership of former premier Gladys Berejiklian, and wished new deputy Labor leader Prue Car all the best. But she did not mention Minns, who reportedly hung up on her when she called to inform him of her decision. McKay is the fifth MP to quit in a month after Berejiklian resigned amid an Icac investigation on October 1. She on Tuesday admitted many believed the end of her career had come too soon, but said she was positive her time had come. “I’m confident in my decision, proud of my achievements, and ready and excited about the next chapter in my life, whatever that may be,” she said. A byelection for Strathfield will be held at a date to be announced. Here’s Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young’s statement on the Senate passing the Labor-Greens motion putting the brakes on a Senate inquiry into the ABC complaints process: This inquiry was a partisan attempt to use the Legislation Committee to undermine the independence of the public broadcaster. It was another tactic in a long line of attacks from the Liberals and Nationals who have spent eight years trying to crush the ABC. An independent review of the ABC’s complaints system is underway. A senate inquiry established outside of normal processes and running in parallel was inappropriate. It is nothing more than political interference by the Morrison government. The Greens will always defend the independence of our ABC. The ABC’s independence is integral to our democracy and politicians should not be dictating what it reports on. Ironically, the biggest trust deficit in the country right now lies with the Prime Minister. Australians trust the ABC, they know how important it has been during bushfires and the Covid pandemic, and partisan attacks only serve to undermine the PM’s credibility even further. The head of Equality Australia, Anna Brown is responding to the religious discrimination bill released today by the government. She says the statement of belief section will allow what is considered discrimination today to be legal if the bill passed. She also points out the legislation will lead to “a whole lot of complexity” if the federal legislation seeks to override anti-discrimination laws in the states, with cases brought before the state bodies ending up in the federal court. The wonderful Josh Taylor will take you through the evening – there is a bit more to come on religious discrimination and whatever else the parliament decides to dish up on this, the seventh last sitting day of the year. Tomorrow will be another doozy, so make sure you get a break! I will be spending my 12 or so hours off the blog staring into space continuing my non-stop existential crisis. A very big thank you to Mike Bowers for keeping me sane, as well as Murph, Sarah Martin, Daniel Hurst and Paul Karp for keeping the blog ticking over. As always though, thank you to you all for reading and following along with us today – it was a fairly busy day with a lot of dense information, so we truly appreciate it. Please, stay safe – and take care of you. The government will introduce its voter ID laws into the parliament sometime this week, possibly as early as tonight – but the laws will also be sent to a committee, which will delay its passage through the parliament. Labor has said if the legislation passes, it will repeal the laws if it wins government as one of its first acts. Labor and the Greens weren’t on the same page with all the motions today though – Labor did not support a Greens motion to disallow the carbon capture and development plan. Adam Bandt had thoughts: Yet again, Liberal and Labor are voting together to hand public money to big coal and gas corporations. Liberal and Labor have just gifted $15m to Santos, a major Liberal and Labor donor, and $5m to a company owned by Glencore, Australia’s largest coalminer. Tax-dodging billionaire corporations don’t need handouts. Carbon capture and storage is unicorn technology that only exists to funnel money to coal and gas corporations. The Glasgow climate summit is barely over and Labor is voting with the Liberals to use public money to make the climate crisis worse. In the last parliament we took over government business to deliver the medevac bill, but it seems today’s Labor won’t do the same to tackle the climate crisis. We’re in a climate emergency, and Labor shouldn’t back more coal and gas. Labor must join us and vote against funding the Beetaloo gas fields tomorrow.” Larissa Waters also had thoughts: In a tragic Groundhog Day, Labor have again voted with the Morrison government to keep the fossil fuel subsidies flowing, just weeks after the Glasgow climate summit. By voting against the Greens disallowance today, the major parties ticked off on giving another $50m of public money to coal and gas companies - this time to fund carbon capture and storage, a technology that remains totally unproven despite the billions that’s already been thrown at it. It’s a great return on investment for the millions of political donations the fossil fuel sector makes to both sides of politics – donations in, many more millions of public subsidies out. Once again fossil fuel donors run our parliament rather than climate science or the public interest.” Andrew Bragg, the Liberal senator who set up the inquiry into the ABC’s complaints process, has responded to the Senate vote which brought about the end of that inquiry – at least until the one already ordered by the ABC board is completed: Australia’s Senate Committees provide the best opportunity for meaningful direct engagement in our democracy. Australians can provide submissions, meet with elected officials, and present at public hearings. In short, Australians can have their say. This is the Senate performing its role as a house of review and a house of scrutiny. Restricting community access to the Senate Committees is a backward step for our democracy. Motions considered by the Senate to silence Australians are very troubling. It raises further questions. The ABC has already admitted the need for action with their own inquiry, which is not as strong as the Senate’s inquiry for three reasons. First, the ABC’s inquiry is not independent as the ABC’s investigators will report to the ABC. Second, Australians will be allowed to have their say at public hearings. Third, the submissions to the Senate carry parliamentary privilege. The ABC has spent $26m on legal fees in the past four years. I don’t want people to face legal and financial barriers which prevent them having a say. The parliamentary privilege attached to Senate submissions means people can say what they like without the threat of expensive and protracted legal action. It sets a terrible precedent for the Senate to close public access, especially where more than a dozen submissions have already been received as evidence. While I am disappointed with the result, I respect the Senate’s right to do so but reserve my right to undertake additional steps. The Inquiry has already received several sensitive but critical submissions. We must not close the door on these Australians. The Greens and Labor came together to put this motion through the senate: That the Senate directs the Environment and Communications Legislation Committee to suspend the inquiry into the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) and the Special Broadcasting Service complaints handling until the independent review of the ABC’s complaints system has been completed, in line with the request made to the Senate on the 14 November 2021 by the independent Chair of the ABC, Ms Ita Buttrose AC OBE. Which passed, 23-22. The two One Nation senators Pauline Hanson and Malcolm Roberts are not in parliament and could not vote for it but her office said they were paired on the vote. At a doorstop at Parliament House, Peter Dutton has defended his recent comments about the potential for Australia to join a military conflict over Taiwan. The defence minister said the situation in the Indo-Pacific was “very serious” and China was engaging in “completely unacceptable” activities across the region. “Australia needs to provide a deterrence against actions, including by the Communist Party, because the Communist Party has been very clear about their intent in relation to to Taiwan.” Dutton said he was not pre-committing Australia to war: “Now, I said, in response to all that, that if there was a situation where first condition, China went into Taiwan, second condition that the United States responded and was involved in an action, that in my judgement, it would be inconceivable under the alliance that Australia wouldn’t go to be standing by the side of the United States. Now, I don’t think there’s anything remarkable in that statement. But it wasn’t a pre-commitment – it wasn’t anything other than a statement of reality. And if the Labor party has a different position, I’d like to hear it. Because it seems today, that they do have different position.” Dutton reaffirmed what he said in question time: “that the acting ambassador [of China] is attacking Australian values and that Senator Wong wasn’t standing up for those values”. Asked on what basis he was making that claim, Dutton said: “Well, she should have been condemning those comments today.” Q: Is that a dog whistle? Are you are you engaging in a dog whistle here? “Senator Wong should have condemned the comments of the acting ambassador today. Instead, she didn’t. And I think that says a lot about Senator Wong, and it says a lot about her approach. And I think it – I can’t recall in my 20 years of parliament, an ambassador from any other country, carrying on the way that the Chinese ambassador has – the issuance of the 14 points that Australia needed to act on or to perform on before the relationship could be normalised; and the comments again today by the acting ambassador should be condemned by the Labor party and they weren’t.” Q: “Senator Wong doesn’t stand up for those values.” Is that a dog whistle? “No, no. I’ve just – I’ve answered that and I’ve given you the context of the quote, and what I said and what I said in relation to both the acting ambassador and her comments.” Dave Sharma is now on Afternoon Briefing where he is asked about Labor’s campaign of pointing out Scott Morrison’s truthiness: Q: It has been the big discussion point in question time. Labor asking questions of the prime minister to extract whether he is truthful, Labor trying to paint the prime minister is loose with the truth, a question for you, Dave Sharma, did the prime minister refer to Sam Dastyari as Shanghai Sam? Sharma: I don’t know, Patricia. Q: I can send you the tweet. Because you believe me, would make it up. Why doesn’t he just admitted, he just did it? Sharma: I don’t know the answer, you can put that to him, I didn’t hear what he said in response to that question. I will take issue with the overall thrust of the debate, I just think it’s childish, people expect more, it’s like going around in a schoolyard and saying you lied to me, grow up and let’s demonstrate the issues. There is a lot of “all politicians lie” commentary from both this place, and the wider public, which usually comes with a bit of a shrug. Water is wet. Days end in Y. Politicians lie. But it should matter if you don’t trust what your elected officials say. And the ethics norming which goes on, should also be addressed. Of course politicians are not always going to be truthful – but there is a difference between spinning something for political reasons, and then outright denying something you said, was something you said. And it should be called out, on all sides, every single time. Does Richard Marles think people care if the prime minister isn’t honest? I think people do care, people look to their national leader as a person of character. Right now the national leader is a man who lies ... I absolutely think that people care about that, and that is a point that we will continue to illuminate, and a point that we will continue to make. And it should be the case. That in public life, when you are doing interviews such as this, that you are consistent, and when you say something on one day, on camera, recorded, you can’t then down the track maintain that you never said it. Richard Marles is also asked about Labor’s question time campaign of bringing up all the times Scott Morrison has said one thing and meant another and says: The prime minister has an uncomfortable relationship with the truth, it’s a simple point, time and time again he says things which are not true, he lies and it’s become patently clear, and we are making that point, loud and clear, and these are not questions that are there to be debated, there are moments when he is on the public record when he will say one thing on Monday and literally pretend it never occurred, and simply deny it on the next, now this is our national leader, people who people look to for a sense of character and a sense of honesty, and moments of difficulty we look to him to lead us and it’s completely [legitimate] to raise the point this is a man who lies, constantly lies and cannot make clear his statements and is really happy to say one thing on one day and then further down the track, completely pretend as if he never said that at all, that’s the point we are making and will continue to make. Richard Marles is on Afternoon Briefing walking a few sides of the line on what Labor will do with the religious discrimination bill: We need to have a look at the number of these provisions to properly answer that, the point is, it is a pretty important piece of legislation that requires scrutiny from us but scrutiny in the broadest sense as well, I’m hoping this goes to some form of inquiry, Senate inquiry or parliamentary inquiry, in relation to the bill, that will give us an opportunity to have a look at this in more detail. ...What we want to make sure of here is that in providing for legislation which prevents discrimination on the basis of religion, there aren’t unintended consequences, that’s exactly the kind of issue we want to be very clear about and get the details exactly right on, so there is proper balance. There are other forms of discrimination we are keen to make sure do not come into being by virtue of an unintended consequence here, that’s the kind of issue we need to look at. From Mike’s lens to you. Given his party nominated him, it’s probably just news if the prime minister doesn’t think he’ll do a great job? Scott Morrison as seen by Mike Bowers: New speaker Andrew Wallace is taking the matter under consideration. Worth noting that Labor is doing this now that Tony Smith has a vote on the floor of the house. Tony Burke uses the interview former speaker Tony Smith gave to ABC radio Melbourne this morning, where he said that if he had the power to, as speaker, he would have directly referred Christian Porter to the privileges committee over his members of interest declaration, which only declared a “blind trust” had donated to his legal costs. Burke is telling the house that given this new information, the house should have another opportunity to consider the issue of referring Porter to the privileges committee. The last time this happened, after Smith, then as speaker, gave the matter precedence, the government went against long established tradition and did not support the referral. Instead, it asked the privileges committee to consider how MPs should declare crowd-sourcing donations. The privileges committee has decided to ask Porter to answer questions. Paul Karp covered it here: Anthony Albanese uses the time after question time to say he has been misrepresented by Peter Dutton: Today during question time the minister for defence [said I] did not support the Aukus arrangement with the UK and the US. This is not true. Australia has a long relationship with the United Kingdom which has enjoyed bipartisan support since Federation. And the alliance with the United States originated from John Curtin in 1942, when Australia turned to Labor in our our greatest need to defend our nation, and has been supported by Labor ever since. Scott Morrison finally ends question time. Incidentally, the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has spoken to south-east Asian counterparts and attempted to assure them “we can build a peaceful home together”. Xi did not specifically mention Aukus (even though state media and the Chinese foreign ministry have renewed their criticism of the arrangement in recent days). But in yesterday’s speech, Xi backed an initiative for south-east Asia to be a nuclear weapon-free zone (the Aukus plan is for nuclear-powered submarines, not nuclear-armed submarines): We need to pursue dialogue instead of confrontation, build partnerships instead of alliances, and make concerted efforts to address the various negative factors that might threaten or undermine peace. We need to practice true multilateralism and stick to the principle that international and regional affairs be handled through discussion among us all. China firmly opposes hegemonism and power politics. China pursues long-term, friendly coexistence with neighbouring countries, and is part of the common efforts for durable peace in the region. China will never seek hegemony, still less bully smaller countries. China supports Asean’s efforts to build a nuclear weapon-free zone, and is prepared to sign the Protocol to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone as early as possible.” China has competing claims with a number of south-east Asian nations over the South China Sea. Beijing has not recognised a 2016 Hague arbitration ruling that undermined the basis for China’s claims. The president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte, reportedly urged China to respect that ruling. Duterte also condemned an incident in which Chinese coastguard vessels blocked and used a water cannon on two Philippine supply boats heading to a disputed shoal occupied by Filipino marines in the South China Sea. Xi told Asean leaders: “Joint efforts are needed to safeguard stability in the South China Sea and make it a sea of peace, friendship and cooperation.” Question time is still going. We may all actually be in purgatory. Keith Pitt squibs a dixer by using something the Labor environmental action network would like Labor to adopt and calling it Labor policy. Which is like taking one of the many motions the LNP conference passes as a motion and saying that is LNP policy. But facts don’t seem to matter any more. If they ever did. Susan Templeman to Scott Morrison: Petrol prices have gone up by $900 for a typical family driving a standard car in a year while real wages have fallen $700. On top of this median rent in my electorate have increased by $3,000 a year, hasn’t it become harder and harder for working families to make ends meet under this decade-old government? Morrison: Our government has taken numerous initiatives to take the pressure off on cost of living and as the data reveals clearly, especially when it comes to petrol prices, in the last three years alone, what we have seen is a 1.2% increase on average a year, comparing to a 2.6 increase that occurred under Labor. Reference was made to housing cost, which I know is a great challenge especially for younger people and younger people wanting to buy their first home, since we came to government housing costs have increased according to the ABS on an average of 1.7% each year, and the last three years they have increased by 0.6%. That compares under Labor years to 5.1%. And I know the minister for housing will be able to tell you this, at the last election I said we would take action to help people get into their first home and under the policies we introduced since the last election, 320,000 Australians, we have helped into homeownership. That’s what we took to the election. Templeman: Relevance, my question was about rentals not purchasing. Wallace: The question is also about making it harder for families to make ends meet, the prime minister has the call. Morrison: You know who has been buying those houses? People who are renting. People who are renting and we have given them the opportunity through the first home loan to posit scheme and family homeownership scheme a scheme that is helping single mothers buy their first home. That is what our policies are doing. Giving Australians who have that aspiration to go and buy a home the opportunity to go and achieve that, and since we were elected three years ago, 320,000 Australians have been helped into homeownership. That’s what I call promise delivered. Commitment given, promise delivered and this government will continue to do that because under our sound economic management delivered by this government, it has seen Australia through one of the greatest economic challenges since the great depression, it has seen Australia coming through this pandemic and the economic recovery under way, Australians can have confidence in the future, they can plan for the future with confidence planned by the first time and get skilled and get a job. They can plan to open and run a small business, plan to invest in new equipment that sees them get an advantage and be able to sell the products at a better price and be able to grow their business they can do this in regional Australian manufacturing and recycling and the services Street and do this as we get the students back in December, that is a plan of securing our economic recovery, those opposite have no such plans and no such experience and no such credibility. We are at the point where question time may never actually end. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: My question is to the prime minister. Petrol prices have increased by $900 for a typical family driving a standard car over a year while real wages have fallen by $700. Can the prime minister confirm it has become harder for Australian families to make ends meet under his almost decade-old government? Morrison: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Headline inflation under our government has increased by 1.8%, over the time we have been in government, under the Labor party it was 2.7% [it was the GFC] electricity prices under our government, Mr Speaker, have risen on an annual average basis of 0.3%. ... Electricity prices under our government since we were elected have risen on average by 0.3% a year, under the Labor party they rose by 12.9%, Mr Speaker, and in most recent years over the last three years, electricity prices have fallen by 3.2% on average each year [thanks to renewables coming onto the grid]. Under the Labor party in the last three years they rose around 12.9% each and every year. On fuel prices, in the last three years, they have increased by 1.2% on average a year, under the Labor party, they increased by 2.6% each and every year and on average on our term of government they have increased by 9.4% and under the Labor party, 2.6%, what I know about petrol prices is this, the Labor party want to change the fuel emission standards, which is an increase in the petrol price for consumers. The Labor party has a sneaky petrol tax, a sneaky petrol tax [there is no petrol tax] where they want to jack up the price of petrol ... Albanese: To relevance it asked about petrol prices going up by $900 in the past it didn’t invite the Prime Minister to make up policies for those on this side of the house. Wallace asks Morrison to be relevant. Morrison: I’m talking about what the impacts on petrol prices might be. What they might be. What I can tell Australians is, our policies will not be changing fuel emissions standards that will put a sneaky tax on Australians. Our policies will not do that. Albanese tries to have a point of order. Morrison is able to continue. Morrison: I can understand why the leader of the opposition with his constant interjections is sensitive on the issue of sneaky taxes, I can understand why he is sensitive. Wallace tells him to be relevant. Morrison: Under our government and the economic policy settings we have put in place, under the excellent fuel security initiatives put in place by the minister for energy, the excellent policies to secure the refinery operations in Queensland, securing those down in Victoria as well, those policies we put in place to protect refinery jobs, protecting jobs and refineries and aluminium smelters and the resources industry and manufacturing. Anthony Albanese to Barnaby Joyce: These two payslips are from two train jobs in the Bowen Basin who do the same job. One is employed by Pacific National and one by a labour hire firm. The train driver employed by the labour hire firm is a casual but still earns about $300 less every week than his colleague. What action will the government take to stop this, which is hurting workers in regional Australia, and is one of the measures which is leading to the reduction in real wages across the economy? Joyce: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for his question, and yet again, it is very sneaky, but we should really address the question to the appropriate minister with carriage of this, and I invite [Paul Fletcher to answer the question]. Fletcher: I thank the deputy prime minister for referring to me as a minister representing the minister for industrial relations in the house. What are we going to do about employment in regional Australia? We are going to boost economic growth and we are going to make it easier for people to be employed, that is what we are going to do. Albanese: Yes, this was a specific question with a real world example about labour hire worker getting the same job as someone else at Pacific National ... ... My point of order is when the minister got the call ... the minister doesn’t get to ask himself a question and then answer it. That is what he did. Wallace: The leader of the opposition, it is not helpful for those on my right to be yelling in my ear. The minister will just resume his seat for a moment. As leader of opposition knows, if want to take a point of order, the leader of the opposition needs to state the point of order. Albanese: Is it in order for the minister, when he came to the dispatch ... Wallace: The leader of the opposition... The leader of the opposition will resume his seat. (He has to repeat this multiple times.) Peter Dutton: It is clear, the leader of the opposition makes a point of order on relevance even though he doesn’t want to say that. He refuses to state in that case what standing order he is referring to, in which case he is out of order, and hence should be ruled out of order because the minister has made a statement ... Wallace: Order. The leader of the opposition, it would assist the chair, when the leader of the opposition was to raise a point of order, that you state the point of order. Albanese: The point of order goes to the standing order provisions for questions without notice. For which standing order 99, in which case I asked a question, what occurred was ... The minister stood up and asked himself a question presenting to answer a question that he asked himself. It is not in order. Wallace: The minister is in order, the minister has the call. Order, order. The minister has the call. Fletcher continues to answer the question he wants, speaks about union membership, calls Labor policy a fallacy and decides he has finished his answer when Tony Burke stands up to challenge him. The new Speaker is not exactly covering himself in glory this question time. Lots of calm headmaster I-am-in-charge voice, not a lot of authority. Just in case facts are at all relevant in this place today, here are some more examples of Scott Morrison calling Sam Dastyari “Shanghai Sam” which he has since denied ever saying. From his own Twitter account: From an interview with Sydney radio 2GB in 2019 where he literally says, “of course I remember saying Shanghai Sam”. And his own Facebook page. Just circling back to the Senate to flesh out this incident of publishing a private telephone number – this was what Jacqui Lambie told the Senate just before question time. Jacqui Lambie: Mr President, this morning Senator [Malcolm] Roberts leaked my personal mobile phone number on his social media. Since then I’ve received any number of nasty, abusive and threatening phone calls and messages. I may have to change my phone number. I give my number to veterans whose mental health is not so good and most of the time they are on their last legs. Those veterans know they can call me anytime of the day or night if they need someone to listen to them. If you’ve got someone’s number it is not hard to find out personal details about them that are linked to it. I’m going to have to change my number because I need to make sure my family and friends are safe. Mr President it should go without saying it is completely unacceptable to leak other senators’ personal contact details to the public just because you don’t like what they are saying. Every single one of us, no matter how much we disagree with one another, no matter how much we go at each other on the floor, we should know that one thing: One Nation have crossed a line here that should never be crossed. You’ve got the AFP briefing politicians about our safety, we’ve got gallows on the steps of Victoria’s parliament, and senators in this very chamber should not be facilitating any abuse. Mr President I’d like to respectfully ask you look at this issue. One Nation have leaked my mobile number. I ask you to consider whether Senator Roberts should front up and apologise for his behaviour even though he’s had more than two hours to do it personally to me and I ask that you look at the safety of senators in this place more broadly – because I think we have some problems here. Thank you. The Senate president Slade Brockman said he would take that under advisement. Malcolm Roberts attempted to respond. Leave was not granted. Labor’s Senate leader Penny Wong was given leave, and said it was important to contain conflict. She said if protagonists didn’t understand limits, safety was put at risk. Addressing herself to Roberts and the government, Wong said: “If you start a fire it can quickly overwhelm us.” Wong said Roberts needed to apologise. The government Senate leader Simon Birmingham was then given leave. He said publishing Lambie’s number was unacceptable. He emphasised the importance of civility in the debate. Debate the issues, not the person, Birmingham said. He said he would facilitate an apology by Roberts. Roberts then sought to make a statement “correcting the record”. Leave was granted. There was no apology. Roberts said “we don’t condone” publishing private numbers. He said the number had been published by a One Nation Senate candidate, not by him. Roberts said the candidate was given Lambie’s number by a Tasmanian voter who got the number from Lambie’s Facebook post, “with an invitation to contact her”. Roberts said at the last election, Lambie posted her bank account details on Facebook “with an invitation to send money”. Roberts said the phone number had been taken down but a text message remained on One Nation’s social media that specified that Lambie opposed vaccine mandates (which is a message Roberts said she sent a Tasmanian voter). For context, Lambie defended mandates in a debate yesterday about Pauline Hanson’s private members bill. Roberts said Lambie was “playing victim” because One Nation was making inroads into Tasmania. He says Lambie had published her own number. Anthony Albanese to Barnaby Joyce: Does the Minister believe that two workers in regional Australia who do exactly the same job should get the same wage? Peter Dutton (who gives Joyce the answer about what to do): That was the question in relation to industrial relations matters that should have been directed to the appropriate minister. It wasn’t a question about a specific award within the regional area, it was in relation to an award which would apply economy wide, worker wide across the economy. It was a cute way of dressing up that element, but that is really what the question went to, and it hasn’t been appropriately directed to the deputy prime minister. Tony Burke: What the leader of the house is saying is when there is a trade deal, only the minister representing the minister for will be allowed to answer the question. Where there is something resulting from international agreement, only the minister representing the minister for foreign affairs will be allowed to make a response. And all the answers that we have previously had of the relevance to a trade agreement from the minister for education, from the minister for agriculture and water, all the other people who come with a stakeholder interest, even though they don’t have policy courage, if that is all going to be ruled out, that is of the leader of the houses asking for, I recommend a wiser course is to allow the question to stand. Wallace lets the question stand. Joyce refers it to Paul Fletcher. Fletcher treats it as a university debate on unions. Defence minister Peter Dutton does his now-infamous “how safe are you” dixer, and comes very, very close to accusing Penny Wong of not standing up for Australian values: At the time of the Aukus announcement 68 days ago the Labor party rushed out and couldn’t have been any stronger in [their] support, at least at that time for the AUKUS announcement, it has taken 63 days and we have seen Senator Wong set out with a speech which could have been written by Paul Keating, and Mr Speaker the reality is, Labor has always been weak on national security and border protection. If you want to look at what they would do in government look at what they did in opposition. [This leader of the opposition] was the architect, along with Kevin Rudd, of the unsuccessful vote policy that resulted in people dying and resulted in children going into detention. When it comes to the defence of our country, I can assure this weak leader of the opposition, you don’t deter an adversarial and you don’t maintain peace in our region from a position of weakness. That is what he is advocating. The Australian public know him very well. They know him to be weak on national security. I noticed the acting Chinese ambassador has been attacking Australian values and Senator Wong doesn’t stand up for those values, instead, she folds in a fit of weakness. This leader of opposition is leaving no Australian uncertain as to what their view is, he is weak when it comes to national security. Richard Marles to Scott Morrison: The prime minister said, reports he had tried to invite Brian Houston to the White House were gossip, why did the prime minister say that when a just wasn’t true? Morrison: I corrected [that] on the record as those opposite our already aware. Here is just one example of where Scott Morrison used the phrase “Shanghai Sam” (which he has since denied using), which is on video. Scott Morrison has decided to just go straight into attack on every single question today, as he attempts to take back control of the parliamentary sitting. Stephen Jones to Morrison: The prime minister claimed he never used the phrase “Shanghai Sam” in reference to former Senator Sam Dastyari. Given that he used that phrase 17 times on 11 occasions why did he claim he had never used the term when that simply wasn’t true? Morrison: I’m not aware of the claim you are referring to and I won’t take it at face value. ... I’m not aware of the claim the members making. I’m not about to accept claims at face value from those opposite. I’m not about to accept that from those opposite. The Labor party thinks sledging, whining and whinging is a policy. That’s not how you actually run a government they have no alternative plans, no alternative policies they come here every day and they engage in personal attack, that’s OK, bring it on, you want to engage in personal sledging, where I go for holidays, and if I go home and spend father’s day with my family. (Morrison doesn’t mention that it was his office which misled journalists about his holiday to Hawaii, which he took when the nation was on fire. Or that he spent father’s day with his family while ACT and NSW were in lockdown. Or that a social media post made it seem like he was separated from his family on that day.) Andrew Wallace jumps in because of all the shouting: The prime minister will resume his seat. (SHOUTING). Just one moment. Just one moment. Order. If I can’t hear the prime minister I can’t rule on points of order. The manager of opposition business. Tony Burke: On direct relevance there is no way this is relevant to any of the 17 time to use the term he is being asked about. Wallace: I would ask the prime minister to be relevant to the question. Morrison: On the former senator Sam Dastyari, the Labor senator, I remember those issues very well because it was the former Labor senator Sam Dastyari who stood up ... I was just ... I was correcting the member for Wells. It was the former Labor senator who disgraced himself by undermining, Australia [defence] in relation to a foreign country. That’s what the former senator Sam Dastyari did and he had to leave this place in disgrace. He had to leave this place in disgrace as we have seen so many other Labor members whether at state level or former Labor members in this place, in jail* enough people in Silverwater prison to start a branch of the Labor party there. That’s what’s going on with the Labor party and you can’t trust Labor with money because they are always after yours. *Morrison also doesn’t mention that it was Icac which led to the Obeid conviction – the same Icac Morrison doesn’t want federally, or supports when it comes to Gladys Berejiklian investigation Most of the Coalition partyroom meeting was devoted to consideration of the religious discrimination bill, with the attorney general Michaelia Cash briefing MPs on the changes made to the second exposure draft. Morrison told MPs that the bill was an election commitment, and emphasised it was “a religious discrimination bill not a religious freedoms bill”. “That is important in relation to it being a shield not a sword and to allow the freedoms of people to follow their faith,” he said. Morrison confirmed that the “sensible and reasonable” bill would be introduced into the House of Representatives this week, but debated on and voted on next week, with the intention of sending it to a Senate committee for consideration. As Paul Karp has already reported, there were 17 MPs or senators who commented on the bill, with moderates speaking about their concerns. There was support for sending the bill to a committee, but MP Trent Zimmerman said he would have preferred a joint committee to allow lower house MPs input into the bill and any possible revisions. One MP expressed concern that the bill may not pass before the election, saying “we need to get it to a vote”, not just introduce it. The prime minister has spoken to MPs about the importance of unity in the joint Coalition partyroom meeting. The remarks were seen as a reprimand of Liberal senators Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic who are refusing to support government legislation until a range of demands are met regarding Covid-19 vaccine mandates and adverse events. Morrison told MPs that they had a choice about how the final sitting week could impact the government’s standing.” Discipline and unity wins elections and if we surrender that we will surrender government,” Morrison told MPs. “I can assure you that we can win this election, I know the path from here to there and it comes from discipline, effort and focus, that all colleagues know well. “I know the path there, we can do it again, I need all of you to come there with me, I am leaving nothing on the field between now and the next election.” Morrison asked MPs and senators to consider their “choices” over the next two weeks”. “Are we going to leave here at the end of these two weeks stronger and in a stronger position, supporting those who put us here ... or are we going to leave here having given our political opponents in the Labor party great courage?” The deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce also spoke to MPs about the importance of getting ready to fight the election, saying it was “business time in politics” and the opposition leader Anthony Albanese was getting ready to “get rid of you”. “It’s his discipline versus our discipline, it’s his army against our army.” In response to the pep talk on unity, one MP said that “team work is a two-way street” and asked the leadership group to ensure they “are engaging with the backbench”. Another MP spoke out against vaccine mandates, calling them “unAustralian”. Labor’s caucus has formally confirmed the party will oppose the Morrison government’s controversial voter ID law (while supporting two other pieces of electoral law reforms). One person at the Labor caucus meeting noted remote polling was only brief. Another said migrants who anglicised their names on coming to Australia often had a different name on their ID from the electoral roll. The shadow special minister of state, Don Farrell, told the Labor caucus: “The whole point of this is to suppress the vote in First Nations communities and in particular in Lingiari [a seat in the Northern Territory] – the government knows exactly what it is doing.” Scott Morrison found that answer hilarious – he was laughing it up with his frontbench. Barnaby Joyce turns a question about a supporter being given a job as the next chair of Infrastructure Australia, into class warfare. The speaker allows him to do it. Catherine King: Can the deputy prime minister confirm that the first chair of Infrastructure Australia was Rod Eddington who led Cathay Pacific, British Airways and was director of JP Morgan and News Corp. Can he also confirmed the government has decided but not yet announced that the new chair of Infrastructure Australia will be the retiring Mayor of Tamworth, Col Murray, who has described himself as a fairly solid supporter to the deputy prime minister? Joyce: Mr Speaker, I am sorry that hypocrisy isn’t what is wrong with the mayor, the former mayor of Tamworth. Does he not have quite enough letters after his name to be considered worthy by the Labor party? A person who has been in the construction industry for 25 years, he is one of the leading mayors of New South Wales, he is underpinned the growth of one of our great regional cities. But of course what we see in the Labor party ... Once we have someone from a regional area, the Labor party doesn’t like that. They are not quite good enough, and this goes to show in ground form how the Labor party does not believe in regional Australia. They want representation from regional Australia at a prominent level. The member for Ballarat of all people ... to slam a regional person I am sorry, what would you have said about Chifley? That his train wasn’t big enough? What is it? What has happened to the Labor party? They are now the people that stand behind, and unless you are endowed with more letters after your name than an alphabet, they say you are not good enough. The academic snobs now reside on the other side. Well, Mr Speaker, once we had a problem about them just being sneaky, now they are sneaky snobs. This is what we are getting! It is the New World order. So we can say to people of regional Australia that if you get yourself a Labor government, they do not believe in regional people. They don’t believe in coalminers and people who have made an honest day’s work standing in a private business, building it up and going to community services as a senior mayor of a senior regional Australia. It is not good enough for the Labor party. Oh, no. You have to live in Grayndler if you want a job in this joint! You have to come from Grayndler. How am are going? All right? Anthony Albanese: He gave himself up, Mr speaker, that he wasn’t being relevant. It is not being relevant to the question. This is about the qualifications for a serious job. The chair of Infrastructure Australia. From a government that promised ... Andrew Wallace: The leader of the opposition will resume his seat. The leader of the opposition will resume his seat. The deputy prime minister is being relevant. The deputy prime minister. Joyce: We go back to the conceit of these people on the other side who want sandstone sandy is the only person who could possibly lead infrastructure Australia. Because the Labor Party believes in that person earn an honest job, and an honest job you have already had one point of order, you can’t have two. Albanese tries again, Wallace lets Joyce continue with his irrelevant class warfare. Joyce: I would like to say we will stand behind honest people, you look after the sneaky snobs. And then he is out of time. Heading back to the chamber for the second part of that answer Scott Morrison was giving to Anthony Albanese’s question on payments for childhood vaccines (no jab, no play). Morrison: The policies we put in place have ensured we have had not only record levels of child immunisation but the policies we pursued during the pandemic was not to pay people cash prizes ... the Labor Leader wishes to give them [a bribe], he is very precious today ... Albanese: The prime minister just made a very specific allegation which was unparliamentary, unparliamentary, against a member of parliament, if he wants to accuse people ... He needs to withdraw, he needs to withdraw he cannot be allowed to stand, if that is allowed to stand it will be a free for all. Wallace: The leader of the opposition will resume his seat. That shouldn’t come as any great surprise. That the level of interjections was so great that I didn’t hear what the prime minister said. Did the prime minister make and an unparliamentary comment? Well, I’m not in the position, I am simply ... The leader of the opposition will resume his seat. If the level of interjections is so high, that I simply could not hear what the prime minister is saying, well, then, shouldn’t come as any great surprise I can’t rule on that, the prime minister has indicated, the manager of opposition will resume his seat for a moment. The prime minister has the call. ... Are you making that a point of order? Burke: What you dealt with then, you asked the prime minister whether or not he believed he had said something unparliamentary, so that you know what was said it was an accusation using a term that is a criminal offence. If you are going to allow that to stand that is a very significant shift. The use of the word [bribe] if you are now going to shift that ruling, if you are going to make that as a formal ruling do it upfront ... Wallace: The manager of opposition business, as I indicated just a moment ago I didn’t hear what the prime minister had said. If the prime minister uses an allegation incorrectly. Morrison: I make no such accusation against any individual member. I was talking about his ... Wallace: The prime minister will resume his seat. Order. Order stop the level of interjections is too high. I can’t hear what’s being said. Morrison: This leader of the opposition wanted to pay people to get vaccinations. He wanted to pay people cash. Wallace: The prime minister will resume his seat, for one moment. I just want to make very clear, that if members for this house are wanting me to be able to rule on issues I need to be able to hear them. So the level of interjections are far too high, and I would appreciate if those honourable members would conduct themselves appropriately. The prime minister has the call. Morrison: That is the Labor policy to have paid people who already had vaccinations, I can understand why the leader of the opposition is so embarrassed about this policy, it was a fiscally reckless policy and why he can’t be trusted with the finances of the nation. Wallace: The prime minister will resume his seat. The leader of the opposition will resume his seat, the question didn’t refer to Labor party policies, prime minister, I would ask you to be relevant to the question. Morrison: The question was about Labor party policies it would be a very short answer, because there aren’t many out there, there is only one thing worse, then Australians not knowing, not knowing what the Labor party do and that is not knowing what Labor would do because they are trying to sneak their way into government, this is a very sneaky leader. Over in the senate, Jacqui Lambie has made an announcement. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: Why did the prime minister in his last answer say, he didn’t pay parents to vaccinate their children when that is exactly what this government did? Morrison: Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker, the entitlement, the entitlement, which is provided to Australians, that the member refers to, was not being made to those who weren’t getting their children vaccinated to attend childcare, that is the policy, that is the withdrawing of a payment, not the paying of it. The leader of the opposition seems confused. I know what the leader of the opposition’s policy was, over the last months he wanted to pay people with a cash prize to get vaccinated. That was the leader of opposition’s policy. Albanese: On relevance, this went to the prime minister’s no jab, no pay policy, and the fact that he once again, before the chamber, misled the parliament and saying he didn’t pay people. That policy was called no jab, no pay because you were paying people! (I am pretty sure it was actually called “no jab, no play”.) Peter Dutton: There are many occasions when the leader of the opposition comes to this dispatch box under the guise of making a point of order, that doesn’t happen, he makes a political statement and he should be ruled out of order. Andrew Wallace: The leader of the house will resume his seat. The leader of the opposition will resume his seat. The prime minister is in order and being relevant. Morrison: The leader of the opposition wanted to be the $6m man on paying people the vaccines they already had, this was his policy, economic recklessness, Mr Speaker! Wallace: The manager of opposition business would know there is one point of order, on relevance, what is the point of order? Tony Burke: On the order of the house, Mr Speaker. Wallace: The manager of opposition business will resume his seat. The manager of opposition business, there is one opportunity to raise a point of order on relevance. What’s the point of order? Burke: With respect to the ruling you made you ruled the prime minister was in order, on the basis he was being relevant to the question, that’s what you ruled, and to that ruling I’m saying how can it be when a question has nothing to do with Labor policy, you are now going to allow an incident like this! How does that happen? Wallace: The manager of opposition business will resume his seat. The prime minister has the call and the prime minister is relevant. We are three questions in. The dixers are back to being about the economy. Which is where the government wants to fight the next election. So yet another re-set occurring here The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, warmed up for question time when he addressed the Labor caucus this morning. Albanese said Scott Morrison’s government had “given up on governing”. He said the prime minister was “trying to walk both sides of the street on vaccines”. He said everyone wanted their lives to go back to normal, but the key to that was vaccines. Referring to yesterday’s Hawaii text message blowup (and the Macron fracas), Albanese said: “Call me old-fashioned, but if someone in this room or in the other room sends me a text message it doesn’t leak.” Albanese said his mother used to say “you can lock your door for a thief, but you can’t for a liar”. Road testing a potential pitch to voters to change the government but not expect radical change, Albanese also told his colleagues (when referring to the economy): “We represent safe change – change that will take the community with us.” Albanese cited policies such as NBN, urban rivers program, funding certainty for ABC, feasibility study for SBS to move from North Shore to Western Sydney, more resilient economy by acting on climate change, secure jobs for better wages. He acknowledged the discipline of the Labor caucus, saying the Coalition couldn’t guarantee how anyone would vote. “No wonder people have trouble working out what to vote for given he [Morrison] says something different every day.” Linda Burney to Scott Morrison: Why does the prime minister pretend he is opposed to vaccine mandates when he imposed some of the strongest vaccine mandates in the country on children? Morrison: As I set out very clearly in the House yesterday, as prime minister I took the proposal for mandatory vaccines for aged care workers to the premiers and chief ministers in June, and it was not until mid- to late-August, until those mandates were put in place by those state and territory administrations around the country. The government policy on vaccines in relation to mandates has not been a binary one; it has been a carefully considered one based on the best possible medical advice, on the advice of the chief medical officer, in fact – and indeed, the unified position that was taken on mandates, by the AHPCC, the medical expert panel which has guided us all the way through this pandemic, has only had unanimous positions on mandated vaccines, in relation to health workers, aged workers and disability workers. Mr Speaker, that is the policy of the Commonwealth government. Now indeed, other states and territories around the country have gone further – on the basis, I assume, of advice received by their own chief health officers. But I stress, the position the Commonwealth has taken on mandatory vaccines has been based on the advice of the chief medical officer and was based on the advice of the expert medical panel, which comprises all chief health officers of the states and territories and the chief medical officer. For those opposite to falsely suggest that the government somehow is in truck with anti-vaccine is false because … it is the policy of our government that we supported those mandates. And in very specific circumstances, people who are working with very vulnerable people, it has also been our policy to allow the law of this land and our courts to enable businesses, where they wish to exercise their rights, to exercise judgements about their own staff and those who consume their services. That is their right, Mr Speaker. We believe those decisions should be taken by those industries and that is the position we have adopted as a government. In relation to the No Jab, No Play, it is true, we removed an entitlement to a benefit for those who did not have their children vaccinated, who are going into childcare facilities, and we have one of the highest rates of child immunisation in the world. That is a good policy, we didn’t pay them to do it, we didn’t offer them cash*, because we understood that people who are receiving a benefit from the government, if people are receiving a benefit from the government, it is only reasonable to expect, that individuals … (he runs out of time) *No, the government didn’t offer cash – it took cash away. Ahead of question time, Linda Burney gave a 90-second speech on Clive Toomey, who passed away after contracting Covid in October. The pandemic is still changing worlds, all around us. I rise today to speak about Clive Raymond Toomey and his family. Clive passed away on 26 September due to Covid. He was only 43, and his funeral was in Dubbo on 29 October. He was the dearly loved husband of Anna, a much-loved father of Clive, Monique, Jasmin and Lachlan – and a grandfather. I visited and spoke with the family last Monday. They were kind and gracious, and gave me the mask with Clive’s initials on it, which I am wearing here in the Parliament today and all this week. Clive’s family had to fight to be able to see their husband and father in hospital for a last time, and to say goodbye after he passed. This Government promised Indigenous people would be vaccinated first, but that did not happen. Clive was unvaccinated, but not by choice. The vaccines his community were to have were diverted away. Clive’s family are strong. They took every step they could to get vaccinated. This Government let Clive and his family down, just as they’ve let down communities around this country. Goodbye, Clive, a highly respected man in the western part of New South Wales. The first question time with Andrew Wallace in the speaker’s chair is about to begin For those who missed Penny Wong’s speech, you can catch up here with Daniel Hurst: And our video team have put together part of the speech as well: At the Labor caucus meeting this morning, one member of the opposition asked whether anyone knew what was going on in the Coalition party room on the religious discrimination bill. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, responded: When we receive a bill, we will deal with it in the normal way. I support religious freedom. People need to be able to practise their faith. It’s extraordinary that there has been no attempt from the government to work with us on this issue. We’re told there was no further debate on the issue (given Labor had not yet seen the bill). Mike Bowers has been very busy this morning. Here is some of what he has seen: (The mask mandate seems to be working well) While Scott Morrison was speaking about the need for unity and discipline in the joint party room meeting, Daniel Hurst tells me Anthony Albanese was telling his colleagues it is all about the mood for change: We represent safe change – change that will take the community with us,” Albanese told Labor caucus. The religious discrimination bill is now out and about in the wider world – we will bring you the detail on that very soon. But it looks like it will go to a Senate committee, which means no vote on it in this term of parliament. What about the federal integrity bill you ask? Good question! That also looks like it won’t make it for debate before the parliament finishes sitting next Thursday, which kicks it into next year. We’ve got a bit more detail about the religious discrimination debate in the Coalition party room. In favour of the bill were: Matt Canavan, Ben Small, Julian Leeser, Melissa McIntosh, Lucy Wicks and Nicole Flint. Raising concerns were: Fiona Martin, Bridget Archer, Warren Entsch, Dave Sharma, Andrew Bragg and Trent Zimmerman. There were also two more neutral contributions from the Liberal senator Hollie Hughes, who asked about the bill’s impact on people with a disability, and LNP MP Angie Bell, who said it needs to go to a committee. It seems despite Zimmerman’s request for a joint select committee, Scott Morrison indicated it would go to a Senate committee in the normal way. Think you can chalk this one up to another for the too hard right now basket: Western Australia police have released this statement: Detectives from the State Security Investigation Group have charged two men in relation to an incident that occurred on Saturday 20 November 2021. It is alleged about 10.50pm, the two men phoned the Premier and left a number of threatening messages. A 20-year-old man from Canning Vale and an 18-year-old man from Harrisdale have both been charged with one count each of Acts Creating False Apprehension as to the Existence of Threats or Danger. They received bail and are subject to strict protective bail conditions. Both men are due to appear in Armadale magistrates court on Friday 17 December 2021. As Guardian Australia reported this morning, the Bureau of Meteorology has just formally declared a La Niña event. As the bureau put it: “Key atmospheric and oceanic indicators of the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) show an established La Niña. Tropical Pacific sea surface temperatures (SSTs) are close to La Niña thresholds, with models indicating further cooling is likely. “The current model outlooks suggest this La Niña will persist until the late southern hemisphere summer or early autumn 2022,” the bureau added, which is longer than previous forecasts which put the La Niña running only “at least until January”. “All models surveyed by the Bureau indicate SSTs will meet NINO3.4 La Niña thresholds in December and January with a majority also predicting thresholds will be met in February 2022,” it added. Translating that into English. The main global met agencies focus on a part of the equatorial Pacific – NINO3.4 – which scientists have determined is the main area to watch for emerging sea-surface temperature anomalies. When they depart from long-run averages for an extended period, they typically translate to important changes in atmospheric conditions. During La Niña years, the typically blowing east-to-west winds strengthen and result in more rain systems developing in the western Pacific and beyond. (El Niños go the other way with the winds stalling or reversing.) Anyway, a lot more of this to come. A La Niña declaration just means certain thresholds have been crossed, not that the weather suddenly switches. All that rain falling over eastern Australia in recent weeks points to a pattern that has been building for a while. Earlier, we reported from the Coalition party room that the religious discrimination bill will be introduced next week. It now seems that Scott Morrison will introduce the bill this week (on Wednesday or Thursday) but there will be no vote before next week. Then, we expect it’s off to a Senate committee. So the government has met the timetable the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, insisted on – that it be introduced this fortnight – but expect delay and debate about its provisions. For those wondering why the Senate didn’t allow Rex Patrick’s push to suspend standing orders and introduce a national integrity commission – the answer is that the Liberal senators Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic were paired. That means Labor and the crossbench would have had the votes to suspend standing orders, except Rennick and Antic were paired with Labor senators, reducing the tally for those in favour of suspension. So, despite all the huffing and puffing about withholding their vote for government legislation, when they had a major chance to embarrass the government, they passed it up. Now, technically, they haven’t breached their commitment, because this was a procedural vote not a vote on government legislation. Senate chaos narrowly averted. The Bureau of Meteorology has declared a La Niña event. Read Peter Hannam’s story here: Liberal MPs and senators have raised concerns about the government’s religious discrimination bill in the Coalition party room. Speakers included the Leichhardt MP Warren Entsch, North Sydney MP Trent Zimmerman and Bass MP Bridget Archer, who raised concerns about the provisions on statements of belief; senator Andrew Bragg, who expressed concerns about gay teachers; and Wentworth MP Dave Sharma who expressed concerns about gay kids. Up to a dozen MPs and senators spoke in support of the bill – despite the fact Coalition backbenchers haven’t seen it yet, they expressed thanks to the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, for her process of consultation to improve the bill. The bill will be introduced in the lower house and go to a committee – but it’s still unclear what sort of committee. Normally the Senate legal and constitutional affairs committee would deal with it, but Zimmerman asked for a joint select committee, a process which helped get bipartisan support for a marriage equality bill. We’re still unclear on the exact timing of introduction – but Scott Morrison said it would be soon. The party room briefings are coming up. Andrew Wallace will be sworn in as Speaker by the governor general. And then we go into question time. The Senate just voted on Rex Patrick’s bid to suspend standing orders to introduce the national integrity commission bill. It was 25-all, and tied votes fail. So the insurrection in the Senate was narrowly defeated by the government. Rex Patrick’s motion to suspend standing orders to debate the integrity commission bill failed on the numbers – Paul Karp will have more for you in just a moment. And here is Jacqui Lambie yells in the Senate, part two: Heading to the NSW parliament for a moment: The independent senator Jacqui Lambie has lashed out at the Coalition for more than three years of delay on introducing a national integrity commission. In the Senate, Lambie said voters would be angry at the next election about the government’s “promises you fail to deliver”. Lambie said Australia has put up with the Liberals in government for eight years and Scott Morrison is the worst prime minister “on record”, calling him “incompetent” and “not a leader”. Lambie added she is “enjoying watching him and you fall apart”. Lambie also warned the Liberal MPs in Tasmania Bridget Archer and Gavin Pearce she will help boot them from parliament. She said: I look forward to running candidates there and directing preferences where they deserve to go – not to political liars. Make sure your people in Bass and Braddon enjoy their last few months. Scott Morrison congratulates him – we’ll get speeches welcoming him from all sides and then the House will adjourn until 1.30pm. The ballot is in. Andrew Wallace: 70 votes Rob Mitchell: 59 Now Wallace is doing that thing where MPs pretend to drag him to the chair (even though they accept the nomination). It’s pantomime but the House seems to like it. Jacqui Lambie says a baby born on the day the government promised a federal integrity commission is walking, talking and getting ready for kindy, being almost three, and has ACCOMPLISHED MORE IN ITS SHORT LIFE THAN THE GOVERNMENT. That is paraphrased, but there is more Lambie yelling in the Senate today. So floods, not fire this summer is the risk. Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology will shortly announce if a La Niña event is under way in the Pacific, underscoring the prospect of a relatively cool, damp and stormy summer for much of the north and east. The declaration will come a day after the bureau confirmed the season’s first tropical cyclone had formed in the Australian region. Cyclone Paddy developed near Christmas Island and reached category-one stretch on Monday but will weaken within days without making landfall. A declaration of a La Niña is widely expected by the bureau at its fortnightly update of the main climate drivers for Australia’s weather on Tuesday afternoon. It has had a La Niña alert in place for weeks, and most of the models the bureau uses have been tipping such an event will last until at least January 2022. Some in the House are watching the Senate: One more update from Penny Wong’s foreign policy speech to the Australian National University: The Australian government and the Labor party have both raised concerns in recent times about an increase in Chinese military pressure against Taiwan, a democratically governed island of 24 million people, amid Beijing’s long-term goal of “unification” with what it considers its territory. Wong has taken aim at the defence minister, Peter Dutton, for telling the Australian newspaper earlier this month: “It would be inconceivable that we wouldn’t support the US in an action if the US chose to take that action.” Wong characterised this as out of step with US policy of strategic ambiguity and blamed domestic political considerations. “Amping up the prospect of war against a superpower is the most dangerous election tactic in Australian history,” she said in her prepared remarks. In the question and answer session, the head of the ANU’s national security college, Prof Rory Medcalf, asks: “If the government is essentially expressing support for a democracy of our size in our region against that kind of intimidation, what’s wrong with that and what would Labor do differently?” Wong replies that the issue of Taiwan is a “finely balanced and complex” issue, adding: “You are correct to assess that the threat of conflict is rising. I think the question is what is it that Australia can do most to preserve the status quo.” Wong says successive US administrations and Australian governments have sought to take positions to preserve the status quo and avoid conflict. “My point is our job really is to ensure we create the disincentive collectively for conflict and continue to create as many incentives as possible for peace. I accept this is historically and now an issue where governments have recognised the downside of the sort of binary way Mr Dutton is construing it. I’m making a point that I do not believe, particularly given the US position, that that is the way in which we are most likely to create that incentive for the status quo.” A member of the audience asks about China’s economic coercion against Australia over the past 18 months and whether Labor would do anything different about those trade actions. Wong says it’s an area where there is “clear bipartisanship” between Labor and the Coalition. She says she has described China’s behaviour across a range of contexts as “not being the behaviour of a responsible global power”. She repeats the Australian government’s position that China’s behaviour in the trade area are inconsistent with its commitments under the China-Australia FTA and the World Trade Organization. “It is an example of where we are in the China relationship. China has changed, the nature of the relationship has changed, and there will be enduring differences that need to be managed and dealt by whoever is in government and that will not change. I think of it as these are the structural aspects of the relationship. However, we know that we have to continue to engage. The question for governments over the coming years is how to do that and how do we do that in a way that recognises and manages these differences that are going to endure.” The parliament is about to get its next ‘wowser in chief’ as a Speaker. Tim Watts has found the history of how it’s previously gone down. This debate is still going on – it will depend on who supports it on the crossbench. Ged Kearney is seconding Rob Mitchell’s nomination as Speaker, she talks of his experience (he is also known for how many times he has been booted out under 94A) and then adds that he loves his family, his cars and his food. It has a bit of a ‘forgot the oral assignment was due today’ vibe about it, to be honest. The House goes to a vote – but the government has the numbers on this. Labor is nominating the member for McEwen, Rob Mitchell, for the role of Speaker. Tony Smith was elected unopposed three times. That streak is broken. While the House of Representatives concentrates on electing a Speaker, over in the Senate Rex Patrick is trying to suspend standing orders to bring on the debate for the federal integrity commission legislation. Labor will support the motion, which is for the crossbench bill Helen Haines introduced into the House, and Patrick introduced into the Senate. It will depend on where the rest of the crossbench will go if it gets up or not. The Victorian government has announced $40m in grants for three major offshore wind projects. The funding will contribute to feasibility studies and pre-construction development for projects from Star of the South, Macquarie Group and Flotation Energy. Star of the South’s proposed 2.2GW offshore wind farm will receive $19.5m, while Macquarie Group will receive $16.1m for the initial development stages of a 1GW offshore wind farm off the Bass Coast. Flotation Energy will receive $2.3m for scoping studies and surveys for a 1.5GW offshore wind farm off the coast of Gippsland. The Andrews government said the projects had the potential to create up to 5,600 jobs, bring more than $18bn in new investment to Victoria and power around 3.6m homes. “Offshore wind is the next step to create thousands of high-skilled jobs, and we know we’re ready with a highly skilled workforce able to step into them,” the premier, Daniel Andrews, said. Victoria’s energy, climate change and environment minister, Lily D’Ambrosio, said it was the largest single offshore wind announcement in Australian history. Andrew Wallace, the member for Fisher (Sunshine Coast seat in Queensland), is being nominated for the role of Speaker. Tony Smith is back on the backbench, having resigned this morning. Wallace is being described as a “clean living man” who doesn’t drink. But is still “fun”. Despite having the nickname “wowser in chief”. It is worth pointing out that those arguing against vaccine mandates, or pushing anti-vaccine agendas, are using emotion as their defence, not facts. Anyone who comes back to them with facts gets pushback with emotional debates with the caveat ‘I am just telling their stories, I am not saying either way’ or that questioning any of the accounts is ‘questioning what these people went through’. There are no facts in that side of the debate. You can’t ‘debate’ emotion. And yet, they continue to get air time for those views – which they then cut up for their social media, and use to spread their message to vulnerable people even further. The Coalition party room is currently considering the religious discrimination bill – but its own MPs and senators still haven’t seen it. Guardian Australia understands the party room has been told they will be given the bill at the end of the meeting, before it is introduced to parliament next week. Labor had expected after consultation with the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, that it would be introduced this week. The Liberal senator Gerard Rennick is currently on Sky News defending his lack of due diligence looking into claims people are making about vaccine adverse events – and didn’t attend the party room meeting. On the partnerships point, Wong says Australia needs to treat south-east Asia as the priority that it is, starting with more support for the pandemic recovery and boosting the vaccine rollout. “The prime minister’s announcement of 60million vaccines by the end of 2022 is a start, but clearly won’t be enough to ensure full coverage and boosters for those who need it, or strengthen frontline health systems in the Pacific and south-east Asia. The government needs to ensure sufficient domestic manufacturing capability to deliver for ongoing vaccine needs for the region.” Wong pledges to appoint an Asean special envoy – “a roving high-level representative, respected in the region, to complement our diplomatic network, and forge close relationships with capitals” across south-east Asia. Wong says Australia must also “address the emerging pandemic that is climate change”, suggesting: “It’s clear that a credible Pacific step-up will only happen under an Albanese Labor government that is genuine on climate – a government that recognises the existential, national security and economic threat climate change presents to all, particularly our Pacific friends.” She calls for the overseas development assistance program to have “effective targets and oversight to not only alleviate suffering but also to address the structural barriers that are holding women and girls back”. Australia, she says, should also have a more robust domestic framework to eliminate modern slavery. Penny Wong’s three overarching ideas for foreign policy are: Projecting a confident, unified, modern Australia. Building genuine partnerships, grounded in trust, to multiply our influence. Deepening the capability of the foreign service, including giving it “clearer political leadership and a sharper understanding of its role, responsibilities, and its potential in these times” along with “a rebuilding of our development assistance program”. On the first point, Wong says how we articulate modern Australia “can constrain or amplify our influence – from a business seeking new markets, to the promotion of our national interests in a time of geostrategic competition”. Speaking at the ANU, she says the world is multicultural and so is Australia. Australia, she says, should place the experiences of First Nations peoples at the heart of its diplomacy. She notes a quarter of Australians were born overseas. Strengthening social cohesion is “the foundation of our sovereignty” and also helps Australia to create common ground and build alignment with other partners. “Expressing who we are in narrow and exclusionary terms can inhibit the potential for alignment. And it can diminish the cohesion in the Australian community. Recall Tony Abbott’s championing of the Anglosphere. Consider how that was received in the region and heard at home. Recall Eric Abetz demanding Chinese-Australians denounce the CPC [Communist party of China] in a Senate hearing – not a demand made of any witness who wasn’t Asian. Recall that the foreign minister was invited to rebuke Senator Abetz, but despite her responsibility to project Australia to the region, she declined to show any such leadership. Narratives matter, as do perceptions. As we strive for maximum influence, we need to understand this. And we need to understand how our past attitudes and policy on race can provide others with the opportunity to promote narratives that limit our influence.” The LNP senator Gerard Rennick is trying to explain his position on Sky News. It is going as well as you would expect. The shadow foreign affairs minister, Penny Wong, is giving a speech to the Australian National University right now outlining her plans for foreign policy if Labor wins the election. First, she outlines the current outlook: Australia must expand its power and influence given a range of challenges, including “rising nationalism, fraying multilateralism, great power competition, emerging Covid strains, an ever-warming planet, and a more assertive China”. Wong says foreign policy “is not merely a stage for photo ops but a critical tool in delivering our national security”. “Our interests won’t be advanced simply by a series of individual deals and transactions. Rather, the features, the architecture and the attributes of our region – and of the international system itself – are being contested. We are in a contest – a race, you might say – for influence. Maximising our influence means we need to use all the tools we have. Military capability matters. When I say military capability, I mean actual, real capability – not announcements. But we need more than that. We need to deploy all aspects of state power – strategic, diplomatic, social, economic.” Wong says most of the challenges that the region faces fall short of military conflict – most of them fall in the grey zone. Alluding to China’s trade actions against Australia, Wong says: “The example most resonant for Australians will be trade – increasingly a vector for geostrategic competition. Economic coercion and cyber-intrusions are being deployed to pursue strategic outcomes and undermine agreed rules. And not far from us, the flouting of norms for exploitation of natural resources including energy, water and fish stocks risk livelihoods and regional stability. These are threats that can’t be deterred by military might alone.” On economic resilience, Wong says, it is “in Australia’s national interest that we reinforce our economy’s resilience by becoming a renewable energy superpower”. New House of Representatives Speaker incoming: This is one preference message you would imagine will be backed by Clive Palmer’s seemingly endless advertising dollars though: A reminder though – in the end, preferences are up to the voter. A how-to-vote card might be handed out at the booth, but there is no onus to follow it (or even look at it) while voting. Supporters of the major parties tend to follow how-to-vote cards, but not those who give their votes to the minor parties or independents, which makes predicting those preference flows a crapshoot. And there you have it: Meanwhile, the Greens are also looking to the election. As the Coalition deals with a backbench revolt over vaccine ‘mandates’ (agreed to as part of the national plan, from the national cabinet, which Scott Morrison, the head of the government chairs) and vaccine misinformation being published on its own members’ social media, there is this message from a public health official: This also clears the way for the bill to form part of the election campaign, where the Coalition can claim it has a mandate to pass it if it is re-elected. Craig Kelly, the leader of the United Australia party, is holding a press conference with John Ruddick from the Liberal Democrats at 11am in the Mural Hall in Parliament House, to talk a preference deal. Campbell Newman, the Liberal Democrats Queensland Senate candidate, is holding a press conference with Clive Palmer in Brisbane at the same time (presumably on the same issue). So Palmer and the Liberal Democrats will be swapping preferences. Palmer has said he is happy to spend $80m in advertising this election, so don’t underestimate the impact. They are all looking for the disenfranchised vote and they don’t care how they get it. Newman is fighting One Nation and LNP senator Amanda Stoker for Queensland’s sixth Senate position, so stay tuned. The government that wants government to get out of people’s lives is moving forward with legislation to make it harder for people to vote – for no reason. This legislation is not addressing any issue which has been raised in Australia, a nation with compulsory voting. A Melbourne man has been arrested over the disappearance of campers Russell Hill and Carol Clay in Victoria’s rugged high country 20 months ago. Read our story here: George Christensen has been able to run rogue for quite some time – Barnaby Joyce said the quiet part out loud when he took back the Nationals leadership and explained why he wouldn’t censure his backbencher over his vaccine views back in August: Obviously, that strategy worked an absolute treat. Absolute Galaxy Brain thinking. The Queensland LNP MP Andrew Wallace has been nominated as the new Speaker. Technically, it is for the House to decide – but the government should hold the votes. The LNP senator Matt Canavan says he is compiling a ‘list of concerns’ he wants to send to the prime minister as he considers what he will do with his Senate vote. I do believe that there remains opportunities for the Australian government and the prime minister to pressure the state and territory governments to back down from their threats to stop Australians from being able to work. The state governments are using Australian government data and the Australian immunisation register to enforce their mandates. And I think that it would make absolute sense for the Australian government to establish a set of guidelines before providing access to that data. All of this anti-vaccine mandate blow-up in the government party room is happening on the same day Victoria recorded 19 deaths from Covid by the way. Nineteen people. Seventeen had not been vaccinated. There are a lot of individual worlds which seem so much bigger because people are missing from them, because of this pandemic. And elected parliamentarians are using their power and influence to push against the most effective tool we have in keeping people safe, and with us. Here is what George Christensen told his supporters on his Substack newsletter about his plans. A couple of things – all LNP MPs are able to vote on their conscience, at any time. Unlike Labor, you don’t have to follow a party position. It’s the main difference between the party. In Labor, you can get kicked out for crossing the floor, but in the LNP you are allowed to cross without consequences (except for those MPs who supported voluntary assisted dying in Queensland and were then threatened with disendorsement after the conservatives in the party blew up over it). The other thing – when would George Christensen’s conscience, given where he sits on the political spectrum, ever have him voting with the Greens or Labor? Does such a reality ever exist? Christensen has threatened to cross the floor/withhold his vote many, many times in the past. I can’t think of a time when he did it, when it actually mattered. It’s like when I say I am giving up chocolate, as I walk into a Haigh’s store. Next time. FOR SURE. Earlier today, I informed Nationals leader Barnaby Joyce (and the Nationals Party Room of which I am a member) that, unless we act to stop state governments and private corporations from discriminating against non-vaccinated Australians when it comes to either employment or clientele, then I intend to not be beholden to party room discipline when voting in the House of Representatives. To be clear, until federal action is taken against vaccine discrimination, I will be voting according to my conscience (or abstaining from votes) on bills and substantive motions rather than just voting with the government as MPs usually do. As I was elected as a member of the Liberal National Party, I will continue to support the government with confidence motions and supply as well as procedural motions (except if they relate to ending vaccine discrimination). My support is not guaranteed on bills or substantive motions. When action is taken to stop vaccine discrimination, I will go back to the normal process of voting with the government on most, if not all, bills and substantive motions. I have no doubt this stance will result in personal attacks on me. But far more important than my political and personal reputation is the prospect of ending the tyranny, the discrimination, the segregation, the job losses and the negative business impacts that are all being wrought (or are about to be wrought) on my fellow Australians. The former Queensland LNP premier turned Liberal Democrats Senate candidate Campbell Newman is holding a press conference with Clive Palmer today (11am AEDT, 10am AEST time) for ... reasons. Palmer and Newman spectacularly fell out during Newman’s one-term premiership, where Palmer went from being the party’s major donor to setting up his own political party to help tear the LNP down. Anyways, now they’re holding press conferences together. Tony Smith has resigned as Speaker, so he is able to chat to the media now – don’t expect too many secrets to be shared – Smith is a traditionalist, and will uphold the respect for the Speaker’s office, as well as his party. He remains the member for Casey until the next election, when he will retire from federal politics. But he does seem to be chatting about some things. For those heading to South Australia now that the borders are open to those who are vaccinated against Covid: The party room meetings are under way, so things will get a little quieter for an hour or so. We’ll bring you the updates of what happened in those meetings as soon as we can. For those who don’t know, one of the strange little Canberra quirks is the background party room/caucus briefings – where a chosen MP (usually Ben Morton for the LNP and Tony Burke for Labor) gives a brief rundown of the minutes taken at respective meetings (the Greens also hold a briefing) but none of it is officially on the record, and is treated as background. Journalists can ask questions about what was discussed (and not always get answers) and names are never offered just ‘an MP raised XX concern’ and then it is a rush to hit the phones and find out what really happened in the meeting. Victoria and NSW have published their daily Covid numbers: Overnight the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, took aim at Peter Dutton for ridiculing comments by China’s acting ambassador to Australia. A quick reminder: Wang Xining, the acting ambassador, last week likened Australia to “a naughty guy” over the Aukus nuclear submarine deal, saying it jeopardises Australia’s peace-loving reputation and the Australian people “should be more worried”. In an interview with the Guardian, Wang said Australia would be branded as a “sabre wielder” rather than a “peace defender” as a result of the plan to acquire at least eight nuclear-powered submarines. (Bear in mind, China is rapidly modernising its own military force, and already has the largest navy in the world with a battle force of about 355 ships and submarines, according to a Pentagon report earlier this month. China currently operates 12 nuclear-powered submarines and, like the US, is a nuclear weapons state.) At the daily foreign ministry press conference in Beijing, Chinese state media outlet the Global Times asked: “In response to the Chinese embassy to Australia’s remarks regarding Australia’s nuclear-powered submarine deal, Australian defence minister Peter Dutton on November 19 called Chinese official’s remarks provocative, silly and funny. Do you have any comment on that?” Zhao replied: “Mr Dutton’s remarks are extremely absurd and irresponsible. As a senior official of the Australian government, he is obsessed with the Cold War mentality and ideological prejudices. Driven by selfish political gains, he has repeatedly made provocations, sensational and astonishing statements on China-related issues. He wouldn’t scruple to hijack Australia onto the chariot in confrontation with China. His real intention has been exposed to all.” Zhao accused “some Australian politicians” of “hyping up” the China threat “and making all sorts of trouble” and interfering in China’s “domestic affairs” related to Taiwan. “Certain Australian politicians should discard the Cold War mentality and ideological bias and not to erect any ‘imaginary enemy’ when it’s completely uncalled for. If they attempt to pocket selfish political gains by singing the anti-China tune, they will end up shooting themselves in the foot and becoming a laughing stock in the world.” Bill Shorten had his regular slot with Channel Nine this morning, where he dutifully gave Labor’s message on Scott Morrison and trust: I reckon all politicians cop a bit of a bad rap. But listen, Scott Morrison, Morrison’s taken us to new levels, hasn’t he? I mean, for the first time ever, we’ve got a leader who doesn’t want to lead. You know, bad leadership’s disastrous for the country, but someone who doesn’t want to lead, who wants to pass the buck to the states on every occasion? That is a recipe for chaos, conflict, almost the decline of the country. So, I just think Scott Morrison needs to turn up and tune in and stand up and stop dropping the ball. The host then helpfully turned to the conversation to how walking both sides of the vaccine mandate conversation is a strategy to harness 10% of the vote, and Labor is falling into a trap by upholding public health messages. Or something. (We all in the media really need to stop talking about politics being a game, instead of something which has impact on people’s lives.) Shorten replies: Well, let’s just back up a little bit here and just look at what’s really at stake. What we have is the Covid crisis, which has been a terrible and complex time for a whole lot of Australians and businesses and families. And what we have as a prime minister, you know, being prime pinister isn’t just a reward for winning the election. It actually carries, that rank carries with it responsibilities. Yesterday, the federation chamber (the spillover chamber for debates and speeches) held a motion in support of the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. A number of MPs spoke on it, including National party MP Mark Coulton, who used the word “apartheid”, which none of the other MPs did. The whole speech is worth reading but here is part of it: I saw that with my own eyes in Hebron, where the centre of the town had been overtaken illegally by settlers. I saw settlements. The image of some temporary buildings on top of a hill in the West Bank does not describe the settlements. There are 620,000 Israelis living illegally in the West Bank. These are cities with shopping centres, swimming pools, movie theatres and substantial, solid homes. These are permanent settlements. The access to the settlements is on roads that only Israeli citizens can use, not Palestinians. How would you like to live in a land where not only is your access cut off by roads that you’re not allowed to use but, at times during the year, military activities mean certain parts of your country are no-go zones? How would you like to be a farmer and know that all the lowlands and the Jericho Valley, the highly productive lands, have been taken from your control and you have to eke out a living on a bare, bony ridge? The policy of the Australian people and our government is to look to a two-state solution. I think that we’re beyond that. I think we have a level of apartheid, with a suppressed people, and the West Bank has been cut up to such an extent that I don’t know how that would work. As the member for Calwell says, I think it’s going to require a lot of effort from the world to actually come up with a solution that’s relevant to now … I support the Palestinian people. The globe needs to act. World leaders need to act. I think we can see where Labor is going today: Anthony Albanese was asked if he knew “straightaway that was not the truth”. Yes, because it was a lie. I didn’t know where he was. The Labor leader continued: I kept that text message which was a private message from his phone to my phone, private, because that’s what you do, whether it’s between Australian political leaders, or whether – or if it was a message from a foreign leader. The truth is that I kept that information that he had given me of a private nature. He chose to go on to 2GB radio live from Hawaii and say that he texted me. That was a matter for him. I confirmed that that was the case, but I didn’t release the text message. And then: This prime minister has a problem with just telling the truth, and it is a real problem for the nation. Anthony Albanese was also asked about the text Scott Morrison sent him in 2019, ahead of his Hawaiian holiday during the 2019 bushfires. For those who need a refresher, Labor, as part of a “let’s remind everyone of all those times the prime minister didn’t tell the truth” campaign in QT, asked why the PMO had misled journalists over the whereabouts of the prime minister as Australia burned. Morrison answered: I can only speak to what I have said, as the leader of the opposition will know, because I texted him from the plane when I was going on that leave and told him where I was going, and he was fully aware of where I was travelling with my family. After Albanese denied knowing where Morrison was, only that he had received a message from the PM saying he was taking leave (as Morrison made public at the time), Morrison followed up with: Where I was going was on leave. That was the importance of the text message sent to the leader of the opposition. He knew I was taking leave. I told him I was taking leave. He chose to politicise that and has done so ever since. And then we had a third attempt from the prime minister explaining that “where I was going on leave” actually just meant “I was going on leave”. I wish to add to an answer. I want to confirm what the leader of the opposition said – that, in that text, I did not tell him the destination of where I was going on leave with my family; I simply communicated to him that I was taking leave. When I referred to him knowing where I was going and being fully aware I was travelling with my family, what I meant was that we were going on leave together. I know I didn’t tell him where we were going, because where members take leave is a private matter. I know I didn’t tell him the destination, nor would I, and nor would he expect me to have told him where I was going. I simply told him that I was taking leave with my family, and he was aware of that at that time. That all happened within the space of an hour. Anthony Albanese was on ABC News Breakfast this morning, where he got to deploy this old line: I just think this is a prime minister who can’t control his own party room, let alone capable of governing us into the future in the way that we need. If you can’t govern your party, how can you govern the country? Liberal senator Andrew Bragg was on Sydney radio 2GB this morning, talking about his ABC complaints Senate inquiry. He was asked about the Greens motion Sarah Hanson-Young will move to try to shut it down (ABC board chair Ita Buttrose said the inquiry amounted to “political interference” given the board has already set up an independent inquiry into the complaints process, which is yet to report back) Bragg: We’ve already received more than a dozen submissions from the community. Many serious issues have been raised in these submissions. Some of them are so serious, we can’t actually put them up on the website straight away. So I think it would be unbelievable if the Senate was to cancel the ability of people to have their say. And this is a community process where people can have their say about complaints handling so if the Senate votes to close this down, they’ll be voting to close down these people’s voices. Peter Dutton has been in the media a lot lately (he is even smiling again for the cameras – never a good sign) as he does his part to talk up the possibility of a “khaki” election campaign (which is all about defence). Penny Wong has noticed, as Daniel Hurst reports: The Morrison government is embarking on “the most dangerous election tactic in Australian history” by talking up the prospect of Australia joining a war over Taiwan, according to senior Labor frontbencher Penny Wong. The shadow minister for foreign affairs will use a speech on Tuesday to accuse Scott Morrison of “desperately playing politics on China whenever he’s in trouble” – citing the prime minister’s attempt to portray Labor as siding with Beijing. Wong will also accuse the defence minister, Peter Dutton, of straying from longstanding bipartisan policy on Taiwan. She will say Dutton is doing the people of Taiwan “no favours by amplifying Beijing’s fatalism” about the limited options available. There will also be a new Speaker of the House elected today. Tony Smith will hand in his resignation to the governor general, which is the political equivalent of making something social media official, and then the House of Reps (the government) will elect a new person to fill the role. Will it be Andrew Wallace? Kevin Andrews? Nola Marino? You’ll find out soon. The new Speaker gets a nice pay bump, giant office, staff and a portrait and they get their new pay from now until the next parliament is formed, so even if they end up sitting in the chair just for the next seven days, the chosen backbencher will receive an extra $160,000 or so until the day before the new parliament resumes, even if they lose their seat at the next election. You’ll be hearing more and more about “wedge” politics as we get closer to the next election (in either March or May). It’s the description political commentators and the players they observe like to use when talking issues and legislation which are designed to create a problem for the other side. So, essentially, it is all part of the political game. The issue with it, of course, is that legislation and highlighting issues is meant to be about making people’s lives, on the whole, better. So when something is boiled down to “a wedge for the other side” it exposes what this part of the political cycle is all about – trying to maintain power. As Sarah Martin and Paul Karp have been reporting, the government party room is expected to consider the religious freedom bill today – not that everyone has seen it yet. What has been seen has managed to alarm the moderates in the party room, who have reserved their right to cross the floor over a statement of belief clause that overrides other state anti-discrimination laws and a positive discrimination right for faith-based institutions. But the conservatives don’t seem too impressed either, as they don’t consider the bill goes far enough in protecting religious freedoms. While the government may have trouble getting it through its own party room (and then its own side on the floor when it comes to votes) it had hoped to use the legislation as a yet another “wedge” for Labor. Here is what Jim Chalmers had to say about the bill yesterday, while speaking to ABC radio in Brisbane: I haven’t seen it yet. It hasn’t been broadly circulated. There’s a lot of coverage in the media, so obviously, we read that and absorb that. But I haven’t seen the bill yet. It hasn’t been broadly circulated. It gets introduced on Wednesday, I believe. So, we’ll have a good look at it. We’ve said throughout these three years of false starts and missteps and all of the rest of it that we support people in our community being able to go about their lives and exercising their faith free from discrimination. That obviously requires a lot of fine details which will be in the legislation, and we’ll take our time to go through it properly to make sure that it accords with our views. But I haven’t seen it yet so I can’t come to a definitive final view on it. Michael McGowan and Christopher Knaus have gone through LNP senator Gerard Rennick’s Facebook page, where he is publishing alleged Covid vaccine horror stories: We say alleged, because the senator himself admits he has not checked the stories, equating it to “school work” and questioning “Did you get all of your school work right when you were at school?” when Mick and Chris asked him about some of the dubious claims: Is it 100% accurate? I can’t guarantee that and I’ve never said that, and that’s why I say it’s someone’s story. It’s not my story, I’m telling someones else’s story. And yet he is sharing this on his page, which labels him as a senator, and is fighting against vaccine mandates because of these stories. South Australia is once again open to the rest of the nation – with some restrictions, as AAP reports: Everyone must be double vaccinated and use a new online border entry process known as EntryCheck SA, which assesses an individual’s vaccination status, departure location and Covid-19 risk. Based on the information provided, travellers may also be prompted to use a new HealthCheck SA app which will help them monitor daily symptoms and guide them through any testing and quarantine requirements. Unvaccinated travellers will be required to seek a special exemption, with applications to be assessed on a case-by-case basis. By yesterday, more than 25,000 people had applied to come to SA, with most of the earlier arrivals expected to be returning residents or people reuniting with family and friends. Tourists are more likely to travel to SA over the Christmas-new year holiday period. Welcome back to Politics Live. Seven days to go in this parliamentary sitting year and Coalition backbenchers have decided now is the time to make a stand. After five government senators crossed the floor yesterday to be the only five to vote on a Pauline Hanson-sponsored anti-vaccine mandate bill (Hanson is in Queensland and was unable to vote on her own bill) perennial “don’t make me do it” George Christensen is once again threatening to withhold his vote in the lower house. Christensen, who will retire from federal politics at the next election, last threatened to go rogue in 2017, writing a letter to then-prime minister Malcolm Turnbull who had just lost his majority in the lower house. Back then, Christensen wanted a banking royal commission and a return of penalty rates. This time around Christensen wants state vaccine mandates overturned. Scott Morrison, who has been walking both sides of the line on the issue lately, yesterday reaffirmed his support for vaccine mandates for health and aged care workers (which the federal government requires). But Christensen is not a fan. It shouldn’t come as a surprise. The Queensland LNP backbencher spoke at the conservative Cpac love-in yesterday, and had a go at the state LNP leader for not being strong enough on Queensland’s pandemic restrictions (even though criticising Queensland’s pandemic restrictions helped the LNP lose the last state election, and strengthened Labor’s numbers in the state parliament). Christensen said: Where’s David Crisafulli on these pandemic restrictions? If I was the leader of the opposition I would have been on the stage [on Saturday] supporting all of these people who are protesting. It’s great we’ve had ScoMo come out just this week saying that governments need to back off and we need our freedoms back. That should have been said long ago. But that’s being said now, that’s great it needs to be followed up with action ... so people don’t go and vote for these minor parties. Christensen also agreed that there needed to be more conservatives in the party and less “ball-less dicks” being preselected: There needs to be more of us so those other types don’t get in. So that was yesterday. And today, he’s threatening to withhold his vote, which given the numbers in the house, is not the news Morrison would want as he tries to do ... something to rescue this last parliamentary sitting of the year. The PM managed to create another own goal yesterday over his own relationship with the truth, and today the latest Guardian Essential poll has Labor ahead on managing the economy, the issue the Coalition hopes to make the next election about: The party room meeting should be fun! You have Mike Bowers with you, as well as the Guardian Canberra team of Katharine Murphy, Daniel Hurst, Sarah Martin and Paul Karp. Amy Remeikis will be with you on the blog until late afternoon. It’s shaping up as a four-coffee morning. Ready?As with most wars, nobody can really trace the origins of English football’s enduring obsession with ketchup. Perhaps, like many things, it only really began to mean something when someone threatened to take it away. Battle lines were drawn. Sides were taken. Occasionally hostilities would subside, perhaps for years, before roaring back into life. And yet even seasoned observers of the ketchup wars can scarcely remember a week as bitterly contested as the last. It all began with Antonio Conte’s appointment at Tottenham, when reports began to emerge that the new manager had immediately banned ketchup from the club canteen. “To be professional means you have to take care of your body,” Conte explained. “The training and the game is only the final part of your work. You have to prepare your body, your mind and also your heart.” Within a matter of days, the new Aston Villa manager Steven Gerrard had followed him on to the frontline. “The players have to have the right mentality,” he said. “Go above and beyond. They need to strive to be elite.” Naturally, this was all extremely flavoursome content to the tabloid press, for whom the established trope of new managers coming in and prohibiting certain foods has long since taken on a sort of totemistic quality. Articulating incremental change in footballing terms is hard. Explaining the minutiae of pressing triggers, set‑piece routines, attacking automatisms: hard. Ketchup or no ketchup: this is a dialectic even a toddler can understand, and the beauty of it is that it can make any point you want. So for Arsène Wenger’s early Arsenal sides, for Conte and Pep Guardiola, it denotes control, professionalism, discipline. And yet for Paolo Di Canio at Sunderland and David Moyes at Manchester United it was an emblem of their overbearing joylessness. Likewise the furious debate over Fabio Capello’s England ketchup ban – in many ways the bloodiest episode in the ketchup wars – and the national festivities that greeted Roy Hodgson’s decision to restore it ahead of the 2014 World Cup. Because here is the thing about ketchup: it is banned, but only so it can later be reinstated, and vice versa. Moyes bans ketchup; Louis van Gaal reinstates it. Ketchup is outlawed at Tottenham under Juande Ramos and returns under Harry Redknapp. When Kevin Ball took over as caretaker manager from Di Canio at Sunderland, ketchup became an indelible symbol of the liberation: the sauce equivalent of Mussolini’s hanging body in the Piazzale Loreto. “If they choose to have it, that’s OK,” Ball said, before adding: “I’m not saying ‘Ha’way lads, get yourself a bucketload of tomato sauce’.” This is not really about ketchup qua ketchup. In many ways, ketchup is really a proxy for a far deeper cultural divide within football: whether it is a game of suffering and sacrifice and self-edification, or a game of expression and pleasure and the pursuit of good feelings. It’s telling, for example, that both Conte and Gerrard express their ban on ketchup in terms of mentality: the implication being that the real sin is not ketchup but the desire for it, the want, the temptation itself. And if you think about it, this is really a microcosm of the debate that preoccupies many of the world’s major religions: whether it is nobler to defer pleasure in this life – be it alcohol, frivolity or fornication – in order to assure salvation in the next. The puritan urges us: forswear ketchup, that you may know the greater glories in life. The hedonist counters: what is the point of life without ketchup? Travel further afield and you see these same battles being played out on slightly different terms, with slightly different condiments. The former Newcastle striker Rob McDonald tells a story about Ronald Koeman from their time at PSV in the 1980s. Koeman – one of the game’s natural pleasure seekers – is sitting down for a team meal when he picks up a chip dipped in mayonnaise. “If you eat that chip,” the stern-faced coach Theo Verlangen warns him, “it’ll cost you 500 guilders.” Defiantly, Koeman pops the chip into his mouth. “Make it 1,000,” he retorts. Yet in this country at least, it is ketchup that seems to inspire the strongest feelings, even over unhealthier accompaniments such as sour cream or barbecue sauce. Partly this is down to its ubiquity, its association with American food, and thus bad food. But according to Charles Spence, an experimental psychologist at Oxford University, part of ketchup’s essential consumer appeal is the way it is experienced through all the senses: the tactile squeeze, the illicit squirt as it leaves the bottle, the deep red pool of sweet‑smelling possibility. This much was made apparent in the mid-2000s when, to general horror and revulsion, Manchester City tried to introduce blue ketchup in its hospitality suites. And in many ways, the eternal debate over ketchup speaks to our own confusion as a nation. We dream ourselves libertarian but vote increasingly authoritarian. We sanctify rules and sanctify the freedom to ignore them. We want ketchup banned, but we will fight to the death for our right to eat it. Perhaps the most poignant expression of English football’s complex relationship with its most loved and hated condiment comes from its greatest folk hero. After losing on penalties to Germany at Euro 96, a distraught Paul Gascoigne returns to England’s base, unsure of his next move. “I went into the kitchen and found a monster carton of ketchup, which I emptied all over Robbie Fowler,” he writes in his autobiography. “Then I ran to my room and had a good cry.”It was typical of Samantha Willis that she bought the food for her baby shower herself. No fuss; she didn’t want other people to be put out. She even bought a cheese board, despite the fact that, because she was pregnant, she couldn’t eat half of it. On 1 August, the care worker and mother of three from Derry was eight months pregnant with her third daughter. The weather was beautiful, so Samantha stood out in the sun, ironing clothes and getting everything organised for the baby. Then the texts started to come through, first to Samantha and then to her husband, Josh, a 36-year-old civil servant: they had Covid. They had taken a test the day before, after coming into contact with someone who was positive. Samantha rang around her family and friends, cancelling the baby shower. Both Samantha and Josh were homebirds – the sort of people who loved nothing better than watching Netflix and snuggling on the sofa – so the prospect of an enforced self-isolation didn’t seem so bad. “We were looking forward to a week in the house,” says Josh. “We thought we’d sit in the garden and cook and get the house organised.” It never crossed either of their minds that Samantha would fall seriously ill with Covid. She was only 35 and in good health, with no underlying conditions. Samantha was unvaccinated – she had received advice against getting jabbed at an antenatal appointment. “They gave her a flyer telling her there wasn’t enough research on the Covid vaccine in pregnant women,” says Josh. He found the flyer among her things recently. It read: “The vaccines have not yet been tested in pregnancy, so until more information is available, those who are pregnant should not routinely have this vaccine.” Later, when the guidance changed to advocate vaccination in pregnant women, Samantha was nearer her due date. “We thought: people are off school, she’s on maternity leave, it’s pretty safe now,” says Josh. “We decided she would get it after her pregnancy.” The couple were careful to limit their contact with the outside world, given Samantha was unvaccinated and pregnant. “We thought we’d be safe in the house,” says Josh, who worked from home. By the time of the positive tests, whenever they needed a change of scenery, they would pick up a Chinese takeaway and eat it in the car. They had been careful; they had come so far. Samantha was due to give birth in less than a month. Their positive Covid tests, while a mild inconvenience, were nothing to be unduly concerned about. “It didn’t even cross our minds that we would get sick,” says Josh. *** Samantha was born in 1986, the oldest of five children. In childhood, she was “more or less a tomboy”, says her mother, Mary Davidson, 54, who lives in Derry and is a support worker for people with learning disabilities. “She went out nice and came in mucky as anything.” Samantha left school at 16 to work as a hairdresser, then at a dry cleaner’s. She had her first two children young: Shea, her son, when she was 17, and Holly, her eldest daughter, when she was 20. She didn’t like to talk about her 20s. “It was just one of those things I wasn’t supposed to ask her about,” says Josh. “She didn’t want to dwell on things.” The couple met in a Derry bar on Samantha’s birthday in 2012. Everything moved quickly. “She idolised that man,” says Mary. “He was the love of her life.” They married in March 2019. “When we got married, I told her: I’ll never get married again,” says Josh. The same year, Samantha began working as an at-home carer. It was exhausting but rewarding work; 11-hour shifts were commonplace. “She got attached to the service users,” says Mary. “If anyone passed away, she would cry.” Samantha was the sort of person who would get out of bed at 2am to drive a friend home if they couldn’t find a taxi. She loved watching trashy TV, such as Keeping Up With the Kardashians, and making extravagant Halloween costumes for the kids; she loved decorating people’s Christmas trees and sliding her freezing cold feet in between Josh’s feet in bed. (He hated this.) “I wish I had done a lot more for her,” sighs Josh. “I thought we had another 50 years or so, to watch the wee ones grow up.” When the Covid vaccine programme began in the UK on 8 December 2020, pregnant women were told not to get vaccinated, as Samantha would discover a few months later. In March, Stella Creasy, the Labour MP for Walthamstow, received a leaflet from Public Health England that read: “[The Covid vaccine] has not yet been assessed in pregnancy, so it has been advised that until more information is available, those who are pregnant should not have this vaccine.” She was pregnant at the time, with her second child. Because Creasy felt uneasy about the rationale for excluding pregnant women from the vaccine programme, she raised her concerns repeatedly at the weekly video-call sessions with the then minister for vaccine deployment, Nadhim Zahawi, to which all MPs were invited. Also on these calls was Prof Anthony Harnden of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), the committee of scientists that advises the government on vaccine policy. “They kept saying to me that a pregnant woman is at no greater risk of dying than her non-pregnant counterpart,” says Creasy. But in October 2020, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) published guidance warning that “intensive care admission may be more common in pregnant women with Covid-19 than in non-pregnant women of the same age” and that pregnant women with Covid were three times more likely to have a preterm birth. Further evidence emerged in 2021 indicating that pregnant women were particularly vulnerable to Covid, especially in their final trimester. Research from the University of Washington, published in January, found that pregnant women were 13 times more likely to die from Covid than people of a similar age who were not pregnant. This is unsurprising, says Dr Kristina Adams Waldorf, the study’s lead author, because pregnant women have long been known to be more vulnerable to respiratory viruses. (It is for this reason that pregnant women are advised to have the flu vaccine.) “The immune system in a pregnant woman changes to make sure that the body doesn’t reject the foetus as an immunologically foreign object,” Waldorf says. “When it does this, it becomes impaired in the way it fights infection – and that makes it more difficult to fight a virus like influenza or Covid-19.” But throughout February and March, the JCVI’s scientists did not appear especially concerned about examining the case for vaccinating pregnant women. “They kept telling me: ‘This is an issue for [addressing when we vaccinate] younger age cohorts,’” says Creasy. Priority in the early stages of the vaccine programme was being given to older people, so many pregnant women remained towards the back of the queue. The maternity campaign group Pregnant Then Screwed was also sounding the alarm. “If you look at who was on the Covid war cabinet and leading the daily briefing, it was nearly all men,” says Joeli Brearley, its founder. “Pregnant women were treated as if they were very similar to the general population, rather than being seen as a special cohort that needs special consideration. They were just not a priority.” Brearley sees this as part of a pattern of generalised apathy towards pregnant women from policymakers. She points out that, even after the government reopened bars and nightclubs, some NHS trusts continued to impose visiting restrictions on pregnancy scans and labour. Pregnant Then Screwed is taking legal action against the government for indirect sex discrimination against women who took maternity leave and were eligible for the self‑employed income support scheme, but received lower payouts due to the fact they had taken maternity leave. By early April, the case for vaccinating pregnant women was mounting. Creasy says that she emailed Matt Hancock, the then health secretary, urging him to consider the evidence. “I was terrified,’ she says. “Because I had read the data, as had lots of pregnant women. People were asking me about it. They were looking at me, saying: what shall I do?” On 16 April, the JCVI announced that pregnant women would be offered the Pfizer or Moderna vaccine at the same time as the general public, based on vaccination data from more than 90,000 pregnant women in the US. But even though pregnant women were now eligible for the vaccine, the infrastructure was not in place to support their vaccination. Women booking vaccines using the online booking system weren’t able to specify Moderna or Pfizer vaccines, as per the JCVI’s guidance. “Pregnant women were telling us that they were being turned away from vaccine centres because they didn’t have the right vaccines,” says Brearley. On 25 April, Creasy wrote to Zahawi, explaining that the NHS booking system needed to be updated to allow pregnant women to specify their vaccines, but the system was not amended until 7 May. Even though pregnant women were now eligible for the vaccine, the expert advice was noticeably tepid. “We believe it should be a woman’s choice whether to have the vaccine or not after considering the benefits and risks … this move will empower all the pregnant women in the UK to make the decision that is right for them,” said a spokesperson for the RCOG. “It is very different to say: ‘We have no evidence that the Covid-19 vaccination is harmful in pregnancy,’ rather than: ‘Our evidence strongly supports that the Covid-19 vaccine is safe and effective in pregnant women,’” says Adams Waldorf. “This hedging language has resulted in a lot of misinformation and misunderstanding. Pregnant women are being given conflicting messages. Many aren’t realising that the data overwhelmingly shows that the vaccines are safe and effective.” Women presenting to vaccine centres throughout the spring and summer were given out-of-date leaflets telling them they were not allowed to get the vaccine, or else discouraged from getting vaccinated. Ellie Parrott, a 26-year-old administration manager from Hertfordshire, went to get vaccinated at a leisure centre in Harlow in July. “They turned me away and told me that I’d need to speak with my GP,” she says. After speaking with her GP, she was finally vaccinated in September, nearly two months later. Ella (not her real name), who is 38 and lives in London, gave birth in July. She says that most women in her WhatsApp group for expectant mothers were told to wait until after their babies were born to get vaccinated. When Ella told her midwives that she wished to get vaccinated, they were lukewarm. “There would be this pause and then they would say: ‘Are you sure?’ It was really not what I wanted to hear,” she says. “I wanted them to support and validate my choice.” Louise Williams, a 32-year-old teacher from London, was vaccinated by the time she attended an antenatal appointment at Barnet hospital in June. But she was horrified to overhear a midwife telling another pregnant woman that she wasn’t allowed to have the vaccine. “She was completely misinformed,” says Williams. A Pregnant Then Screwed survey of 6,869 pregnant women in July found that 47% had been given conflicting advice about the Covid vaccine by a health professional. As a result, vaccine uptake among pregnant women was slow. Research from St George’s University hospitals NHS foundation trust, conducted between March and July, found that only 10.5% of pregnant women surveyed received at least one dose of the Covid vaccine before giving birth. By June, the RCOG was so concerned about vaccine uptake in pregnant women that it dropped its earlier position. “We understand this is a very challenging time for those who are pregnant … but we want to reassure them that vaccination in pregnancy is safe and effective in preventing Covid-19,” a spokesperson said in a press release. On 22 July, a coalition of organisations including Pregnant Then Screwed, the Royal College of Midwives and the RCOG wrote to Sajid Javid, the health secretary, to ask him to prevent the spread of misinformation about the risks of Covid vaccines in pregnancy and to ensure that the staff in vaccine centres were given the most up-to‑date research and data. Ultimately, however, this change in position was ineffectual. By July, ICU beds were filling up with pregnant women. Data from the UK Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS), published that month, found that 98% of the 171 pregnant women hospitalised with Covid symptoms since mid-May had been unvaccinated. One in 10 of these women required intensive care. Internal NHS data revealed that women who tested positive for Covid at the time of birth were twice as likely to have a stillborn baby. All through the summer, beleaguered NHS clinicians worked to save desperately ill pregnant women and their unborn children. “It was your worst fear,” says Creasy. “That something you wanted to prevent did happen.” *** By 3 August – two days after the news of her positive test – Samantha was having trouble breathing. It took her ages to get out of bed and get dressed. “We thought: if she’s having difficulty, then the baby is having difficulty,” remembers Josh. “We weren’t thinking about her health at that point, just about the baby.” Mary brought over a pulse oximeter, which measures the saturation of oxygen carried in red blood cells. Samantha’s sats were 87%, well below the safe limit of 95%. After speaking with a GP, Josh dropped Samantha at Altnagelvin Area hospital. “I didn’t even give her a hug or a kiss,” says Josh, sounding tormented. “I thought I’d see her again in a couple of days.” On 5 August, doctors delivered Samantha’s baby, Eviegrace, by caesarean section. Josh wasn’t allowed in the room, because of the Covid risk. He watched at home, from an iPad. It was a bittersweet experience. “She never wanted a C-section,” says Josh. After Eviegrace was born, Samantha seemed to be improving. “She said she could breathe a wee bit easier,” says Josh. She was moved from the ICU to the general respiratory ward on 9 August. Nurses brought her Eviegrace’s teddy bear from the neonatal ward. They sent her photographs and videos of the baby girl she had never held. On 12 August, Samantha’s oxygen levels plunged. She had to be ventilated on the ward, because doctors weren’t sure she would make it to the ICU. Josh was at St Eugene’s cathedral at the time, with their four-year-old daughter, Lilyanna. “She lit a candle and said: ‘I hope Mummy gets better soon,’” Josh says. He got a phone call in the car to say she was deteriorating and that he should come in. “I thought: I won’t be lighting candles in a hurry any more,” he says. At the hospital, Josh held Samantha’s hand. She was ventilated, lying on her front, wires snaking out of her. Josh told his wife that everyone missed her, so much. He urged her to fight and get well. He hoped that the sound of his voice would somehow reach her. After a few hours, he returned home and gave Lilyanna the news. “I said to her: ‘Mummy might die,’” says Josh, clearing his throat. “She said: ‘Who will be my mummy then?’ I said: ‘She will always be your mummy, even if she’s not here.’” Later that evening, the hospital summoned him again and told him that this was the end. Josh, Shea, Holly and Mary entered the room. A priest administered the last rites. Samantha died just after midnight on 20 August. The nurse told Josh first, then Mary, who screamed. “I had to get out of there,” she says. “I panicked. That’s my regret.” Josh, Shea and Holly stayed with Samantha until the morning. “It was the only time any of us had had with her for over two weeks,” says Josh. It took Josh five attempts to leave the room. “I knew that it would be a closed coffin, because of Covid,” he says. “When I left, I was never seeing her again.” *** Samantha was initially discouraged from getting the Covid vaccine because the clinical trials that proved the vaccines were safe did not include pregnant women. Even before the vaccine programme began, academics had warned of the dangers of excluding pregnant women from trials. In August 2020, Prof Marian Knight of the University of Oxford co-authored an editorial in the British Medical Journal, pointing out that only 1.7% of 927 Covid-related trials specifically included pregnant women. “We may face the paradoxical situation of recommending vaccination for a risk group in which the vaccine is untested,” Knight wrote. “What I predicted has come to pass,” Knight says now. “What I didn’t predict, really sadly, is that I would also be counting women dying from a vaccine-preventable disease due to the high levels of uncertainty among pregnant women, and inconsistent advice.” As the leader of the nationwide MBRRACE-UK study, Knight is probably Britain’s foremost maternal mortality researcher. Every time a woman dies within a year of giving birth in the UK, Knight investigates. “My job is hard, because I deal with tragedy,” she says. “But I always try to see the big picture. For me, the ultimate tragedy is not to learn from these deaths.” Knight has been collecting the statistics on unvaccinated pregnant or postpartum women who have died of Covid. From February to September, 235 women were admitted to ICUs with Covid, of whom 98.7% were unvaccinated. Thirteen have died since July. Almost all were unvaccinated. “Never before have I wanted to cry so much as I have in the last few weeks,” says Knight. “Because I feel we’ve failed these women. They’re dying because they haven’t been vaccinated.” It is the single most disturbing experience of her decades-long career, she says. Knight sees this as an issue of medical equity. “This is one of the major structural biases we have got within the system,” she says. “Pregnant women don’t get equitable care compared with non‑pregnant people.” Even when pregnant women are admitted to ICU beds, they may not be given the same access to potentially life-saving medications as non-pregnant people. Clinicians are reluctant to treat women with the full range of Covid therapies, because these drugs haven’t been tested in pregnant women. “If the doctors would talk to obstetric physicians, they’d be able to advise on which drugs you can give to pregnant women,” says Knight. “But the default is that they don’t give pregnant women anything, because they’re worried [about the side-effects].” This issue is not specific to Covid. Women of childbearing age are routinely excluded from pharmaceutical trials, regardless of whether or not they are pregnant, breastfeeding or using contraception. The reason for this is historical and can be summed up in one word: thalidomide. Developed in the 50s, thalidomide was used to alleviate morning sickness in pregnant women. The drug led to birth defects in thousands of children and transformed the way in which regulatory bodies approved medicines. In 1977, the US’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA) effectively banned women of childbearing age from most clinical trials. “Thalidomide is without doubt the reason we have such an extremely cautious approach to testing drugs in pregnant women,” says Knight. A number of women reported to Pregnant Then Screwed that they had been turned away from vaccine centres for that exact reason. Brearley says: “The number of times a health professional said to a pregnant woman: ‘We don’t want another thalidomide incident …’” But pregnant women can and do fall ill – and should be given equal access to evidence-based medicine. “There’s a default attitude among doctors that women should stop taking medication when they are pregnant,” says Knight. “But women may have conditions that need medication in pregnancy.” Experts disagree about whether pregnant women should be included in clinical trials. But many feel that excluding all women of childbearing age from drug testing trials is unnecessary and even a form of medical misogyny – part of a pattern of generalised contempt for bodies that are not male and able-bodied. “It’s pure sexism,” says Brearley. “Everything about it makes me furious.” As a result of this mass exclusion, pregnant women don’t receive the best evidence-based medicine. “There are a number of factors that affect the functioning of a drug in our body,” say Dr Maria Teresa Ferretti of The Women’s Brain Project, a Swiss collective of scientists that study and advocate for better consideration of sex and gender in precision medicine. “Men and women have different sex hormones and they also have different genetics. The immune function is different between men and women. There are biological reasons why the same drug may have different effects in men and women.” The situation is gradually improving. In 1993, the FDA lifted its ban on women participating in clinical trials. Women now represent about 43% of all trial participants globally, although they tend to be underrepresented in higher-risk phase 1 trials. Knight believes that regulation is needed to ensure equity in medical testing. “There will never be any incentive for companies to test vaccines or medications in pregnant women, because they’ve got a big market elsewhere,” she says. “Unless the regulator insists as part of the licensing requirements, pregnant women will always be an afterthought.” The Women’s Brain Project champions a global registry, in which clinicians could provide real-world information about the safety of drugs in pregnant or breastfeeding women. After high-profile tragedies, such as the death of Saiqa Parveen, a mother of five from Birmingham, ministers and public health officials are now loudly promoting the benefits of vaccination. This month, Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, warned at a Downing Street press conference of the “stark” numbers of pregnant women being hospitalised with Covid, describing these cases as “preventable admissions”. Some NHS trusts have begun administering the vaccine at antenatal clinics, although this is not yet a nationwide policy. But as recently as October, pregnant women were reportedly turned away from vaccine clinics. That month, NHS England figures showed that one in five Covid patients requiring ECMO treatment – the highest form of life-saving treatment on offer in the NHS – were unvaccinated pregnant women. Last week, Dr Latifa Patel, a chief officer at the British Medical Association, told the i that she felt that “pregnant women have been let down by society, the NHS and the government” during the pandemic, due to confused and mixed messaging around the safety of vaccinations in pregnancy. Pregnant women are still not deemed a vulnerable group by the government, nor were they made eligible for booster vaccines. Last month, the RCOG said only about 15% of pregnant women in the UK were fully vaccinated (although data analysis suggests the figure is probably higher than that). *** On 23 August, the Willis family held a baptism and a funeral. The sun shone brilliantly as Eviegrace was carried into the church behind her mother, who arrived in a coffin covered in white flowers. Josh had insisted the baptism and the funeral be held together; it was the only way that Samantha could be there. Around Derry, Josh has become a tragic celebrity. “I can’t go on a walk without people looking at me,” he says. “It’s a small enough city. People think: there’s that boy whose wife died of Covid and had the baby christened at her funeral.” He visits Samantha’s grave every day and talks to her about the weather. He tells her how many weeks it has been since she died. He tells her that they are all doing OK. He asks her to watch over them and keep them safe. “I hope one day we will see each other again,” says Josh. “In another 50 years or so.” Mary hopes that pregnant women will hear Samantha’s story and get vaccinated. “Do you want to carry a baby and not be there to rear it?” she says. “It’s a no-brainer. Get the injection.” Josh isn’t angry at the situation, but he wishes things had been different. “What can you do?” he says. “You would go off your head if you let it bother you.” Because it is what Samantha would want, Josh is pushing ahead with their plans. He is in the process of buying their council house and redecorating it according to Samantha’s designs. “She would want us to march on,” says Josh. “But we will never forget her. I won’t let Lilyanna forget her. And when Eviegrace is older, we’ll tell her all about her.” Mary finds it hard to look at Lilyanna and Eviegrace. “The fact them poor kids don’t have their mother, that’s the hardest part,” she says. “Thinking about what they will miss out on. That is what breaks my heart.”For Olivier Messiaen, Sundays were sacrosanct. For more than six decades he was organist of Sainte-Trinité in Paris, having first deputised there as a 20-year-old in 1929. Remarkably, that same year also saw the appearance of his first published compositions, the eight Préludes for piano, so it seemed fitting that six of these were central to Angela Hewitt’s Sunday morning recital at the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama. Some of the aura of Debussy can be heard, but Messiaen’s own distinctive musical language – ecstatic and enigmatic – is already present. From the delicate wing-flutterings of the first, La Colombe (The Dove) through to the virtuosic figurations of the eighth, Un reflet dans le vent (A reflection in the wind) moving from gently sighing breezes to tempestuous gusts, Hewitt brought to each prelude an intense and wonderfully controlled expressive focus. To those who only associate Angela Hewitt with Bach, this would surely have been a revelation. Two relatively early Mozart sonatas – K309 in C major and K281 in B flat major – had Hewitt’s trademark clarity of rhythm and articulation, with careful shading of the dynamics to vary the repeated phrases and sections. The sustaining pedal was only sparingly used, but lent warmth to the sound in the middle movement of K281, helping underline how unusual Mozart’s indication of Andante Amoroso actually was. Hewitt seemed almost to relax into Chopin’s two Nocturnes, Op 55, and indeed to be enjoying finding a range of colours on the Steinway piano rather than her customary Fazioli, this concert being one of the RWCMD’s Steinway Series. To lyricism was added drama and display in the Chopin Scherzo No 4 in E major, Hewitt power-housing through. Her encore was Liszt’s arrangement of Schumann’s song Widmung, the composer’s wedding gift to his beloved Clara, all amorous ardour. • Available to watch on demand (£) until 23 November. Angela Hewitt is at the Wigmore Hall, London on 23 November.The television producer Jacqueline Davis, who has died aged 89, is best known for the series Rumpole of the Bailey, which ran from 1978 to 1992. Jacqui “could win the hearts of that most brutal and intractable of bodies – a film unit on location,” said the series creator, and her friend and collaborator, John Mortimer. The programme starred Leo McKern as the ageing barrister Horace Rumpole, alongside Peggy Thorpe-Bates, Peter Bowles and Patricia Hodge. Rumpole was an everyman’s hero, defending criminals from all walks of life. His exploits were so popular that his stories were told in other media, including the books in which Mortimer novelised Rumpole’s trials until 2006. There are Rumpole societies all over the world; Jacqui once travelled to San Francisco to speak to one. Jacqui had been introduced to Mortimer by Verity Lambert, head of drama at Thames Television. The pair instantly hit it off, their creative connection apparent from the start. The success of Rumpole led them to form a production company, New Penny Productions, in 1989. Their output was prolific, and included the TV drama Paradise Postponed (1986), which explored why the Rev Simeon Simcox left the millions of his brewery estate to the opportunist Thatcherite politician Leslie Titmuss (David Threlfall). In the 1991 sequel, Titmuss Regained, the loathsome Titmuss was forced to choose whether to sacrifice his political beliefs to save the village. Under the Hammer (1994) followed, in which Richard Wilson portrayed a preposterous auctioneer who would go to great lengths to authenticate a different auctioned item in each episode. Jacqui remained director of New Penny until her retirement in 1995. She was a skilful producer, and led each step of the production process with easygoing verve. She was not just good at her job, though. She was warm and kind, and brought to Rumpole a friendly good-humour that was reflected in the tone of the show. Like Rumpole, Jacqui championed the underdog, and treated all cast and crew members equally. As manager of drama at Thames Television from 1968 she oversaw the first broadcast of plays in the afternoon. In 1970 she was made associate producer on Man at the Top, starring Kenneth Haigh, and the following year took the same role on Armchair Theatre. Shortly thereafter, she became a producer. She made more than 100 episodes each of the popular daytime dramas Harriet’s Back in Town (1972-73) and Rooms (1974-77). She went on to produce drama series such as Zodiac (1974), Killers (1976) and Armchair Thriller (1978-81). Her later successes included Not a Penny More, Not a Penny Less (1990), a TV film adaptation of Jeffrey Archer’s 1976 novel of the same name. David Nobbs’s screenplay of Love on a Branch Line by John Hadfield, which starred Michael Maloney as the civil servant Jasper Pye, was Jacqui’s last work to be broadcast, in 1994. Born in Finsbury Park, north London, Jacqui was found abandoned in a guesthouse in Clapham, south-west London, at six weeks old, and was adopted by the owner, Muriel Purdy. She was evacuated to Surrey during the second world war, and returned four years later to Palmers Green, north London, where her family were now living. She attended Winchmore secondary school, which she did not enjoy, and aged 14 left for technical college. She thought she would learn drawing and dress designing. Instead she was forced to take shorthand, typing, mathematics and bookkeeping; all “horrible subjects” as far as she was concerned. Jacqui’s accidental enrolment in secretarial school would, however, stand her in good stead. She married her childhood sweetheart, Guy Davis, who worked for ICI, in 1951. Five years later Guy’s work took them to New York. Jacqui easily found a job with CBS, one of the biggest commercial television stations. She was production secretary on The Seven Lively Arts (1957), an 11-episode anthology series that aired on Sunday afternoons, hosted by John Crosby and executive produced by John Houseman. After three years she returned to Palmers Green and became a researcher on Kenneth Clark’s first art history programmes. In the early 60s, Jacqui decided to take a break from television to pursue her early dream of designing clothes. The Jacqui Davis Boutique opened its doors in Crouch End, where she designed and sold women’s clothing and cufflinks. Jacqui enjoyed being a business owner and designer but, having been surrounded by people all day long in television, did not enjoy spending so much time on her own. Following the breakdown of her marriage in 1967, she returned to television as a production assistant for ABC and then Thames Television. In the summer of 1963 Jacqui bought an empty greengrocer’s shop in south-west London. Over the course of a year, she renovated the building into the house she would live in for the rest of her life. Jacqui is survived by a brother, Angus, and a sister, Pamela. • Una Jacqueline Muriel Davis, television producer, born 10 July 1932; died 28 September 2021Maurice Riordan, in one of his poems, describes a “shoulder tap” as a practical joke. I was not altogether sure what this amounted to until YouTube put me straight – the sneaky touch on a shoulder that leaves the tapped one disconcerted, as they look around to find that there is no one there. Memory itself is the shoulder tap of this collection: the past steals up without warning in often discombobulating bids for attention. In the title poem, it is a boyhood friend Riordan recalls – dead now – who plays this sad prank on him. This is Riordan’s fifth collection in a distinguished career and is finely attuned to the past: he was born in County Cork and his rural Irish roots are still much in evidence. In Madame Bovary, a single memory recalls his youth, and what particularly pleases is the poem’s assured lack of commentary, an underwritten composure that only comes, if you are lucky, with maturity. Riordan’s rogue father heads off on a drinking spree or, in Irish parlance, a “batter” (I had to look that up too). But the most significant thing here has to be the fading volume of Madame Bovary on the windshield. It exists like a promise: one feels confident that Riordan will have eventually picked the Flaubert up before launching himself upon the literary life. How do you judge where you find yourself in a life? In the entertaining Hamartia (meaning: the flaw that leads to a hero’s downfall), a nameless woman turns on Riordan in scornful criticism of his work. She denounces his “fixation on the local” and “Those litanies of place names.” And it goes further downhill from there: And besides you’re stuck in some wormhole. Band names. Brand names. Dead girlfriends. You can only drink out of a straight pint glass. You can only sleep on clean white sheets. You boil pigs’ feet and eat Golden Wonders in their skins. Nothing’s to your liking unless you had it moons ago. The song of the has-been, it pulsates with reckless comedy: Her index finger is prodding my ribcage. Gently now, as though I’m an endangered species. You’re a throwback, a quisling, a swipe left, a a a I’m nodding again. At everything she has to tell me. Undeterred, Riordan’s project is, in part, to see what a “selfie”, in a less trivial sense, might mean in his 60s, at an age where posing is past the point. He is aided by a dextrous imagination and gift for self-ridicule. In The Narcissist, he writes about his interior self-image before owning that: Whenever I’m caught off-guard, in a hotel or new bedroom, it comes as a shock I’m in the presence of another male, who is florid and badly proportioned. You might side with the finger-prodding critic here. You might ask: who cares? But this would be to miss the point. Riordan’s exploration of the oddity of finding yourself one person and not another is a universal experience. And there are tremendous poems on other subjects too: a storm and its fallout, a sheltering fledgling, an unusually erotic game of Monopoly. But the best are about identity at its most mysterious. The Changeling is an especially arresting piece about the elusive self: I thought you can hide in galleries and foreign cities, in bars in daytime, even in a swimming pool. There are hours you can spend loosely tethered to a lover. That “loosely tethered” is perfection. Riordan is an exceptionally accomplished herdsman of words, corralling the unexpected into a single field and stoically soaring above his own doubts. Madame Bovary I’m following the old man out to Clonmult. That’s him bareback on the mare, his head in a cloud of hawthorn, taking her to stud. I’m in the Morris behind, stalling and starting, with Madame Bovary propped open on the dashboard. Nance, the mare, is my small sister, hand- reared with the Pyrex bottle and rubber teat I’d barely surrendered. In the paddock, the black stallion is up on his hindquarters, wielding his yard like it’s a length of plastic hosepipe. Now it’s done, we switch roles – that’s me on Nance belting for home, while my father is gone to the East on his travels, off on a batter, Madame Bovary at Chapter Twelve, yellowing under the windshield. Shoulder Tap by Maurice Riordan is published by Faber (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThose wags at Tate Modern! They spend 21 years telling you figurative painting is dead: 21 years of film projections, dance and guys screaming on monitors. Then they give an old-school figurative painter a retrospective and tell us this is what modern looks like now. Lubaina Himid’s exhibition in the museum’s Blavatnik Building, where time and performance-based art usually rule, is full of the kind of jolly postmodernist pop you usually see at the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition. The vibe this museum projects is heavy and apocalyptic, in keeping with its daunting industrial scale. But this artist is all whimsy. She starts her retrospective with a set of paintings about DIY. Safety instructions from a manual are written out next to pictures of cogs, nails and tools. On speakers nearby, in one of several sound art pieces Himid has created with Magda Stawarska-Beavan, these instructions are repeated. It’s like a very, very soft version of Jasper Johns. And it turns out this whole show is about as dangerous as a painting of a hammer. It doesn’t escape from art into life. The sound work, so early on, seems intended to reassure us that Himid fits perfectly well into Tate Modern. But she’s no more modern than David Hockney – although he’s very modern, in his way. The comparison is not random. When Himid started her art life in the 1980s, it appears, she was a huge Hockney fan. His influence is visible in early paintings such as Ankledeep (1991), with its two pairs of naked feet resting on a splashy spume of blue and white brushstrokes straight out of one of his early 1960s pictures. Hockney himself appears, with the dyed blond hair he still sported in the 1980s, sitting with a man on his lap in Himid’s 1984-6 installation A Fashionable Marriage. When this Hogarth-inspired tableau was shown in the 2017 Turner prize (which she won) in Hull, it seemed angry and satirical. Here, amid all her paintings, it is tamed. It turns out to be an expression of Himid’s fascination with narrative painting. Her 2016 cycle Le Rodeur, taking its name from a French slaving ship, uses Hogarth’s idea of a “progress”, a visual story told across multiple images. Le Rodeur: The Cabin is particularly Hogarthian, set on a ship, where a musician in 18th-century costume plays fife and drum while a waiter brings on a jelly. The crew of Le Rodeur threw 36 shackled west Africans overboard in 1819. Himid’s paintings don’t rage at this incident. Instead it is a dull ache in the background, a fact her characters might be evading or silently brooding about. If this was a play it would be full of pauses. “What is a monument?” asks Himid in a painted text beside a collection of pots, based on jelly moulds, painted with historical portraits, emblems and styles. It’s a good question. Her art deals with memory yet in an oddly meandering way. Historical pain haunts it but the sedate figures and upbeat colours maintain their composure. After a while, you want an explosion. I wanted a video screaming at me, a performer slapping my face. This is all too easy and too polite. The gap between the political and historical themes of Himid’s art and its elegance could be highly effective. Instead, meaning gets reduced to a thin thread of allegory. OK. I get that the sea in all the scenes of Le Rodeur is sinister, the calm of the characters unnatural, when you know it’s about slavery. Yet you won’t see that from the actual images. There are also paintings of utopian buildings, of carpets and near-abstract patterns. Himid enjoys her colours. A sound work keeps repeating the word “blue” in different languages, in a room filled with constructivist arrangements of musical instruments, newspaper (this one) and book covers, all shot through with lacings of blue. As a colourist she fizzes, but as a painter of people and places she’s too damn vague. We see formally composed, stylishly clad groups meeting in bars or living rooms, but each detail is like a quote of a quote. If Tate Modern thinks painting is now modern, it needs to give some thought to why some paintings are just decorative, while others are profound. There’s nothing here to show why this particular skilled and idiosyncratic, but not especially earth-shaking painter belongs in Tate Modern when others of her generation have to be grateful for a show at the less glamorous Tate Britain. I have always wondered what this museum means by “modern”. It turns out to be whatever’s fashionable, and if the wind blows towards painting then let it not be said that Tate Modern does not also blow. Lubaina Himid is at Tate Modern, London, from 25 November to 3 July.Scott Morrison has ducked a direct question about why he called a former Labor senator “Shanghai Sam” 17 times before denying he’d ever used that term. As the opposition doubles down on a campaign of questioning the prime minister’s truthfulness, Morrison was asked to explain why he would use that terminology 17 times on 11 occasions and then deny using it. The prime minister declared on Tuesday he was unaware of “the claim” Labor referred to, and did not intend to take statements in the question “at face value”. But this controversy has surfaced before. Challenged in 2019 on 2GB about his use of “Shanghai Sam” and subsequent denials, Morrison told the radio host Ben Fordham: “Of course I remember saying Shanghai Sam”. In August 2019, he told Fordham he had no regrets about using the moniker. Back then, Morrison said he’d denied using the term because he had misheard a question from a reporter. With a federal election now in sight, Labor is using the final parliamentary sitting fortnight of 2021 to home in on Morrison’s truthfulness. On Monday, under pressure after a sequence of Labor questions, Morrison falsely claimed he had told Anthony Albanese that he was travelling to Hawaii during the black summer bushfires. The prime minister later acknowledged in parliament that wasn’t correct – he had told the Labor leader he was going on leave, but not the specific holiday destination. Morrison responded to Tuesday’s question about his characterisation of the former senator Sam Dastyari by accusing Labor of engaging in “personal” attacks as a substitute for pursuing a policy alternative. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “They come in every day and they engage in personal attacks on me as prime minister,” Morrison said. “That’s OK – bring it on, bring it on Mr Speaker if you want to engage in personal sledging and have a crack at where I go for holidays, and if I go home and spend Father’s Day with my family … bring it on”. “The Labor party thinks sledging, whining and whingeing is a policy”. While Morrison stepped around whether or not particular statements from him had been truthful, he told parliament he remembered the Dastyari furore very well. Dastyari, a New South Wales right-faction Labor powerbroker, quit the Senate in 2017 after weeks of controversy over his links and interactions with Chinese donors. “It was the former Labor senator who disgraced himself … by undermining … Australia’s sovereignty in relation to a foreign country,” Morrison declared on Tuesday. “That’s what the former senator Dastyari did Mr Speaker – he had to leave this place in disgrace”. Morrison said there were now examples in the states “and former [Labor] members of this place, up on charges, off to jail – they’ve got enough people in Silverwater prison to start a branch of the Labor party there, Mr Speaker – that’s what’s going on with the Labor party”. Tuesday’s question time session was rowdy, with parliamentarians testing the mettle and tolerances of the new Speaker of the House of Representatives, Andrew Wallace. Wallace has replaced Liberal Tony Smith, who will retire at the coming election. Smith was given a standing ovation when he farewelled the Speaker’s chair on Monday. Smith told the ABC on Tuesday had he had the power, he would have supported referring former attorney general Christian Porter to the privileges committee over his declaration that part of his defamation legal fees were paid by a blind trust, with funds from an unknown source. Smith said in October there was a “prima facie case” that Porter should be investigated for a possible breach of disclosure rules, but he didn’t express a view on the substantive merits of a referral. Labor used Smith’s comment on Tuesday to raise the Porter matter again with the new Speaker at the conclusion of question time. “Members of this House have spent the past two days praising the member for Casey and the deep integrity he brought to the role of Speaker,” the manager of opposition business Tony Burke said on Tuesday. Burke said Smith’s personal view about the Porter referral was “new information”. He said the House deserved “another opportunity” to consider referring Porter’s use of the trust to the privileges committee. The manager of opposition business said Wallace, the new Speaker, needed to consider giving the issue precedence. “If this matter is allowed to stand, we might as well not have a register of members’ interests at all,” Burke said. “If what the member for Pearce has done is allowed to stand, it means any MP can set up a trust and instruct the trustee to accept donations on a confidential basis only, and then rake in the cash from any source all the while saying well I couldn’t tell you … where my donations are coming from because they were given on the basis of confidentiality.” Burke said trust arrangements of that nature could allow federal MPs to get around a ban on foreign donations. He said the privileges committee needed to examine the precedent. Porter maintains he has properly disclosed his interests in accordance with both the rules and the ministerial standards, but resigned as a minister in September on the basis the issue had become an “unhelpful distraction” for the government. Porter’s colleagues are continuing to speculate that he won’t re-contest the next federal election, and could announce a decision to retire from politics over the coming parliamentary fortnight. Wallace said he would consider his position on the specific issues raised by Burke and come back to the House “as is customary”.Bulb Energy has collapsed, in the biggest ever energy supplier failure. Here we address some of the most important questions for the company’s 1.7 million household customers. Why has this happened? At the start of the energy crisis in September, analysts were warning there would be a tsunami of small energy supplier failures – and 21 suppliers have now collapsed. The cause is simple. Wholesale prices have soared, leaving firms that had not forward-bought all their gas and electricity having to buy it for more than they were able to sell it to customers for. The price cap limits the amount suppliers can charge households. Bulb was a big supplier – why has it failed? The energy crisis just got serious. Until now, the failures have been limited to smaller, little-known suppliers. Bulb was the seventh-biggest supplier, and while it tried to tough it out, in the hope the market would return to normal, it ultimately ran out of time and cash. In recent weeks it was heavily criticised for upping its customers direct debits, in an apparent attempt to bolster its balance sheet. I am a Bulb customer – what happens now? Until now, customers of collapsed suppliers have all been moved to a new supplier appointed by the regulator Ofgem – the supplier of last resort. Those customers had no say in it, and in many cases suffered big price hikes as a result. Bulb is considered too big to go through that process. Instead, a firm of special administrators will take over the day-to-day running of the company. They will be named in the next few days. In reality, Bulb customers will see no difference, and any credit balance that they built up on their account is protected. Customers should continue to pay their direct debits or bills as before. Bulb was unusual in that all its customers were on the same variable – now capped – tariff, meaning they will continue to be charged the same, capped prices – see below. The administrators will seek to run the company until they are in a position to either trade it back into a saleable state or, as is more likely, the market has calmed to the point they can move the customers over to another supplier that actually wants to take them on. What is the price cap? The cap is the maximum your supplier can charge you for each unit of energy, with standing charges and VAT taken into account. For a household with average gas and electricity consumption the charges work out at £1,277 a year – higher-using households could easily see their bills rise to £2,000 a year. For pre-payment customers with average usage, the new cap will equate to an annual bill of £1,309. What is going to happen to prices in future? The price cap changes each October and April, and experts are already warning that it will rise again next spring. In October, the analysts Cornwall Insight predicted the price cap will rise to around £1,660 a year in April for average use, and it could be higher. The hope is that the market calms down and wholesale prices return to normal, at which point consumer prices should also fall, but this is looking unlikely. Can’t I just switch supplier? Normally, switching would be the response to rising prices. However, as happened to the financial markets in 2008, the energy market has all but seized up. While there are a few companies still offering to take on new customers, there is little point in switching, as you will just end up paying the same prices. If this has happened to Bulb, are other big suppliers at risk? That is the million-dollar question. Bulb will not be the last supplier to collapse, but whether it is the last large supplier to fail remains to be seen. While the likes of EDF and the other power-generating companies will be fine, any supplier that has not forward-bought its energy and which relies on the wholesale markets for even a proportion of it is facing an uncertain future. Watch this space.China’s birthrate has plummeted to the lowest level seen in official annual data covering the period from 2020 back to 1978, as the government struggles to stave off a looming demographic crisis. Figures released by the country’s national bureau of statistics show there were 8.5 births per 1,000 people in 2020, the first time in decades that the figure has fallen below 10. In 1978, the figure was more than 18 per 1,000. The statistical yearbook, released at the weekend, said the natural rate of population growth – taking in births and deaths – was also at a new low of 1.45. The government is under pressure to prevent a potential population decline after decades of interventionist policies on childbirth and more recent pressures including high living costs. It did not give reasons for the dramatic drop, but demographers have previously pointed to the relatively low number of women of child-bearing age and the rising cost of raising a family. The yearbook reported a drop in per capita spending on educational, cultural and recreational costs, and health and medical services for rural and urban Chinese, and an increase in household income. Housing costs also rose. China’s population woes are largely driven by a one-child policy that was implemented in 1980 and ran – with some exemptions – until 2015, but they are part of a broader pattern around the world, particularly in east Asia. Governments and local authorities have introduced a swathe of policies seeking to reverse the trend, from relaxing limits on having children, to easing costs associated with education and child rearing, and introducing mandatory “cooling off” periods for divorces. China’s yearbook revealed a fall in divorces for the first time since at least 1985, to about 4.3m, though there were also fewer marriages, 8.14m, compared with 9.27m the year before. But it appears the government’s policies have so far failed to adequately address young people’s concerns about the costs associated with having children. “What the Chinese government is doing has already been done by the Japanese government, and the former is not as rich as the latter,” said Yi Fuxian, a senior scientist in obstetrics and gynaecology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. “Japan can provide free healthcare and education, but China can’t.” Yi, the author of Big Country With an Empty Nest, said there were many social and societal influences on China’s low birthrate, and interventionist policies on reproduction had also shaped public sentiment. “Most people just want one child, as was promoted by the government, and they have become used to having just one child. They don’t want a second or third despite the policy changes,” Yi said. “For the foreseeable future the Chinese government can’t do much, because Japan has done everything it can and must consider its society and economics to make fundamental changes. The difficulty of this is even higher than the reform and opening up in 1979. I don’t know if the Chinese government has such boldness.” Yao Meixiong, a demographics expert and adjunct professor at Huaqiao University’s school of economics and finance, told the local outlet Jiemian that the low levels of desire to have children was a wake-up call for China’s development. “The response to the population crisis is in a race against time, and measures to encourage childbirth must be expedited,” Yao said. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu • This article was amended on 25 November 2021 to clarify a heading and text describing China’s birthrate as the “lowest since 1978”. That year marked the start of a body of data cited (1978-2020) – not a low in Chinese birthrates.Shoppers in the UK are expected to spend almost £9.2bn on the weekend due to Black Friday deals. We would like to hear from delivery drivers who are working and fulfilling orders during this time. What has your experience been like? Are you encountering any issues with delivering parcels? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Adele’s 30 is already the biggest-selling album of the year in the US, just three days after it went on sale. Using a metric that combines sales of vinyl, CDs and downloads alongside streaming, 30 has sold over 575,000 copies. Adele has overtaken the previous highest seller Taylor Swift, whose December 2020 album Evermore has sold 462,000 copies this year. 30, a typically lovelorn album that addresses the musician’s 2019 split from her husband, is also performing strongly in the UK. In the midweek album chart reported yesterday, it outsold the rest of the Top 40 combined, with 167,000 chart sales (again combined sales and streaming figures). Adele looks certain to beat Abba to the biggest first week of 2021, after the Swedes sold 204,000 copies of Voyage on its release last month. The UK’s biggest-selling album of the year so far is Olivia Rodrigo’s Sour, with 320,000 chart sales as of the end of the third quarter in October, according to the Official Charts Company. Adele could also achieve the rare feat of appearing at Nos 1, 2 and 3 in the singles chart, where she currently sits in the midweeks. Easy on Me is set to spend its sixth week at No 1, with Oh My God at No 2 and My Little Love at No 3. Only one artist has achieved that feat before: Justin Bieber, whose singles Love Yourself, Sorry and What Do You Mean occupied the top three in 2016. Swift is currently No 1 in the US and UK album charts with her re-recorded and expanded version of 2012 album Red, Red (Taylor’s Version), making it her 10th chart-topper in the US and eighth in the UK. She is also top of the US singles chart with All Too Well (Taylor’s Version), which at 10 minutes and 13 seconds is the longest song to ever reach No 1 there.The pain was visibly etched on to Kevin Sinfield’s face when he completed his incredible latest fundraising challenge on Tuesday morning. He arrived at Headingley Stadium, 24 hours and 101 miles since leaving Leicester, alongside the wife and daughter of his former rugby league teammate Rob Burrow, the inspiration for his feats. Emotionally and physically exhausted, Sinfield pleaded with the BBC’s Sally Nugent not to make him cry as he spoke of the epic run that has raised more than £1m in aid of research into motor neurone disease, which Burrow suffers from. But as he embraced Burrow on the Headingley pitch you would not have begrudged anyone else shedding a tear or two. Sinfield and Burrow shared an unbreakable bond as players with Leeds Rhinos, winning every trophy there was to win and solidifying themselves as giants of the game. Yet in the two years since Burrow was diagnosed with the disease, that bond has strengthened further. It is not difficult to see why. “To my amazing friend Kev, you don’t realise the impact you have had on me and the whole MND community,” Burrow said as they sat alongside each other. After running seven marathons in seven days last year to support those living with MND, raising £2.7m in the process, Sinfield decided to push his body even further for his latest fundraising feat. The goal? Run the 101 miles from his new employers, the rugby union side Leicester Tigers, to his old home stadium in Leeds in 24 hours without sleep: the equivalent of just under four marathons. Split into 7km sections which Sinfield would aim to complete in under an hour before setting off again, he was joined at various points throughout his Extra Mile challenge by the likes of Alastair Campbell and the Brownlee brothers, Alistair and Jonny, as guest runners. But it was the sight of Burrow’s wife Lindsey and daughter Macy running the final mile with Sinfield on Tuesday morning which truly stirred the emotions of everyone watching. The 41-year-old initially wanted to raise £100,000, split equally between the MND Association and Leeds Hospitals Charity, where a new care centre will be built in Burrow’s name. By Tuesday lunchtime, the total stood at £1.1m, underlining how the friendship between two of the greatest rugby league players of their generation has captured the public’s affection. The sight of Sinfield making a beeline for Burrow as he arrived at the finish line was poignant, to say the least. “I’m broken – I don’t know when I’ll be able to run again,” Sinfield told the BBC shortly after the finish. “Rob knows how much we love and care about him. For those really dark moments, you have to think about Rob. It’s been a real team effort from all the crew and I wouldn’t have got it done without them. It was certainly a battle. We wanted a battle, and we got one.” Sinfield, perhaps understandably, was unable to speak to reporters after completing the challenge, and Burrow’s father said that it is time the Leicester defence coach scales back on his incredible endurance challenges to protect his own wellbeing. “It’s difficult to take in,” Geoff Burrow told PA Media. “While we all knew he would do it, the main thing is that Kevin took care of himself. The money is great but nowhere as important as Kevin’s health. But he’s done it, I don’t know how.” Donations continued to pour in after Sinfield had completed his challenge, with the fundraising web page crashing repeatedly. The rugby league community refer to Sinfield as “Sir Kevin” given the manner in which he contributed so much to the sport during his glittering career as a player. He was awarded an OBE in the Queen’s birthday honours list in June this year but given his recent achievements, the nickname bestowed upon him by supporters may become a reality. • This article was amended on 23 November 2021. A care centre is to be built in Burrow’s name, not a care home as stated in an earlier version.It is not often that Narendra Modi gives a televised address to the nation and it is met with relief, not disarray. The Indian prime minister’s previous frightening acts of decisiveness have included announcing a complete lockdown with just four hours’ notice last year, and withdrawing 85% of the country’s currency overnight in 2016. This most recent on-screen address went another way entirely. When Modi announced his government’s intention to withdraw three controversial farm laws after one of the most prolonged periods of protest ever recorded in India, in which hundreds died in the face of state violence, it was met with mass jubilation. The laws – originally passed during a chaotic voice vote in parliament last year, when the television broadcast was muted so viewers could not hear the opposition – were seen as tools to encourage the corporatisation of agriculture and weaken state protections for farmers. Backed by the International Monetary Fund’s chief economist Gita Gopinath, the US state department, rightwing economists and a large section of India’s pro-Modi, pro-industry media, the laws faced mass opposition among Indians – almost half of whom, according to the most recent census, work in farming. This is a rare climbdown from Modi’s government, and perhaps its most significant. But it would be overambitious to hold up the farmers’ victory as a sign of things to come. The space for dissent in India has shrunk markedly over seven years as the Modi juggernaut has rolled on and emboldened Hindu nationalism; people have found themselves jailed, journalists have faced police action and a Muslim comedian has had to cancel gigs in the face of threats. Despite promises from Modi early on in his term that he would protect freedom of speech, parts of the Indian media now resemble a propaganda wing. The central issue of the farm protests – protection and fair prices for farmers – was one that enjoyed genuine mass support. While led from the front by farm leaders from Punjab’s Sikh and Uttar Pradesh’s Jat communities, the protesters had in their ranks women and men from across the country. Those too poor or elderly to make the trek to Delhi held demonstrations in solidarity locally, capturing the popular imagination with their fortitude, camping out on the streets for months and remaining firm in the face of state violence. The number of protesters is a testament to the huge reach and deep roots of farm unions in India – more than 40 of them came together to organise. While led by the veteran farm organiser, Rakesh Tikait, the movement was not overshadowed by one personality; nor did factional differences split it, and consensus on the issues remained strong. When some protesters became violent, condemnation from the leadership was swift. While political support from opposition parties was cultivated and encouraged, the group held them at arm’s length. The Sikh diaspora across the world, including in the UK, marshalled significant support including, unexpectedly, from Rihanna. Once the protesters had demonstrated to Modi that public opinion was with them, and the time and effort his government had spent trying to discredit the protesters had not gone much further than Delhi TV studios, the spectre of a potential electoral defeat loomed large, as Modi saw his polling drop in states where elections are due to take place next year. But this does not mean that every mass protest in India will have the same impact. In December 2019, Modi’s government enacted the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) which could grant citizenship to illegal immigrants fleeing religious persecution from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh, but only if they were non-Muslim. Simultaneously, the government began work on a national register of citizens (NRC), a version of which it rolled out in the north-eastern state of Assam, forcing immense hardship and misery on people who were unable to produce documents proving their Indian ancestry. Taken together, the CAA and the NRC were widely perceived by Indian Muslims to be an attempt to force them into statelessness and triggered massive nationwide protests. The anti-CAA-NRC protests had some things in common with the farm protests: they blockaded a part of Delhi, were creative, energetic and sustained, and had satellite protest sites across the country. But there was a noticeable difference – this was a “Muslim issue” in a country that has demonstrated an increasingly muscular majoritarianism, and the Indian media was enormously spiteful in its coverage of the protests. Then, in March 2020, the country went into pandemic lockdown and the protests dispersed. If the government begins once again to move on the NRC, it is unclear if the farmers’ victory will energise Muslim protesters and their non-Muslim allies, or if they will meet an angrier state machinery. For now, India’s farmers and their supporters will savour this victory. The broader democratic square remains hemmed in, but perhaps a crack has let some light in. Rukmini S is a data journalist based in Chennai, IndiaThe 2021 autumn international series has been eventful, with northern hemisphere nations enjoying some striking successes over their increasingly weary southern counterparts. Here is The Breakdown’s definitive end-of-year report … Best game France’s 40-25 thrashing of New Zealand in Paris offered a tantalising glimpse of what might lie ahead in the 2023 Rugby World Cup. It was the first time the All Blacks have conceded 40 points to anyone since Ireland beat them in Chicago in 2016 and the 24-6 half-time deficit was the widest New Zealand have ever known. Best men’s player Antoine Dupont (France). An absolute dead cert for the world men’s player of the year award. Les Bleus have a scrum-half with no apparent weaknesses. Best women’s player Sarah Bern (England). Back from injury and looking as strong, mobile and influential as ever. Most impressive individual performance Caelan Doris (Ireland v NZ). The Irish back-rower was all over the All Blacks in Dublin, his side’s best performance since the heights of the Joe Schmidt era. What a shame that injury ruled Doris out of contention for the British &amp; Irish Lions tour. Most dominant team of the month England’s Red Roses. They walloped all comers, including the Black Ferns twice. Will take some beating at next year’s World Cup in New Zealand. Best try Waisea Nayacalevu (Fiji). The Flying Fijians could not beat Wales with 14 men but they did score the most exhilarating try of the month, a counter-attacking gem following a quick tap in their own 22. The rampaging Nayacalevu’s unstoppable dive probably merited this award on its own. Champagne moment Romain Ntamack turning a tight defensive spot into a glorious attacking opportunity from behind his own line against New Zealand in Paris. Best male newcomer Marcus Smith is front and centre of the “new” England but the 20-year-old Freddie Steward at full-back barely put a foot wrong. Best female newcomer Heather Cowell. Two tries and some nifty footwork on her Test debut from the former gymnast now playing on the wing for England. Biggest letdown Australia without Samu Kerevi, Quade Cooper and Sean McMahon. Their decision to return to their Japanese clubs for pre-season training robbed the Wallabies of any collective momentum. Head coach of the autumn Andy Farrell (Ireland). His side’s improvement in attitude, sharpness, desire, fitness and intent has been clear for all to see. Best tackle Courtney Lawes. How he managed to get back and catch Tonga’s flying Telusa Veainu as he surged for the line was a minor miracle. Best pre-match backdrop A tie between Wales v New Zealand in Cardiff and England v Australia at Twickenham. Dramatic lighting, fireworks, flame throwers … rugby union stages its biggest days increasingly well. Best referee Wayne Barnes (England). It was a nice touch by the Rugby Football Union this month to present all living English international referees with their own “Test caps”. Rassie Erasmus water-carrier award Richard Cockerill (England). If anything is finally going to propel World Rugby into banning coaches from running water on to the field it will be the sight of Cockerill on the Twickenham turf as the pressure mounted in the second half of the England v South Africa game. Provocative, moi? Biggest captaincy work-on Courtney Lawes (England). Did an outstanding – and unbeaten – job as England captain in place of Owen Farrell. That said, running on to the pitch after being substituted and remonstrating with the opposition with the game still ongoing is not a globally recognised diplomatic technique. Most emotional moment The Wallaby prop Ollie Hoskins, drafted in at late notice from club duty with London Irish following a raft of front-row injuries, shedding tears of pride and joy after learning of his first Test call-up at the age of 28. Biggest missed team-sheet opportunity What a divine moment it would have been had Wales’s Christ Tshiunza and New Zealand’s Josh Lord faced each other this month. Let’s all pray it happens one day. Best quotes 1) “Our forward pack isn’t weak and we’ll show that on Saturday.” Eddie Jones throws down the gauntlet to the world champions South Africa. 2) “Well, we threw the kitchen sink at them first half and its 5-10. We are going to have to throw the garden shed at them second half!” Donncha O’Callaghan commenting on the Ireland v New Zealand game. 3) “I’m not going to lie, that one hurt.” The All Black hooker Dane Coles after his side’s 40-25 loss to France in Paris. 4) “Due to the actions of Mr Erasmus, my family and I have endured a significant amount of distress and we will only have negative memories of the whole experience.” The Australian referee Nic Berry, whose post-Lions tour testimony was belatedly released this month by World Rugby. 5) “I thought some of the decision-making by the officials was horrendous. We’ll end up getting an apology next week but it won’t help the result.” The Wallabies head coach Dave Rennie fumes at the officiating of the Wales v Australia game. He has already forgotten about 4) above. 6) “Sad not to be with the boys. I do however get the feeling the two months will not be so bad as feared.” A tweet from Rassie Erasmus accompanied by a picture of a pint of Guinness. End of year northern hemisphere pecking order: 1 France, 2 Ireland, 3 England, 4 Scotland, 5 Wales, 6 Georgia. Autumn series XV F Steward (England), W Jordan (New Zealand), H Slade (England), D De Allende (South Africa), M Mapimpi (South Africa), R Ntamack, (France), A Dupont (France); S Kitshoff (South Africa), P Mauvaka (France), T Furlong (Ireland), E Etzebeth (South Africa), C Woki (France), C Doris (Ireland), T Basham (Wales), A Savea (New Zealand). • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Will Westlake, a Starbucks barista in Hamburg, New York, whose store recently filed for a union election, was told by a manager he could attend an earlier mandatory anti-union meeting on 8 November because he was scheduled to work early the next day. The meeting was in a nearby hotel and when Westlake arrived he found out he was the only worker in attendance, with six members of Starbucks management. The meeting lasted for about one hour. “That was basically how my last anti-union meeting was, totally separated from the rest of my co-workers and having to be surrounded,” said Westlake. “They started off by going around and saying that they wanted me to vote no for the union. And then they went back and forth talking about how great all the benefits are at Starbucks and if we vote in a union, we may not have any of those benefits.” Westlake emphasized the numerous anti-union meetings have been framed as listening sessions, but it’s the workers who have been doing most of the listening: the sessions have largely consisted of management presenting anti-union talking points, with little feedback from workers involved. Westlake’s experience is just one part of an aggressive anti-union campaign run by the giant coffee chain as six Starbucks stores in the Buffalo, New York, area have filed for union elections with the National Labor Relations Board in recent weeks. If successful, the stores would be the first Starbucks corporate locations to unionize in the US. Workers have reported numerous captive audience meetings, one-on-one meetings, store shutdowns, closures, remodelings, and text messages – a mode of contact that was previously used only for emergencies. Dozens of corporate executives have flooded stores with the intent to deter workers from voting to unionize, workers say. “The company has sent more managers here to Buffalo than workers voting in the first three elections. There’s no way it can be viewed as anything other than an attempt to spy on partners and intimidate them,” said Brian Murray, a Starbucks barista in Lancaster, New York. Murray added: “Every day we’re forced to deal with new managers we’ve never met and it’s draining to have to go through constant anti-union meetings, text messages and managers trying to pry into our lives. It shouldn’t be acceptable for them to treat anyone like this, especially during the lead-up to an election that should be free and fair.” The former Starbucks CEO and billionaire Howard Schultz visited Buffalo to present a case against unionizing to workers on 6 November and incited criticism for making an analogy to the Holocaust in discussing the company’s mission. Starbucks Workers United filed an unfair labor practice charge with the NLRB on 4 November over Starbucks’ conduct during the union campaign, which included Starbucks shutting down two stores that are holding union elections and transferring workers to disrupt the voting units. Starbucks characterized the closures as coincidental. “As soon as the baristas publicly announced they wanted to have a union, corporate executives swarmed into the stores to try to stop them with threats, promises, store closings and overwhelming pressure,” said Richard Bensinger, an organizer with Starbucks Workers United. He said all 21 employees at the Starbucks store in Cheektowaga, New York, had signed the union election petition, but the company then expanded the voting list to 46 workers. At another store, Bensinger said, 80% of workers signed union authorization cards, and Starbucks shut down that store as well. The company transferred workers to other stores and turned the location into a training center. According to a December 2019 report conducted by the Economic Policy Institute, US employers are charged with violating labor law in 41.5% of all union elections and spend nearly $340m annually on union avoidance consultants, tactics that labor leaders and many elected officials are hoping to rein in with the Pro Act in Congress. “It’s been really stressful, especially when there are times when they come in a group of four or five of them to talk to every single person on the floor. It’s 10am, peak coffee time, and we’re trying to keep up business while they’re trying to do one-on-one meetings with people to gauge what’s going on with them, and that’s been frustrating,” said Angel Krempa, a shift supervisor at the Starbucks location in Depew, New York, just outside Buffalo. Krempa’s is of three stores that filed for a union election with the NLRB this month, joining three other nearby stores that have begun their mail-in ballot elections. Krempa said that since the union organizing drive went public, Starbucks has sent dozens of corporate executives to the Buffalo area, including two support managers to her store, which had operated without an assistant manager. As corporate executives have shown up at stores as a part of the anti-union campaign, her store manager, along with several others in the area, have resigned. She noted that shortly after her store filed for their union election, on 9 November, Starbucks announced the store would be remodeled, the third time in the past eight months. The corporate presence, Krempa argued, has worsened working conditions, as workers feel constantly under surveillance, and it has consistently disrupted regular job duties, while problems such as short staffing, lack of proper training and safety measures remain unresolved. “It’s really just a spying technique, and it’s made most of our baristas really uncomfortable, because it feels like instead of a helping hand, it’s more of an eye in the sky right in front of you, and they’re waiting for you to mess something up,” added Krempa. “We’re here to just bring back the accountability that Starbucks says they’re trying to give to us and make sure that Starbucks is the good company that they say they are, and this is how we feel we can make sure that happens. Starbucks needs to allow partners to continue to fight for themselves and the company because that’s all we’re trying to do.” Starbucks deferred comment to a letter by the Starbucks executive vice-president – North America, Rossann Williams, who noted operational changes in the Buffalo area were a response to operational gaps. “We care deeply about our partners here in Buffalo, as we do in every market across the country, and we want to preserve our partner to partner relationship,” wrote Williams. “While it is certainly our partners’ right to make their own decision – and one we fully respect – I do hope our partners will give us a chance as they make the best decision for themselves, their families and their fellow partners.”New Yorker Fiction In this monthly podcast, a celebrated writer selects a short story from the New Yorker’s archive to read and discuss with the magazine’s fiction editor, Deborah Treisman. The pleasure here lies as much in the pairings of authors with material as it does the stories themselves: Margaret Atwood reading Alice Munro, or Andrew Sean Greer reading Dorothy Parker, or Tessa Hadley reading John Updike. There is much to be learned about the craft and discipline of short fiction writing from the subsequent discussions, too. A recurring point: fewer words is always better. Also, check out The New Yorker: The Writer’s Voice, where writers read their own stories. Longform Approaching its 10th anniversary, the Longform podcast is a weekly hour-long interview with a nonfiction writer about their work, practice and personal philosophies. When it was founded in 2012, as a co-production of Longform.org and the Atavist magazine, co-hosts Max Linsky, Evan Ratliff and Aaron Lammer drilled down into aspects of the craft such as note-taking and revising drafts. These days the scope of their warm, considered conversations has broadened to be as much about life as about writing. Dig into the archives to hear from greats such as Gay Talese, Renata Adler, Ta-Nehisi Coates, Ariel Levy, Ira Glass, Michael Lewis, George Saunders, Susan Orlean and Robert McKee. Much of their advice applies to all writers, but for a podcast with a fiction slant, check out First Draft. In Writing With Hattie Crisell Now in its fourth series, for this pod Hattie Crisell, a contributing editor of Grazia magazine, interviews writers of all kinds about “how they write, why they write, and what they can teach us about doing it better”. There are lessons for everyone who works with words and stories here, from bona fide publishing powerhouses Curtis Sittenfeld and David Nicholls to comedians, playwrights, critics and even songwriters. Crisell is an engaging interviewer who puts her subjects at ease so that they speak freely and frankly about the realities of life as a full-time writer – not least the horror of the blank page. Those just starting out might be heartened to hear that it never gets easier. Writer’s Routine and The National Writing Centre’s The Writing Life are two more UK interview podcasts focusing on the day-to-day. Start With This Start With This is like a look inside the engine room of the hit podcast Welcome to Night Vale, as co-creators Jeffrey Cranor and Joseph Fink aim to help you “put your ideas in motion”. Each episode discusses a challenge or an aspect of writing – from scene-setting to plotting, finding one’s voice to overcoming perfectionism – before setting the listeners two practical assignments relevant to the subject: “something to consume” and “something to create”. The series concluded last month but, with episodes totalling an entire day and a half, Start With This presents an accessible, supportive step towards starting and extending a regular writing practice. Ann Kroeker, Writing Coach is another podcast with practical exercises (with the added bonus of bitesize episodes as short as 15 minutes). Between the Covers With episodes often in excess of two hours, this fortnightly “literary radio show” is one to sink into rather than blitz on your commute. But when you have time to invest, Between the Covers will expand your horizons, in both the exceptional curation of the interviewees – spanning all literary forms, all over the world – and the depth of their conversation. Even if you are not familiar with the works being discussed, host David Naimon will pique your interest. He is patient, never presumptuous, curious and well-informed. This podcast is like the best writer’s festival talk you’ve ever been to, fitting in with your schedule and with no unedifying Q&amp;A session at the end.“Something’s haunting you, Mr Black. I can see it. Hope you get the chance to confront it.” With this utterance coming from Kate Dickie, playing a one-eyed ferry operator who keeps a stuffed crow on her boat, you know that confrontation is a given. She’s just shipped Eric Black (Tom Hughes) and his collie Baxter across a menacing stretch of water to the prehistoric-looking Scottish island where a husk of a cottage and a job as resident shepherd await him. “Escaping or running?” she asks, but he dodges the question. What is left unsaid is that he has just buried his pregnant wife Rachel (Gaia Weiss), something his face – a study in pasty desolation – suggests he may have had a hand in. Dickie’s goading suggests this might be framed as another self-consciously salty yarn along the lines of Robert Eggers’ 2019 film The Lighthouse, which, like Shepherd, was inspired by the Smalls lighthouse tragedy. But director Russell Owen’s less humorous brand of confinement horror takes a different tack. Eric corrals his sheep, starts glimpsing a jet-black revenant, and is transfixed by a sinister lighthouse prone to letting its fog-bell clank at dramatically emphatic moments; his isolation is reinforced largely through oppressive sound design. Said bell, dank reverb, creaking timbers, ticking clocks and a score heavy on the scything strings all combine into a psychological cacophony that feels like an Alfred Hitchcock migraine rattling around inside Hans Zimmer’s washing-machine drum. It’s a shame that the relentless sonic assault tends to drown out the emotional impact when snippets of Eric and Rachel’s past are periodically shaken free. Keeping deliberately permeable barriers between his protagonist’s waking and dream lives, moreover, lets Owen off the hook for the film’s lack of narrative precision. He does, though, excel at atmosphere, both with the imposing geographic scale and the musty cragside close-ups; Hughes, meanwhile, sparely conveys Eric’s muted agony. In the end though, while a bit self-defeating, this attempt at a maximalist style is ultimately admirable. • Shepherd is released in cinemas on 26 November.Nothing makes sense. Along the east coast of England, British employers scan the horizon. They are desperate for any migrant workers whom Boris Johnson will bless with visas to pick fruit, kill turkeys, staff hotels or care for elderly people. At the same time along the south coast British politicians howl with horror at boatloads of just such people as they come ashore, desperate to offer their services. Brexit is a shamble of hypocrisies. Immigration materially affects very few Britons. It is more a feature of the politics of xenophobia. The 24,000 asylum seekers who have crossed the Channel so far this year are presented by eager Tories as presaging a new Viking horde or a Norman conquest. There is something ominous in people arriving on beaches, rather than coming through Terminal 5. Turn the boats around, cries home secretary Priti Patel. Send them to Albania or the Falklands. Blame the French. Blame the Border Force. Blame those snowflakes in the lifeboat service. If the refugees land, make them sorry they ever left home. Johnson may have backed immigrants when he was London mayor – and needed them. Now he apparently spends half his time trying to stop them. In reality the cabinet should fall to its knees and give thanks for having to deal with only 24,000 refugees. Italy this year has had 60,000. More than 150,000 entered Europe, mostly through the Balkans. This is paltry alongside the Syrian surge of close to a million in 2015, who now seem to have merged miraculously into the German economy. Most of these refugees are by definition “middle class”. They have paid dearly for their journey. They include doctors, engineers, academics and nurses; builders, cooks and farmers. These are occupations Europe badly needs and which Europe’s open labour markets, notably Britain’s, have traditionally welcomed. The free-market pretensions of leading Brexiters now emerge as only skin deep. Behind the authoritarian slogan of “take back control” and fuelled by the toxins of lockdown, Johnson, Michael Gove and Jacob Rees-Mogg are erecting a pastiche of a command economy. They must decide how many Bulgarian butchers Britain needs, or Romanian fruit pickers, or whether a German truck driver speaks enough English. They are control fanatics. Meanwhile the 650 Chinese millionaires who arrived this year are a “boost to Britain”, while a destitute Afghan doctor is a threat to the British way of life. We should never forget that the chief driver of the current surge in European immigration is the west’s crusade of devastation of the Muslim world over the past two decades. Its destabilising chaos spread from Afghanistan to Iraq, Kurdistan, Libya, Syria and Lebanon. We can hardly complain when the victims of our arrogant aggressions come beating on our door. Of all the fantasies of Brexit, the stupidest was that it would enable Britain to withstand the tides of global migration. Nor should a robust economy need to do so. Growth needs immigrants. The idea that Britain might actually prosper by denying itself access to the EU’s labour pool was illiterate. Instead in London we now have an intellectual, and a human, obscenity. Near the NHS’s chronically understaffed University College hospital is a hotel recently requisitioned by the Home Office. It is packed with hundreds of mostly English-speaking Afghan refugees, kept in limbo by Patel and banned from working. Why? It is the sure sign of a state gone mad. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistHockey is still such a big deal in the Iron Range town of Eveleth, Minnesota, that a 110ft, 10,000lbs stick can be found less than a mile from the US Hockey Hall of Fame over on Hat Trick Avenue. The big stick, a real wooden stick, sits in front of a big puck. Between the stick and the hall is Eveleth-Gilbert Senior High School, home of the Golden Bears, who won five of the first seven Minnesota state hockey championships as Eveleth High. Both the 1960 and 1980 USA gold-medal Olympic hockey teams included players from Eveleth. Because most high-grade natural iron ore has been taken from the Iron Range, however, the population of Eveleth is about half what it was before World War Two, and Eveleth-Gilbert High is merging with a neighboring rival school into Rock Ridge High, home of the Wolverines. Hockeyland, a 107-minute Northlands Films production directed by Tommy Haines, an Iron Range native, takes a closer look at how entrenched the sport still is in Eveleth, the Iron Range and Minnesota, even though practically everything else has changed. “Hockey is the glue for these towns,” Haines tells the Guardian about the film, which premiered earlier this month in New York. “They’re still coming out and packing these arenas, night in and night out.” The film tells the story of the 2019-20 Golden Bears, a senior-laden team that had a good chance of going farther in the state playoffs than most Eveleth-Gilbert teams since 1998, when the Golden Bears won the state small-schools championship. They had not won a playoff game in 18 years. As a contrast, the film also chronicles the 2019-20 Hermantown Hawks, from the suburbs of Duluth, an hour to the south of Eveleth. As Eveleth’s population dwindled, Hermantown’s got bigger, and, partly as a consequence, the Hawks became a hockey power. The kids from the two schools, not surprisingly, turn out to have a lot in common: playing hurt, coping with family illnesses, figuring out what to do next, romance, teenage angst. With shaggy blond hair under backward baseball caps, the players even look like each other. Along the way, the film hammers home the fact that it is mighty cold during hockey season in northern Minnesota, with plenty of overhead shots of remote woodland, with bare tree limbs black next to the fallen snow on the ground. Best to watch this film in front of a fire. But the kids cope with the weather, like when they have to shovel out a buddy’s car that is stuck in the snow – or shovel off their roofs to prevent heavy snowfall from caving them in. They even thrive outdoors, taking time for snowmobiles, ice fishing and pond hockey. Sometimes, the stories of the two teams get tangled: Wait, is that guy from Eveleth or Hermantown? But hockey is always the common thread. The Eveleth-Gilbert coach could be the Hermantown coach, or any other coach, when he tries to fire up his team before a playoff game by admitting, “I’m so jacked up right now, I wish I had a little eligibility left to get you guys going!” Naturally, the two teams, who meet once in the regular season, are on a collision course in the playoffs (you won’t find any spoilers here). At season’s end, one player says, tearfully, “Hockey has been so good to me. I can’t express how passionate I am about the sport.” Hoosiers, the film loosely based on a real-life basketball team in Indiana in the mid-1950s, pretty much set the standard for the high-school-sports-in-a-small-town coming-of-age subgenre when it came out in 1986. Hockeyland won’t be the last film to try to tell compelling stories about how a sport affects Americana, and vice versa. Hockeyland completes a Northland Films hockey trilogy. The first, Pond Hockey, focusing on youth hockey, was recognized by ESPN as “the best and purest hockey movie ever.” The second, Forgotten Miracle, chronicles the 1960 US gold-medal team, now largely overshadowed by the 1980 Miracle on Ice. Of Eveleth-Gilbert, Haines says, “I’d been looking for a story to follow. That they were going away was a big reason for doing it.” Focusing simply on Eveleth-Gilbert in the documentary might have been cleaner, but the parallel story of Hermantown gave Haines a chance to develop a subplot: What happens to the Hawks’ gifted center, Blake Biondi, who passed up a chance to play junior hockey, the smoothest route to the NHL, so he could spend his senior year in Hermantown. Haines acknowledges that he – not to mention hundreds of high school hockey players in the State of Hockey – was extremely fortunate, because the state championships, held at the Minnesota Wild’s arena in St Paul, were decided on 7 March 2020, only a few days before the coronavirus pandemic shut down sports for months. High school hockey in Minnesota is only returning to normal now. But Eveleth-Gilbert played its final season in 2020-21. The Rock Ridge Wolverines are scheduled to open their season on 30 November. A gorgeous new arena will be the team’s home instead of the ancient and venerable Eveleth Hippodrome, “the Hipp,” which played host to its first hockey game in 1922. It won’t be quite the same, but certain parts of the sport, and sports’ role in American culture, are likely to never change. “By the end of the film, you’re rooting for them to succeed at life,” Haines says of the 2019-20 teams. But he could have been talking about players from any Minnesota high school hockey team.The deadliest war ever fought between Latin American states saw Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay team up to invade Paraguay, kill its headstrong ruler Francisco Solano López and wipe out nearly half its people. Allegations are still voiced across the region – in schoolbooks, newspapers and documentaries, and by politicians and journalists – that a “fourth ally” was pulling the strings behind the 1864-70 war of the Triple Alliance: Britain. But a book by a Brazilian historian recently published in Paraguay has concluded that the theory is a “historic lie” and that the conflagration’s causes lay entirely within the region – provoking a fresh row with those convinced that Britain played a role. In researching The War Is Ours: England Didn’t Cause the Paraguayan War, Alfredo da Mota Menezes trawled through volumes of correspondence between British diplomats in Buenos Aires, Montevideo and London. “There’s not a single line that proves that England encouraged or took part in the war,” said Da Mota Menezes. “There’s absolutely nothing.” Instead, his book points to a series of fatal blunders made by South American leaders. In 1864, Brazil invaded Uruguay and installed a puppet government. But López, Paraguay’s president, had promised to come to its aid if attacked, and marched his armies into Brazil – and across Argentinian territory – in response. Pedro II of Brazil, President Bartolomé Mitre of Argentina, and López’s enemies in Uruguay then signed a pact agreeing to overthrow Paraguay’s bellicose strongman. It took five long years of bloody trench warfare, urban bombardments and river battles between canoe-borne warriors and ironclad steamships for Paraguay to be conquered. As many as half a million lives were lost to disease, starvation and bullets. But the idea that Britain was behind López’s downfall comes from the “erroneous conception that Paraguay was a superpower before the war”, said María Victoria Barrata, a historian and professor at the University of Buenos Aires. According to this “conspiracy theory” – which started gaining force among revisionist historians in Argentina in the 1950s – London bankers plotted to flood Paraguay’s surging, self-sufficient economy with British goods, or to plant cotton for Lancashire textile mills in its fertile, red soil. “The certainty came first. Then they looked for the sources to back it up,” said Barrata – despite the role played by British engineers in sustaining Paraguay’s war effort. During the cold war, as the United States helped topple leftist governments across the region, Latin American writers projected the same scenario backwards on to the British Empire – itself notorious for multiple atrocities around the world. The 1982 conflict over the Falkland Islands, claimed by Argentina as Las Malvinas, further strengthened “the idea of the English as pirates and the enemy”. “In the public imagination, England is evil and orchestrated the war,” agreed Ana Barreto Vallinoti, a Paraguayan historian and biographer of Madame Lynch, the Irish courtesan-turned-consort of López. “It’s repeated and repeated,” she added, pointing to the huge influence of the Uruguayan writer Eduardo Galeano’s Open Veins of Latin America (1971) and American Genocide (1979) by Júlio José Chiavenato, a Brazilian journalist. Da Mota Menezes suggested that the thesis of British responsibility dies hard for psychological reasons: it salves the conscience of the victors and massages the ego of the loser. “For Paraguay, it’s like a consolation prize,” he said, adding that he has already received complaints from aggrieved readers. “It tells them they held out for five years against three countries and the greatest power in the world.” “The oligarchies of Brazil and Argentina” were directed by “English and extractivist interests,” insisted Ricardo Canese, a Paraguayan member of the regional parliament, Parlasur. “If they hadn’t had British financing, the history would have been different.” In May, Parlasur voted to create a truth and justice commission to examine “crimes against humanity” committed during the conflict. Canese has pointed to Queen Victoria as one of the main culprits. “It was a genocide,” he argued. “The Paraguayan people resisted to the very end.”Australia’s defence minister has stood by his comments about a potential military conflict over Taiwan, insisting he was not pre-committing Australia to war but declaring he wanted to deter “aggression” from the Chinese Communist party. Peter Dutton also ramped up his warnings about how China had changed under the rule of its president, Xi Jinping, declaring: “It’s really important that we understand what point in history we are [at].” Dutton went on the attack on Tuesday in response to a substantial foreign policy speech by the Labor Senate leader, Penny Wong, who accused the defence minister of amping up the threat of war over Taiwan in a “dangerous” pre-election tactic. Dutton also denied dog-whistling when he told parliament Wong “today doesn’t stand up for” Australian values. Another Labor frontbencher called Dutton’s remark “appalling” and “inappropriate”. With the Morrison government set to face an election by May, and lagging behind Labor in major opinion polls, there has been speculation the Coalition may seek to make national security a key issue in the lead up to the poll. Wong, the shadow foreign minister, said Dutton’s “binary” comments about Taiwan were not “the way in which we are most likely to create that incentive” to preserve the status quo. The Australian government and the Labor party have both raised concerns in recent times about an increase in Chinese military pressure against Taiwan, a democratically governed island of 24 million people, amid Beijing’s long-term goal of “unification” with what it considers its territory. Wong took aim at Dutton for telling the Australian newspaper earlier this month: “It would be inconceivable that we wouldn’t support the US in an action if the US chose to take that action.” She characterised this as out of step with the US policy of strategic ambiguity, while agreeing that the risk of conflict over Taiwan had increased. At a doorstop interview at parliament house late on Tuesday, Dutton said Australia needed to “provide a deterrence against actions … because the Communist party has been very clear about their intent in relation to Taiwan”. He also criticised the CCP over its “completely unacceptable” activities across the South and East China seas, the crackdown in Hong Kong, border clashes with India, and “coercion and grey zone activity and cyber-attacks on our country and on our near neighbours”. Dutton, a significant conservative figure in the Morrison government, said his comments had been about what might happen if China invaded Taiwan and if the US responded with military action. He reaffirmed that “in my judgment, it would be inconceivable under the alliance that Australia wouldn’t go to be standing by the side of the United States”. He said he did not think there was “anything remarkable” in that statement. “But it wasn’t a precommitment – it wasn’t anything other than a statement of reality, and if the Labor party has a different position, I’d like to hear it, because it seems today, that they do have different position,” Dutton told reporters. On ABC’s 7:30, Dutton accused Labor of “starting to walk away” from its bipartisan commitment to the Australia-UK-US (Aukus) partnership. He cited Wong’s speech and claimed it “could have been written by Paul Keating”, a reference to the former Labor prime minister telling the press club the Aukus submarines would have no impact on China. Earlier, Dutton also argued Wong should have condemned China’s acting ambassador to Australia, Wang Xining, over his recent comments that the Aukus nuclear-powered submarine plan would brand Australia as a “sabre wielder” and a “dangerous guy”. Wang told Guardian Australia last week China’s infamous list of grievances against Australia should be longer than 14 points, and that politicians like Dutton should refrain from “destructive” commentary. Dutton accused Labor of being “weak” on national security, telling parliament: “I notice the acting Chinese ambassador has been out attacking Australian values and Senator Wong today doesn’t stand up for those values; instead, she folds in a fit of weakness.” The Labor frontbencher, Andrew Giles, said: “It was an appalling allegation, untrue, inappropriate and carrying consequences – which should not have been made, and should be withdrawn.” Wong later hit back at Dutton. “Mr Dutton is proving my point by lying about what I said in my speech today, lying about Labor’s position on Aukus and Anzus, and abandoning long-held bipartisan foreign policy positions,” Wong said. “Labor supports Aukus, we support Anzus, and we are sticking to the long-held bipartisan position on Taiwan, even if Mr Dutton is walking away from it.” Asked whether his comments were a dog whistle, Dutton said in his 20 years in parliament he could not recall “an ambassador from any other country carrying on the way that the Chinese ambassador has”. He said the acting ambassador’s comments were an example of China’s “wolf warrior” diplomacy, and Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson should have condemned them. China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, accused Dutton on Monday of “extremely absurd and irresponsible” remarks and of “hyping up” the China threat. Zhao said the submarine deal among the US, the UK and Australia “deliberately escalates regional tensions, stimulates [an] arms race, threatens regional peace and stability, and undermines international nuclear non-proliferation efforts”. Xi told south-east Asian leaders at a summit on Monday that China would “never seek hegemony, still less bully smaller countries”. The Chinese president said his country was “prepared to sign the Protocol to the Treaty on the south-east Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone as early as possible”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Dutton said China’s criticisms of Aukus did not stand up to scrutiny, in light of its own rapid military build up. He said China had 355 ships and submarines, and that was projected to increase to 460 by 2030. He said the Australian submarines would be nuclear-propelled, not nuclear-armed. Dutton challenged critics to point to anything he said that was factually incorrect, while conceding “it might be, you know, diplomatically more adequate for me not to make mention of some of these facts”. He said it would be wrong to “pretend that China is like it was 10 years ago”. Dutton said China was “a very different country under the current president”. In her address to the Australian National University, Wong backed the Australian government’s position opposing the trade actions China has taken against Australian export sectors over the past 18 months – something the Morrison government has labelled “economic coercion”. Wong said China had changed and its actions across a range of contexts were not “the behaviour of a responsible global power”. “There will be enduring differences that need to be managed and dealt by whoever is in government,” Wong said.Book now Life as the parent of a teenager can be at once exhilarating, exhausting and challenging and may even make you feel as though your own teenage years were so different to that of your child’s, that you feel wholly separate from them. Adolescence - and all the unique behavioural changes that come with it - is a normal adaptive stage of human development, and to become a well-rounded adult, these changes can be significant and dynamic. Dr Bettina Hohnen and Dr Jane Gilmour lead this informative and insightful masterclass, which will reveal to you how we have never before understood post-pubescent changes in the brain so well. You will learn how the implications are shifting the narrative from sulky, stroppy teens, to the view of the adolescent years as a time of great opportunity and passion, deep neural sensitivity and enormous potential - and a look to young climate activists will nod to these characteristics. Using scientifically-backed evidence, engaging activities, and takeaway strategies, Bettina and Jane will guide you through the specific brain changes that occur in teenagers, and why they are a necessary part of the developmental process, as well as how adults are responsible for taking a different approach to helping them maximise their true potential. You will come away with a deeper understanding for how pubescent changes can positively impact family life, how strong relationships and meaningful communication are the bedrock through which we can support teens, and the essential tools for launching your teen into a fulfilling and healthy adulthood. You can purchase a ticket with a copy of The Incredible Teenage Brain: Everything You Need To Know To Unlock Your Teen’s Potential at checkout for the combined price of £64.99 including postage and packing. This course is for … Parents or carers of teenagers Teachers and care workers Course content The unique aspects of the incredible human brain An introduction to scientific concepts such as neuroplasticity and their relevance for learning An orientation to five key facets of the world that attract the teenage brain An overview of the central drivers and motivations of the teen brain, and how they translate into the real world How to capitalise on the unique attributes of the teenage brain for success in school and family life A practical guide to getting through tough conversations and meltdowns with young people A review of communication tips that will engage the incredible teenage brain Tutor profiles Dr Bettina Hohnen is a clinical psychologist, author and presenter. Driven by her passion for mental health, she works with individuals, families, schools, organisations and the government to embed an evidence-based understanding of what helps young people to thrive. Her prestigious academic credentials and ongoing work as a lecturer across University College London have equipped her with the necessary skills to understand neuroscience and psychological science. She co-wrote The Incredible Teenage Brain (Everything You Need to Know to Unlock a Teen’s Potential), writes for the national press, and is a regular guest on podcasts as well as presenting her own with Dr Jane Gilmour, called Incredible Conversations. How to Have Incredible Conversations with Your Child, co-authored with Jane, is her latest book. Bettina’s goal is to help busy people understand the science and adapt ways to support young people. Dr Jane Gilmour is a parent, mental health professional, author and broadcaster. She aims to deliver engaging, jargon-free science to inspire change in families. She is a consultant clinical psychologist at Great Ormond Street Hospital, and course director for postgraduate child development programmes at University College London, where she lectures on neuropsychology, neurodevelopmental conditions and therapeutic issues. She has published numerous academic articles and chapters. Her media presence includes appearances on BBC TV, radio and press commissions. Her first book for parents and teachers (with co-authors Dr Bettina Hohnen and Dr Tara Murphy) is The Incredible Teenage Brain Book, and was published in 2019. How to Have Incredible Conversations with Your Child, co-authored with Bettina, is her latest book. Using an innovative format, the book invites parents and children to use the book together in a shared experience, to strengthen their communication skills and understanding. Price: £49 (plus booking fee); £64.99 with a copy of The Incredible Teenage Brain: Everything You Need To Know To Unlock Your Teen’s Potential (plus booking fee). You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6.30pm (GMT). Details Book now Date: Tuesday 1 March 2022 Times: 6.30pm-8.30pm (GMT) Price: £49 (plus £2.66 booking fee) or £64.99 for book + ticket (plus £3.34 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6.30pm GMT | 7.30pm CET | 10.30am PST | 1.30pm EST Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible – but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.China’s foreign ministry has accused unnamed people of “malicious hyping” in the case of the tennis star Peng Shuai, in a hardline and unrepentant response to questions in the west over her wellbeing. The whereabouts and wellbeing of Peng, a former doubles world number one, has become a matter of international concern over the past three weeks, after she alleged in a message on the Chinese social media site Weibo that the country’s former vice-premier, Zhang Gaoli, had sexually assaulted her. Peng ceased to be seen in public shortly after she made her allegation on 2 November. Some countries are weighing up a potential boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics, which is due to take place in February, and assurances by Chinese authorities that Peng is safe and well have been met with scepticism, especially by the Women’s Tennis Association. “This is not a diplomatic matter,” the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, told a regular press briefing on Tuesday. “I believe everyone will have seen she has recently attended some public activities and also held a video call with the IOC [International Olympic Committee] president, [Thomas] Bach. I hope certain people will cease malicious hyping, let alone politicisation.” Mentions of the 35-year-old have been heavily censored in China since early this month. But outside the country, an online campaign under the hashtag #WhereIsPengShuai – joined by stars including Naomi Osaka and Serena Williams – has taken off, particularly after the Chinese state media published an email purportedly written by Peng that said she was “fine”. Peng reappeared over the weekend in Beijing and held a video call with the Bach on Sunday. The IOC reported that she was “safe and well”, but its apparent attempt to ease international concern drew it into the line of fire. The organisation was subsequently accused of staging a “publicity stunt” for Beijing. “That’s not a safeguarding call by any means. Tennis should have been able to have that call, it should have been a safeguarding officer having that call – not a publicity stunt,” said Nikki Dryden, a human rights lawyer and former Olympic swimmer for Canada. With talk of a diplomatic boycott of the Winter Games on the rise, pro-government actors in China are framing the issue as an ideological struggle with the west. “The ideological conflicts between China and the west will escalate before the Beijing Winter Olympics in 2022 as anti-Chinese forces will converge to make trouble for China,” the Global Times wrote in an editorial on Monday. “China used to care about maintaining a harmonious atmosphere with the west and the way being regarded by the rest of the world, particularly by the west. This needs to be changed.” Reuters contributed to this reportLabor has blasted Nationals leader Barnaby Joyce for being set to appoint the retiring mayor of Tamworth, Col Murray, as the new chair of Infrastructure Australia. Asked on Tuesday by the shadow infrastructure Catherine King whether he could confirm that the Morrison government had decided, but not yet announced, that Murray, “who has described himself as a fairly solid Barnaby supporter” would be the new chair of the infrastructure advisory body, Joyce rounded on the opposition. “What is wrong with the former mayor of Tamworth?” he said. “Does he not have quite enough letters after his name to be considered worthy by the Labor party – a person who has been in the construction industry for 25 years; a person who was one of the leading mayors in New South Wales; a person who has underpinned the growth of one of our great regional cities?” The question was clearly a fishing exercise to establish Joyce’s plans for Infrastructure Australia, which currently has an acting chair. But the deputy prime minister contended the question showed Labor wasn’t committed to regional Australia. “What would you have said about Chifley – that his train wasn’t big enough? What has happened to the Labor party?” Joyce blustered, accusing his opponents of being “academic snobs”. Murray characterised himself in an interview with The Monthly in April 2020 as “a fairly solid Barnaby supporter”. Murray is a retired businessman first elected to Tamworth Regional Council in 2004. He became mayor in 2010. Joyce’s electorate of New England takes in the city of Tamworth. King said Labor had created Infrastructure Australia while in government “to provide impartial advice to governments and industry across the country”. “Labor appointed an internationally renowned infrastructure expert as inaugural chair, showing our commitment to infrastructure Australia’s mission,” King said. She said as a regional parliamentarian, she understood “the importance of regional voices within infrastructure Australia – but this is not the way to do it”. “Under law, appointments to the Infrastructure Australia board must be based on skills and experience in the field,” King said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Pointing to Murray’s observation in The Monthly, King said: “Last time I checked, supporting Barnaby Joyce was not in the selection criteria.” Labor has complained that the Morrison government has isolated Infrastructure Australia. King flagged recently Labor would commission an independent review of the organisation if it won the coming federal election to advise on what changes may be needed to the body’s powers, focus and priorities. In its 2021 plan, Infrastructure Australia called on the Morrison government to provide policy certainty to kickstart investment in low emissions technology and prevent saddling taxpayers with the cost of stranded high-emissions assets. The organisation argued Australia needed new vehicle and fuel emissions standards and sector-specific emissions reduction plans.Reports of the longnose harlequin frog’s death appear to have been greatly exaggerated – or, at least, premature. The Mark Twain of the frog world is listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as extinct, which may come as a surprise to those alive and well in the cloud forests of Ecuador’s tropical Andes. Known for its pointed snout, the longnose harlequin frog (Atelopus longirostris) is about to play a central role in a legal battle to stop a mining project in the Intag valley in Imbabura province, which campaigners say would be a disaster for the highly biodiverse cloud forests. “Ecuador is wildly diverse with amphibians,” says Carlos Zorrilla, executive director of environmental organisation Decoin (Defensa y Conservación Ecológica de Intag). In 2016, four longnose harlequin frogs – last seen in 1989 – were found in the area. “Elicio Tapia and Gustavo Pazmiño, the biologists from Jambatu Centre for Research and Conservation of Amphibians, who found them, also believe there’ll be dozens more amphibians endangered by this mining project,” says Zorrilla. “Mining would violate the ‘rights of nature’, which are enshrined in Ecuador’s constitution. This is a good argument to halt mining at this site.” In 2008, Ecuador became the first country in the world to recognise the rights of nature in its constitution, acknowledging that all nature has the right to exist and to receive state protection. Article 73 says: “The state shall apply preventive and restrictive measures on activities that might lead to the extinction of species, the destruction of ecosystems and the permanent alteration of natural cycles.” The concession area for the planned Llurimagua copper opencast mine – a joint project between the state-owned Chilean mining company Codelco, the world’s largest copper producer, and Ecuador’s state-owned Enami – is primary cloud forest, a fragile ecosystem found in high mountainous tropical regions, usually between 1,000-3,000 metres above sea level, with heavy rainfall and persistent cloud and mist at the canopy level, meaning humid, moist environments where wildlife thrives. Less than 2.5% of the world’s tropical forests are estimated to be cloud forests but they contain a disproportionately large number of the world’s species. Researchers at the Jambatu Centre believe Intag could be functioning as a “frog ark”, where the fatal fungal disease chytrid has not yet wiped out amphibian populations. The critically endangered Lynch glass frog has been reported here, as has a frog originally thought to be the Confusing rocket frog, but now believed to be a species that is new to science. Frogs are just part of the picture. “We’re within the most biodiverse of the world’s biodiversity hotspots: the tropical Andes,” says Zorrilla, who has lived on his farm in Intag for 43 years, though he is originally from Cuba. “This is one of the biological jewels of the world,” he says, adding that the number of endemic species in that part of Ecuador is higher than even the lowland Amazon. Among the animals that live in the area are the brown-faced spider monkey; the Andean, or spectacled, bear; the black-and-chestnut eagle; the puma; the white-faced, or Panamanian, capuchin monkey; the Choco toucan, and Andean catfish. “There are also two endangered tree species, and the region is one of the most biodiverse for orchids,” Zorrilla adds. “There are 43 sources of rivers and streams within this one single mining concession, which is less than 5,000 hectares [20 sq miles]. “It’s extremely steep and mountainous, with heavy rainfall – a nightmare scenario for mining,” he says. “Communities would have to be relocated. It’s going to devastate a biological jewel, displace people and we’ll be left with all the environmental liabilities.” Zorrilla is leading a team of lawyers and members of the local community to present their legal case to block the Llurimagua concession within the next few weeks. While the project has stalled, due to a disagreement between Codelco and Enami, the campaign to block the proposed mine permanently is continuing. There are four plaintiffs, including two farmers, a community leader from the Intag valley town of Chalguayaco Alto, and Javier Ramírez, a community leader who was previously jailed for an anti-mining protest in Intag. Zorrilla says: “We’ll present the case at the lower court for Cotacachi county government, then provincial courts. And if we lose there, which I don’t think we will, it will go to the constitutional court in Quito, the highest court in the land. I think we’ll win.” Since coming to power in May, Ecuador’s president, Guillermo Lasso, a former banker, has signed two presidential decrees, including Decree 151, which supports the development of mining in the country and was widely welcomed by the mining sector. In October, indigenous communities were among those that took to the streets of the capital, Quito, to protest rising fuel prices and other economic issues. “These decrees are one of the reasons why there’s a major national strike in Ecuador,” argues Zorrilla. “Indigenous people and campesino groups oppose these decrees because of the expansion of petroleum and mining activity in indigenous land, campesino land and protected areas.” Ecuadorian politician, indigenous leader and environmental lawyer Yaku Pérez, who ran for president this year, says: “The mining decree is a declaration of war on the defenders of water and nature. It’s harmful to the rights of indigenous and non-indigenous peoples alike. “Mining leaves indelible traces wherever it goes: environmental pollution, poisoned water, violence, dispossession. And in order to open mines, they must deforest forests and ecosystems, which generates more greenhouse gases and global warming. That’s why the cry of the Earth is the cry of the poor who resist in order to live.” Mario Ruiz Jácome, a member of the national assembly for Imbabura province, says: “We oppose Decree 151 because it clearly accelerates the extractivist process in our country.” The longnose harlequin frog versus Llurimagua concession is not the only legal battle of its kind in Ecuador, says Zorrilla. “There are three protected areas declared by the minister of the environment, including ours, which are being given away. “In Ecuador and the world over, we need to draw red lines and say areas like this, with high biodiversity and indigenous people, should be off limits.”The Ashes are coming, the Ashes are coming. And yet, if you were paying attention to cricket over the past couple of weeks, you may identify with a lack of enthusiasm. You may identify instead with a weariness, a wariness, a general swirling malaise. Australia and England, that pair, where those leading the game and those leading the teams have been draping themselves in the inverse of glory. The two captains, as per the pre-series marketing, have dwindled to one captain, meaning that 100% of the remaining captains and 100% of the former captains in this series exist under a cloud. Australia’s anointed repairer of reputation, Tim Paine, resigned his commission via the national tradition of a teary public apology after his homespun erotica attained belated publication. England’s blameless golden child, Joe Root, has always been fiercely claimed as the property of Yorkshire, and thus must remain so, as a teammate who, Azeem Rafiq said in his testimony to a parliamentary hearing, was oblivious to racist chatter. To describe Cricket Australia as an administration in turmoil may falsely suggest that this is an exception rather than a norm. It would also be overly kind in suggesting the possible visitation of trouble from outside. In reality, the text messages were coming from inside the house. For at least five years CA has been a rolling maul of incompetence, where a high attrition rate of failed executives and directors has been balanced by enough new substitutes joining in to keep the whole mess ploughing relentlessly on in the same direction. There are decent people in the place but so far they have been kept on the sidelines, ignored as they shout directions towards something better. Nobody needs 1950s prurience about relationships any more. But even if Paine’s is the kind of story that only concerns those within his marriage, the fact remains that Cricket Australia held an investigation into the workplace conduct of their new captain after he had led the team in a total of one Test match. Soon afterwards, in November 2018, at the same time as their hired hands were emblazoning “Elite Honesty” on large placards on the dressing room wall, all parties elected to bury that fact. Despite the ongoing threat of it becoming known, they never got out ahead of the story. They sat quietly and hoped it would do the same. All of which is before you come to the issue of consent or otherwise. CA this week restated its 2018 findings that the messages were mutually desired, but won’t address why the recipient now disputes this. They also state that the interaction was a one-off, despite the familiarity in the correspondence strongly indicating that this is implausible. As with Yorkshire and Rafiq, conclusions from cricket authorities investigating themselves are not worth the paper that they don’t get printed on. Then you have the England and Wales Cricket Board, claiming shock and dismay at Rafiq’s testimony that they have just spent 15 months not listening to, letting Yorkshire try to run down the clock. All the while, they were asking England players to wear nice T-shirts before each match with slogans about cricket being a game for everyone. They have hosed fortunes on a fortnight’s play in the needlessly divisive Hundred competition, rather than investing those resources and ingenuity to elevate the county T20 tournament, and the top suits this year paid themselves £2.1m in bonuses to congratulate themselves on their wise financial stewardship last year in sacking 62 staff to get through the pandemic. It all correlates with the English Test captain’s milquetoast response to Rafiq, a smoothie of motivational quotes about moving forward together, in that way that makes Root an ideal study in the Yeats formulation about the best lacking all conviction. When Root carries England with his batting, it only emphasises the contrast. He will need to do plenty of that in the upcoming series. Teams can come to reflect the failings of their boards, just as the other way around. The Ashes boards along with India are responsible for so much, dominating the International Cricket Council as they do. Their recent schedule announcement gives India five major events in 10 years, including two out of three 50-over World Cups, while Australia and England take three events between them. By season’s end, 14 of Australia’s past 19 Tests will have been against India or England. Both CA and the ECB will be desperately hoping that come Brisbane, attention will shift on to the field. But they’re hardly set for a 2005 barnstormer. And anyway, some of the heroes of 2005 have recently had a fair bit of gloss taken off. Instead, two already ordinary teams now look like something more tawdry and tarnished, a tired routine relying on too few stars, going through its paces to churn out some more money for the Old Firm. It’s hard to feel inspired. It would really be something to have people leading the game who could manage that. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Wandering from his mic stand as the music fades to a murmur, Ricky Ross marvels at Chocolate Girl’s 34-year history as a mixtape constant and soundtrack to marriages, births and divorces. It’s a neat bit of accounting, but its backward glance doesn’t take into account Deacon Blue’s intriguing place in the present. It has been some time since the band sat this close to the indie zeitgeist, yet thanks to the rise of outfits such as the War on Drugs and Wild Pink, who prize the exact blend of pristine pop-rock and conversational songwriting that Deacon Blue excel at, their music is ripe for reappraisal. If they intend to engage with that process, even hurry it along, they don’t show it. They are an immaculate live band, urged on by a watertight rhythm section, lived-in interplay between guitarist Gregor Philp and pianist James Prime, and the boundless charisma of Lorraine McIntosh, whose voice remains a wonder. But they are not a particularly daring one. The people who walk the streets of Ross’s songs have dirt under their fingernails, so it’s a shame that an overreliance on cut-and-paste arena stagecraft – video packages that look like screensavers, momentum-sapping acoustic interludes – leaves certain cuts adrift in the gloss, and a charge through Twist and Shout does little with its jangle-pop quirks. The other side of this coin is that the hits are dispensed with undiminished enthusiasm. Real Gone Kid is evergreen, a song so vibrant that no number of ad campaigns can kill it, while Fergus Sings the Blues and Dignity are greeted wildly by an amped-up crowd. There is a neat through line to newer tracks – the stately A Walk in the Woods and barrel-chested Hit Me Where it Hurts – that display the same melodic solidity and ringing harmonies. Ross, his voice a perfect blend of Paul Westerberg rasp and bruised romance, lands a blow on Boris Johnson in the preamble to Loaded, a polemic about haves and have nots from Deacon Blue’s 1987 debut Raintown that is precision-tooled for the moment. Their music isn’t far behind in that regard.Boris Johnson’s speech to the CBI has been called a “mess”, the “most embarrassing by a Conservative prime minister” since his most recent PMQs performance. It is said to have capped off a “pretty bad bloody fortnight” and left the prime minister struggling to command the confidence of his party. In it he referenced Peppa Pig, “funkapolitan” cafes and his time as motoring correspondent of GQ. Then he lost his place. So how bad was it? Here is the official transcript, judge for yourself: “Great to be here in Tyneside, the number one exporting region of the UK. Great to be with the CBI. And I want to begin with a massive thank you to British business for keeping going, for looking after your employees, for rising to the challenge, for responding to the call for ventilators in those first dark days. Dozens of you – kitchen appliance makers, hairdryer makers, Formula One motorcar manufacturers – turning your production lines over in days to try to save lives. For making the masks and the gowns and the gloves at such speed, turning things round from that awful moment when we realised we simply didn’t have the domestic production. So we have gone from being able to supply 1% of our domestic needs to 80%. And thank you British industry, enterprise, commerce, for producing not just one but perhaps half a dozen vaccines. Because, without you, let’s face it, we would simply not be here. And nor would tens of thousands of people in our country and millions around the world who owe their lives to your resourcefulness and inventiveness. And while I’m on the subject can I ask: who has had your booster? You all look far too young and thrusting to need a booster but get your booster as soon as you can because it is by vaccinating our country that we have been able to get your staff back to their place of work, to open our theatres, our restaurants and to get back for longer now than any other comparator country to something like normal life; even if we are still bumping elbows and wearing masks. I am not going to pretend that everything is going to be plain sailing – we can see the state of the pandemic abroad, the supply chain issues that we’re facing, the pressure on energy prices that we’re all facing, the skills shortages. But don’t forget, folks, my friends, it was only last year they were saying we would have an unemployment crisis now on the scale not seen since the 1980s or 1990s. They were forecasting 12% unemployment. And what have we got? Thanks to you – thanks to the resilience of British business – we have employment back in work at pre-pandemic levels. It was only last year that we experienced the biggest fall in output in a century as we were forced to lock down the economy. Well, look at us now. Thanks to you and thanks to British business bouncebackability, we are forecast to have the fastest economic growth in the G7. And I was there in the 70s and 80s and 90s. And I remember mass unemployment and the misery and the drain of the human spirit. And I would much rather have our problems today, which are fundamentally caused by a return in global confidence and a surge in demand. Because now we have a massive opportunity to fix these supply-side problems, to transform whole sectors of our economy and to tackle the chronic problems underlying the UK economy. The woeful imbalance in productivity across the country, but also the imbalance between British business between the go-getting world-beaters represented by so many people in this room and the long comet tail whose potential is, frankly, yet to be realised; that don’t have the skills – particularly the IT skills, as Rishi the chancellor so often points out – that don’t have the banks behind them, that don’t have the investment. And that is the mission of this country: to unite and level up; of this government, to unite and level up across the whole country. And I’ve got to be honest with you, it is a moral mission. As you get older, the funny thing is you get more idealistic and less cynical. It’s a moral thing but it is also an economic imperative. Because, if this country could achieve the same kind of geographical balance and dispersion of growth and wealth that you find in most of our most successful economic comparators, and, if all our businesses could reach more balance in their levels of productivity, then there would be absolutely no stopping us. And we would achieve what I believe we can, and become the biggest and most successful economy in Europe. And, today, fate has handed us an opportunity to do that. When the first Industrial Revolution began 250 years ago, it was British industry that had first-mover advantage. For hundreds of years, we maintained that pace. Right up until the beginning of the 20th century, we were producing more coal, smelting more iron, building more ships and boilers and making more machines than virtually any other country on Earth. And today, we are on the brink of another revolution: a green industrial revolution. And again, there are many ways in which we have first-mover advantage. And today, I want to tell you in the CBI how Britain is going to win in the new green industrial revolution – provided we act and act now. I have had some pretty wonderful jobs in my life. But among the most purely hedonistic I would rank motoring correspondent of GQ magazine. I drove Ferraris, Maseratis, Nissan Skylines, Proton Sagas. You name it, I drove it. And I learned to admire the incredible diversity of the UK specialist motor manufacturing sector, which is actually the biggest in the world. And I have spent hours in the traffic listening to the porridge-like burble and pop of the biggest and most sophisticated internal combustion engines ever made. And I have heard that burble turn into an operatic roar as I have put my foot down and burned away from the lights at speeds I would not now confess to my protection officers. In that time, that great era, I only tried two EVs – electric vehicles: an extraordinary wheeled rabbit hutch that was so tiny you could park it sideways and I tried the first Tesla for sale in this country for GQ, that expired in the fast lane of the M40 – they’ve got a lot better. And when, a few years later, as mayor of London, I tried to get London motorists to go electric and we put in charging points around the city, I must confess that they were not then a soaraway success. And they stood forlorn like some piece of unused outdoor gym equipment. But 10 years after that, the tipping point has come, hasn’t it? UK sales of EVs are now increasing at 70% a year. And, in 2030, we are ending the market for new hydrocarbon ICEs – ahead of other European countries. And companies are responding. Here in the north-east, Nissan has decided to make an enormous bet on new electric vehicles and, together with Envision, there is now a massive new gigafactory for batteries. And around the world, these cars are getting ever more affordable. And at Glasgow two weeks ago, the tipping point came, as motor manufacturers representing a third of the world market – including the EU and America – announced that they would go electric by 2035. And, of course, Glasgow was far bigger and more important than that: 250 years after we launched the first Industrial Revolution, we are showing the world how to power past coal. When I was a kid, 80% of our electricity came from coal. And I remember those huge barges taking coal up the Thames to Battersea power station and those four chimneys belching fumes into the face and lungs of the city. By the time I became mayor, Battersea was a wreck; closed for being simply too polluting and good for nothing except the final shootout in gangster movies. But, in 2012, we were still 40% dependent on coal. Today, only 10 years later, coal supplies less than 2% of our power and, by 2024, it will be down to zero. And Battersea, of course, is a great funkapolitan hive of cafes and restaurants and hotels and homes, thanks to the vision of the former mayor. And every time I made that point to leaders in Glasgow – about the speed of the switch that we’ve made from coal – I could see them thinking about it and I could see them thinking ‘right, OK, maybe this is doable’. And, when I was a kid, literally 0% of our energy came from wind. And it seemed faddish and ludicrous to imagine that we could light and heat our homes with a technology that dated from ninth-century Persia, I think. And yet, today, look at the coast of the north-east where we are today: row after row stretching out to the North Sea, of beautiful white mills, as we claim a new harvest rich and green from the drowned meadows of Doggerland. And, on some days, we derive almost half this country’s energy needs with the biggest offshore wind production anywhere in the world – and growing the whole time. And that tipping point having been reached, the pace of change is now going to accelerate like a new Tesla. Because I can tell you, as a former motoring correspondent, EVs may not burble like sucking doves and they may not have that arum arum araaaaaagh that you love. But they have so much torque that they move off the lights faster than a Ferrari. And we are now embarked on a new epoch and, in just a few years’ time, after almost a century of using roughly the same technology, we are going to change radically. We are going to change radically our cars, our trucks, our buses, our ships, our boats, our planes, our trains, our domestic heating systems, our farming methods, our industrial processes, our power generation, and much else besides. And I can tell you the force driving that change, it won’t be government. And it won’t even be business – though business and government together will have a massive influence. It will be the consumer. It will be the young people of today, the disciples of David Attenborough – not just in this country but around the world – who can see the consequences of climate change and who will be demanding better from us. And I confidently predict that, in just a few years’ time, it will be as noisome, offensive to the global consumer to open a new coal-fired power station as it is to get on a plane and light up a cigar. And, as the world reaches this pivotal moment post-Glasgow, it’s vital that we recognise not just the scale of the challenge, but the opportunity now for British business and industry. Because, in the end, it is you – it is businesspeople – who will fix this problem. Governments don’t innovate, governments don’t produce new products and get out and sell them in the market place. And, though governments can sell, governments can spend tens if not hundreds of billions, we know that the market has hundreds of trillions. And yet we also know that government has a vital role in making that market and in framing the right regulation. And to ensure that you, the British business, succeeds in this new world, we have set out a 10-point plan for government leadership; a new Decalogue that I produced exactly a year ago when I came down from Sinai and I said to my officials, ‘the new Ten Commandments thou shalt develop’: 1. Offshore wind 2. Hydrogen 3. Nuclear power 4. Zero-emission vehicles 5. Green public transport, cycling and walking 6. ‘Jet zero’ and green ships 7. Greener buildings 8. Carbon capture and storage 9. Nature and trees 10. Green finance And for each of those objectives, we are producing a roadmap so that you in the private sector can see the opportunities ahead and what you need to do. And we are regulating so as to require new homes and buildings to have EV charging points – with another 145,000 charging points to be installed thanks to these regulations. We are investing in new projects to turn wind power into hydrogen and the net zero strategy is expected to trigger about £90bn of private sector investment, driving the creation of high-wage, high-skill jobs across the UK as part of our mission to unite and level up across the country – not just in the green Industrial Revolution, of course, but in all sectors of the economy. And to help you and to build the platform to give you the advantage you need, we are now waging a cross-Whitehall campaign to solve our productivity puzzle and to rebalance our lopsided economy, fixing our infrastructure with investment on a scale not seen since the Victorians. And we must begin with energy and power generation if we are going to have, allow our manufacturing industry to succeed, we must end the unfairness that UK, high-energy intensive manufacturing pays so much more than our competitors overseas. And that’s why we are going to address the cost of our nuclear power and we are all now paying for the historic under under-investment in nuclear power. Which country first split the atom? Which country had the first civilian nuclear power plant? It was this one. And why have we allowed ourselves to be left behind? Well, you tell me. So we are investing not just in big new nuclear plants but in small nuclear reactors as well. And we are consulting on classifying this essential technology as “green investment” so that we can get more investment flowing in and ahead of the EU. Lenin once said that the communist revolution was Soviet power plus the electrification of the whole country. Well, I hesitate to quote Lenin, Tony, before the CBI, but the coming industrial revolution is green power plus the electrification of the whole country. We are electrifying our cars, we are electrifying our rail – last week we announced three vast new high-speed lines, cutting the time from London to Manchester by an hour and creating a new Crossrail of the North, cutting the time from Manchester to Leeds from 55 to 33 minutes, a Crossrail for the Midlands, cutting journey times from Birmingham to Nottingham from one hour and 14 minutes to 26 minutes. But these plans are far richer and more ambitious than some of the coverage has perhaps suggested. To solve this country’s transport problems, you can’t just endlessly carve your way through virgin countryside. You have to upgrade and to electrify; you have to use the tracks that already exist and bring them back into service. And we are doing the Beeching reversals – that’s putting in lines that were taken out, sadly, in the last century. You have to put other transport networks as well, you have to put in clean buses, you have to improve – 4,000 new clean green buses we’re putting in. And, of course, you have to fix the roads as well. We cannot be endlessly hostile to road improvements. And we have to do it now, we have to fix it now. I know that there are some people who think that working habits have been remade by the pandemic and that everyone will be working only on Tuesday and Wednesday and Thursday in an acronym I won’t repeat. I don’t want to be dogmatic about this, but I have my doubts. And it is not just that young people need to be in the office to learn, and to compete, and to pick up social capital, there are also sound evolutionary reasons why mother nature does not like working from home. So I prophesy that people will come back, Tony, they will come to the office and they will come back on the roads and the rail. But people also want choice and that is why we must put in the gigabit broadband – as we are – which has gone up massively just in the last couple of years from 7% when I became PM to 65% at the beginning of next year. And, with safer streets, with great local schools, with fantastic broadband … [Lost it] [Uhhh] [Forgive me] [Forgive me] [Forgive me] … people will have the confidence to stay nearer the place they grew up to start business and business will have the confidence to invest. And then, of course, there is one thing that business wants and that this country needs far more than a hundred supersonic rail links, far more than broadband, and that is skills and the people that you all need to staff your business. It’s an astonishing fact that the 16- to 18-year-olds in this country are getting 40% less time and instruction than our competitors in the OECD, and so we’re turning that round. We are focusing on skills, skills, skills; investing in our FE colleges, our apprentices, in the knowhow and confidence of young people. And, since – as everybody knows – 80% of the 2030 workforce are already in work, we are giving every adult who needs it the chance to get a level-three skill – £3,000 for a lifetime skills guarantee. We are supporting bootcamps for everything from IT to entrepreneurship. And, at this pivotal moment in our economic history, we are taking advantage of our new freedoms to deliver freeports, as well as free trade deals, and to regulate differently and better to lengthen our lead in all the amazing new technologies of the 21st century: AI, cyber, quantum computing and all the rest – and all the applications of those technologies to the areas in which we excel. So you get fin tech, ed tech, bio tech, med tech, nano tech, ad tech, green tech. So you sound basically like 15th-century Mexico. And that is what this country is doing. There are only three countries that have produced more than 100 tech unicorns. And they are, as you will know, well which are they? Let’s see who’s been paying attention to any of my speeches in the last few … which, which three nations have produced more than 100 tech unicorns? [Audience-member: The United States, China and the UK.] Correct. They are the US, China and the UK. And the wonderful thing about the more than the 100 tech unicorns is they are dispersed now far more evenly across the whole of the UK than the tech unicorns of some of our rival competitor economies. And that is a fantastic thing. We want to see the dispersal of this growth and development across the UK. That’s why this government has doubled investment in scientific research – and, again, we want to see the benefits of that research across the whole of the country. But, in the end, and this is the most important message of all, there are, there are limits to what governments can do. And I just want to be absolutely clear about this – because this has been an extraordinary period. There has been the financial crisis of 2008 – where government had to intervene on a massive scale, then Covid – when government had to intervene on a massive scale. But government cannot fix everything and government sometimes should get out of your hair. And government should make sure there is less regulation and, indeed, less taxation. And the true driver of growth is not government, it is the energy and dynamism and originality of the private sector And Tony, yesterday, I went as we all must to Peppa Pig World. Who’s been to … hands up anybody who’s been to Peppa Pig World? Not enough. I was a bit hazy about what I would find at Peppa Pig World but I loved it. Peppa Pig World is very much my kind of place – it had very safe streets, discipline in schools, heavy emphasis on new mass-transit systems, I noticed. Even if they are a bit stereotypical about Daddy Pig. But the real lesson for me about going to Peppa Pig World – I’m surprised you haven’t been there – was about the power of UK creativity. Who would have believed, Tony, that a pig that looks like a hairdryer or possibly, well a sort-of Picasso-like hairdryer, a pig that was rejected by the BBC would now be exported to 180 countries, with theme parks both in America and in China, as well as in the New Forest. And a business that is worth at least £6bn to this country – £6bn and counting. Now, I think that it is pure genius, don’t you? Peppa Pig? And no government in the world – no Whitehall civil servant in the world – could conceivably have come up with Peppa. So my final message to you, as we stand on the brink of this green industrial revolution and we prepare to use our new regulatory freedoms in what I believe will be a very strong post-Covid rebound, we are blessed, we are blessed not just with capital markets and the world’s best universities and incredible pools of liquidity in London and all the … the right time zone and the right language and opportunity across the whole country, we are also blessed with the amazing inventive power and range of British business. And that, above all, is what fills me with confidence, members of the CBI, for the days ahead. Thank you very much for your kind attention this morning, thank you.”Good morning. A man has been charged with five counts of intentional first-degree homicide after a vehicle was driven into a Christmas parade on Sunday night in Waukesha, Wisconsin. The city’s police chief named the suspect as Darrell E Brooks. He is accused of killing five people and injuring another 48, including two children who remain in a critical condition. Daniel Thompson, the police chief, said the suspect was involved in an unspecified domestic disturbance immediately before the parade incident, and that further charges were expected. Thompson said Brooks “drove right through the barricades” to enter the parade route and raced towards a collision with those entertaining the holiday crowds, including a marching band, a troupe of Dancing Grannies. Was it a terrorist attack? Thompson said there was no evidence the bloodshed on Sunday was a terrorist attack or that the suspect knew anyone in the parade. The suspect acted alone, the chief said. Who were the victims? Tamara Durant and Jane Coolidge, both 52; Leanna Owens, 71; Virginia Sorenson, 79; and Wilhelm Hospel, 82, all died on Sunday. How many are in hospital? At least 10 children remained in intensive care on Monday afternoon, health officials said. Injuries ranged from broken bones to serious head wounds. Starbucks launches aggressive anti-union effort as upstate New York stores organize Starbucks has launched an aggressive anti-union campaign as six stores in the Buffalo, New York, area have filed for union elections with the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) in recent weeks. If successful, the stores would be the first Starbucks corporate locations to unionize in the US. Workers at the coffee chain have reported numerous captive audience meetings, one-on-one talks, store shutdowns, closures, remodelings, and text messages – a mode of contact that was previously used only for emergencies. Dozens of corporate executives have flooded stores with the intent to deter workers from voting to unionize, workers say. The billionaire former Starbucks chief executive Howard Schultz visited Buffalo to present a case against unionizing to workers on 6 November and was criticised for making an analogy to the Holocaust in discussing the company’s mission. How has Starbucks Workers United reacted? It filed an unfair labor practice charge with the NLRB on 4 November over Starbucks’ conduct during the union campaign. Roger Stone and Alex Jones among five to receive Capitol attack subpoenas The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack on Monday issued new subpoenas to five political operatives associated with Donald Trump, including Roger Stone and the far-right radio show host Alex Jones, as the panel deepens its inquiry into the Save America rally that preceded the 6 January insurrection. The subpoenas demanding documents and testimony expand the select committee’s inquiry focused on the planning and financing of the rally at the Ellipse, by targeting operatives who appear to have had contacts with the Trump White House. House investigators issued subpoenas to the veteran operatives Stone and Jones, Trump’s spokesperson Taylor Budowich, and the pro-Trump activists Dustin Stockton and his wife, Jennifer Lawrence. Why were they subpoenaed? The chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said the subpoenas aimed to uncover “who organized, planned, paid for, and received funds related to those events, as well as what communications organizers had with officials in the White House and Congress”. What else are they interested in? They want to know more about Stone’s connection to the Oath Keepers, the militia group he used as his private security detail before several members stormed the Capitol. Joe Biden intends to run again in 2024, White House confirms The White House has said Joe Biden intends to run for re-election in 2024, amid speculation over his future after a dip in his approval rating. There has been a drop in the president’s polling numbers in recent months, leading some Democrats to speculate he might not seek another four-year term. “He is. That’s his intention,” said the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, as Biden flew onboard Air Force One for a Thanksgiving event with US troops in Fort Bragg, North Carolina. Democrats were rattled by Republican victories in Virginia’s gubernatorial election this month and a narrow Democratic victory in New Jersey. The statement from the White House follows reports that Biden has been reassuring allies of his intentions to run again, and that he is keen to quash rumors of a one-term presidency. Biden will be 15 days short of his 82nd birthday on 5 November 2024. He was already the oldest presidential candidate to be elected as commander-in-chief when he beat Donald Trump in the November 2020 election. In other news… Kevin Spacey and his production companies must pay the studio behind House of Cards more than $30m because of losses brought on by his firing for alleged sexual misconduct, according to an arbitration decision made final on Monday. At least 45 people including 12 children have died as a bus carrying mostly North Macedonian tourists crashed in flames on a highway in western Bulgaria hours before daybreak today. The tragedy is the most deadly bus accident in the country’s history. For the past few months, small municipalities – many without any standing abortion clinics – such as Lebanon and Mason – have outlawed abortion. Though women in those cities can still travel to get an abortion, the bans send an intimidating message. China’s birthrate has plummeted to its lowest level since 1978 as the government struggles to stave off a looming demographic crisis. The government is under pressure to prevent a potential population decline after decades of interventionist policies and, more recently, high living costs. Don’t miss this: the female imams taking over an LA mosque In many mosques across the world, women are not even allowed to pray. In some mosques in the US, women may enter but are often forced pray in separate rooms – leading some to call it the “penalty box”. Spiritual leaders that have pushed boundaries – by running mixed congregation or an LGBTQ mosque – have received death threats. But at the Women’s Mosque of America, women are using their sermons to cover previously untouched topics including sexual violence, miscarriage and domestic violence. Climate check: Want to fight for climate action but feel daunted or powerless? Try this For anyone hoping for some optimism about our planet, the recent Cop26 climate summit left much to be desired. The scale of the crisis can make us feel powerless, and individual action may seem like a drop in the ocean where climate change is concerned. But there are ways to use the affiliations we already have – such as with employers, universities, unions or religious groups – to boost our collective voice for change. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comI must begin this article by stating that the information I’m providing is not financial advice. I think I legally have to say that because I heard it on a podcast or whatever, I really don’t know. But, if you’re taking crypto advice from me, that might be your first problem. It all started with a missed shot. Let’s go back to 2004, when I invested my $5,000 life savings into Apple, a company I truly believed in. It was my first stock purchase, and the first grown-up thing I did for my future immediately after graduating college. Unfortunately, life quickly became expensive. Within three years of my initial purchase, I was forced to sell all of my Apple shares because bills, housing and beginning a new life in NYC on a $29,000 salary didn’t come cheap. Cold sweats. I’ve been waking up to them for almost 15 years now, near-panic attacks about the biggest mistake I’ve ever made. That $5,000 investment from 2004 would be about $1.8m sitting in my account today. Instead, I’m about to turn 40, my partner and I are still renters, and both she and I are paying off loans. Compared with most of my peers, we’re somehow among the lucky ones. The point of this editorial isn’t to mope about my lost gains. It’s about our collective hopelessness. The dollar is becoming worthless and the class struggle is intensifying. The typical homebuyer is nearly twice as old now as they were in 1981. When adjusted for inflation, our parents would have paid 1/10th of what we would now to buy a home. Rental prices are rising at four times the speed of inflation. The cost of a higher education required for most high-paying jobs is 17 times that of what our parents paid. When we retire our social security checks will be a fraction of the minimum wage. The snowball rolling down the mountain to flatten us continues to grow wider and faster. We need a way out. We need a way up. Many of you have lived through your very own version of my Apple nightmare, watching the waters of prosperity trickle through cupped hands. I never want to let that happen again. And unless we can get in early on the next Amazon, Tesla or Google stock, it looks like we’ll never be able to afford our future. This is why I ventured into cryptocurrency. If you couldn’t tell by now, I’m somewhat ignorant of the financial world. Sure I’ve got a 401k through work and assembled a tiny online portfolio of companies I personally believe in, but I don’t really know how it all works. I just put money in and pray that it becomes more money in the future. I’m almost as ignorant about crypto. My first jump into the cryptocurrency world came with bitcoin in early 2018, after my now technically wealthy friends had been going on about it for years. I decided to take the plunge by opening a Coinbase account and buying a fraction of one bitcoin when it cost about $11,000-12,000a coin. I let it sit and, two years later, the price of a bitcoin hit $40,000. A year after that, $60,000. I could feel it happening again … Was this my shot at redemption? A chance to secure my bag? Even though I got in late to bitcoin, I was early enough to see my investment go up six times. It wasn’t the 3,600 times that Apple would have been, but it was a start. At that point I decided: I’m all in. Crypto will save us. I asked those same crypto-rich friends about what would be the next big coin, and blindly bought a little of every single one they recommended. I soon got into dogecoin at $0.03 a coin. Within a month, the coins hit about $0.60, settling in the $0.25 range today. Another win. My retirement scheme was actually coming to fruition. Could I continue this hot streak? Next, I sought to get in even earlier with more up-and-coming crypto, because that’s apparently how you see parabolic growth. I succumbed to buying more meme tokens, aka “shitcoin”. This required learning a very “simple” 13-step process between my bank, crypto trading platform, digital wallet and some shady-looking websites that swap real crypto like bitcoin and ethereum for your desired crap crypto. I’ve lost nearly everything I put into those speculative meme coins. Meme coin scams exist purely because people like me exist. Let me plainly state: cryptocurrency isn’t intended to be stocks bought and sold for retirement planning. The true promise of secure, decentralized currencies is that they’re free from the grasp of government and those they collude with to ensure the house always comes out on top: Wall Street, hedge funds and trading platforms like Robinhood. As long as we the people continue losing, our elected criminals have convenient problems they can promise to solve during their campaigns. Cryptocurrency is our chance to rage against that machine. This promise of decentralization can feel like an unobtainable utopia. When discussing with a friend, she noted that most of what we’ve seen thus far has been less decentralization, and more a shift of power from one group of elites to another: the executive class to the technology class. Those people with the insane rigs mining blockchain transactions since the early days are sitting on their piles of digital gold. But that’s OK because there’s more than enough scraps for us to pick up along the way. My entire cryptocurrency portfolio is in the red except for bitcoin, ethereum and doge. I harbor no ill will towards SafeMoon, CluCoin, Muskets and all the other dumb meme tokens I fell for. A few hundred dollars here and a few hundred there could very well be a winning lottery ticket in some years’ time. Or it could all be money burned on scam coin. Every gain is a win for decentralization and every loss a healthy reminder that crypto is a gamble, just like the stock market. The real trophy is this: we don’t need to look solely to the establishment to game our future. The establishment is looking to us. Russia banned payments made with cryptocurrency, China has banned it altogether and here in the US, there’s talk of an official digital currency to compete with the dollar. Just this week the Staples Center in Los Angeles was renamed the Crypto.com Arena. Everyone, legacy institutions included, is looking to cryptocurrency to build their futures. Unlike before, we’re getting a better head start. Let’s just hope we don’t sell too soon. Rohit Thawani is a creative director working at the intersection of tech and advertising. He is co-host of The Hopeless Show podcastFor anyone hoping for some optimism about our dying planet, the recent Cop26 climate summit left much to be desired. Developing countries were severely underrepresented at the conference, and only a third of the usual number of delegates from those countries was able to attend, due to Covid restrictions, a lack of affordable accommodation and accessibility issues. As the race to save the planet continues, much of climate action rhetoric these days remains split between personal calls to action – such as recycling or cutting down on individual consumption – and calls for governments, corporations and international organizations to wind down fossil fuel production, switch to renewable energy on a mass scale and protect key ecosystems that can help mitigate the effects of the climate crisis. The scale of the crisis can make us feel powerless as individuals – and individual action may seem like a drop in the bucket where climate change is concerned. But there are ways to use the affiliations we already have to boost our collective voice for change. Here are a few ideas: If you’re employed by a big corporation: Major corporations have thousands of employees. Staff at these companies can plan walkouts or join strike actions to push their companies to make serious commitments to climate action such as reducing their consumption and switching to clean energy alternatives. When the staffs of tech companies like Google and Amazon took to the streets of Silicon Valley to join the global climate strike in September 2019, their employers responded swiftly: Amazon agreed to buy 100,000 electric delivery vans and committed to meeting the goals of the Paris climate agreement 10 years early, while Google made the largest purchase of renewable energy in corporate history. Employees can also push their employers to divest their pension and retirement savings plans from fossil fuel companies. Many of these companies are situated on vast corporate campuses and consume significant amounts of energy. Staff can lobby their employers to build green spaces and take up green initiatives. If you’re a member of a labor union: Labor unions are a great way to organize around climate action. Thanks to unions’ sheer size, members can make a difference by forming climate change campaigns or sub-groups within larger campaigns. Some unions have also successfully collaborated with academics and environmental groups on research to identify and develop effective strategies for climate action. Some of these collaborations have led to the passing of legislation that protects workers in light of the climate crisis. Unions can also draft environmental policies that call on the government and international organizations to take serious climate action, form workplace environment committees to help develop their environmental strategy, and make their own seat at the climate action table by having trade union delegates at the global climate change conferences. If you’re a student or member of faculty at a university: Universities are essential hubs of research and advocacy on climate change – and, like other large organizations, they produce significant emissions. Students can push for their universities to divest from fossil fuels, generate power on-campus, and commit to being carbon-neutral in other ways, like increasing bike parking across campus and retrofitting old buildings. These institutions can also join in collective action with other colleges and universities across the globe which are addressing climate change, and incorporate climate change education into their curricula. If you belong to a religious organization: In recent years, religious institutions have become leading voices against the climate crisis. Members of these organizations can push for community initiatives that help the environment, like building green infrastructure. Religious denominations also have a lot of sway with governments. Members can ask their religious leaders to support bills and other political actions that address climate change, or press Congress directly to take climate action. Members of religious organizations can also advocate for putting their money where their mouth is by divesting from high-emitting companies. The Church of England recently threatened to divest from fossil fuel companies that haven’t aligned their businesses with Paris agreement goals. Twelve companies made changes to ensure they weren’t dropped by the church. Tayo Bero is a freelance writerFor a few months in 2005, you couldn’t move without encountering Crazy Frog. First sold as a ringtone, his nonsensical catchphrase, “Rring ding ding ding baa baa”, entered the national vocabulary. Then it became the most popular – and divisive – single of 2005, coupled with a CGI video of an explicitly naked frog on the lam in a futuristic cityscape. “The frog is irritating to the point of distraction and back again,” wrote BBC News. “And yet at the same, it’s strangely compelling.” The craze lasted for five Top 20 hits and then mercifully dwindled. The character was so hated that hackers found success with a virus offering to show users an image of him being killed off. But now the frog is staging a comeback. Next month, the once-ubiquitous amphibian will release a new single – a mash-up of a classic and a more recent song, the details of which the frog’s guardians are keeping under wraps, other than to say that both are popular on TikTok. “He looks the same, he acts the same, but he’s a fresher frog,” says Sigfrid Söderberg, CEO of Kaktus Film and Crazy Frog Entertainment. Although the character’s gibbered cry was invented by a teenager called Daniel Malmedahl in 1997 and his body created by animator Erik Wernquist in 2003, Crazy Frog Entertainment owns the intellectual property, and Söderberg and his business partner Andreas Wicklund produce the character’s videos. The frog’s future is in Söderberg’s hands. You might well question who wants this dated irritation back, but the frog fandom endures. The original hit has more than 3bn views on YouTube, making it the 26th most-watched video on the site, and the Crazy Frog YouTube channel has 11.5m subscribers. Interest seemed to surge a few years ago, says Söderberg, who claims that it was at one point getting 4m new views per day. Earlier this year, Rita Ora sampled the Axel F track in her song Bang Bang (though this is news to Söderberg). Kaktus decided that the world was telling it one thing: bring back the frog. There were two important steps in Crazy Frog’s original ascent to cultural infamy. The first came when the mobile phone content provider Jamba! called Wernquist, who had landed a job at Kaktus thanks to his frog design, to ask if they could license the character’s noise for a ringtone. In 2004, ringtones were a billion-dollar industry with their own charts – even printed in the pages of NME, to the horror of some loyal readers. Kaktus agreed an advance and a royalties arrangement (“obviously way too low”, says Söderberg) and the deal was done. Jamba! then spent an unprecedented amount of money promoting the infectious ringtone on TV – in May 2005, it was shown 2,378 times a day – incurring the wrath of the British public. “I myself got annoyed with it,” admits Söderberg. “It was too much.” The worst was yet to come. Wolfgang Boss, executive president of A&amp;R at Sony Music, wanted to pair the frog with a sped-up version of the theme tune to Beverly Hills Cop, a song called Axel F. Kaktus agreed to make the animation on condition that they had carte blanche to do what they wanted. In the video, a bounty is placed on the frog’s head and a sinister character chases him around the city, eventually firing a rocket at him – which the frog ends up riding to safety. When the song came out in May 2005, it changed the lives of everyone involved. “The minute that was released, boom – it was No 1 in 23 countries in the world,” says Söderberg, who found himself travelling the world to collect gold and platinum records. He also found himself facing the wrath of the Advertising Standards Authority. Crazy Frog’s penis was clearly visible in the video, which attracted mass complaints. The fuss bemused Söderberg. “It’s like seeing a baby’s penis,” he reasons. “He’s a baby in his mind and his body. He was originally created like that, as we all were.” Sixteen years on, the public’s rage may have subsided – or, at least, the frog may benefit from a social media audience too young to remember his original incarnation. In the spring, various TikTokers with millions of followers, including Kimberly Loaiza (55.2m) and Karla Bustillos (20m), performed choreographed dances to the track. Kaktus has learned from its mistakes, Söderberg says, and now chooses business partners more carefully. “He didn’t deserve to be a ringtone figure,” says Söderberg. “We want to do it right this time: we want to have funny songs, funny TV series, funny little books; make him have the longevity we wanted last time.” But can the frog survive this cruel new world – isn’t he a relic? “He’s actually more tuned in to this world,” says Söderberg, arguing that short, funny clips are even more popular now than they were in 2005. “Musically there will always be a place for kind of novelty songs. He’s not Stormzy; he doesn’t need to do credible, cool, urban stuff.” How does the frog feel about the comeback? “The frog is always completely oblivious,” says Söderberg. “I would say he’s very happy as always. For him, he was never away – or there, even.”Police must do more to support and listen to survivors of child sexual abuse, according to the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC), following a major investigation into South Yorkshire police’s response to allegations made in Rotherham. The report published on Tuesday made 12 recommendations to national and local police forces, warning that some systemic problems identified in the 91 separate investigations completed so far still existed. The watchdog’s investigation into allegations of misconduct by police in relation to child sexual exploitation in Rotherham, known as Operation Linden, involved looking into 265 separate allegations, from 1997 to 2013. There were 51 complainants, 44 of whom were survivors of abuse. The investigation was launched following a report in 2014 by Prof Alexis Jay, a former chief inspector of social work, which concluded that failures by politicians and the police contributed to the sexual exploitation of 1,400 children by groups of men in the town over 16 years. Jay’s report followed an investigation by the Times in 2012 which found that gang rape and trafficking were widespread in Rotherham Jay concluded that police did not prioritise child sexual abuse, regarded many victims with contempt and failed to act on their reports. The IOPC warned that some crimes committed against vulnerable children reported directly to South Yorkshire police’s public protection department were still not being recorded, urging the force to take steps to ensure it complied with Home Office rules around crime recording. The watchdog investigated 47 officers. Eight were found to have a case to answer for misconduct and six had a case to answer for gross misconduct. Five have faced sanctions, the harshest being a final written warning. However, in many cases, the officer had retired and could not face disciplinary proceedings. The IOPC also recommended that the voices of survivors should be included in College of Policing training for all officers dealing with child sexual abuse. The investigation also spoke to many survivors who have criminal records as a result of their actions when they were being exploited. The IOPC has asked the Law Commission to review laws on offences committed by young people who are being groomed and exploited, and highlighted parallels between child sexual exploitation and children who are criminally exploited, for example in “county lines” cases. Steve Noonan, the IOPC director of major investigations, praised the bravery of the survivors who had enabled the body to “shine a light on the failings of the past”. However, he said that survivors of abuse would be “deeply concerned, as are we, some of these problems still exist today”, urging the police to act on the recommendations. “Police understanding of this type of offending has evolved significantly in recent years and we must acknowledge the efforts made to improve the way these cases are dealt with. However, there is still work to do and we have issued these recommendations to make sure lessons are learned and mistakes of the past are not repeated,” he added. The Rotherham MP, Labour’s Sarah Champion, welcomed the recommendations, but said improvement in tackling child sexual exploitation cannot be “a finite process, but must be sustained and long-lasting”. “It is deeply concerning that the report suggests that improvements made following inspections of South Yorkshire police in 2014 may have stalled, or even deteriorated in some areas,” she said. The last outstanding police misconduct hearing is due to be heard next spring, after which the IOPC’s final over-arching report will be published. Operation Linden is the watchdog’s largest ever investigation, after Hillsborough.The Christmas nativity play – complete with wonky crowns, toddler tears and angel wings – is making a cautious comeback on the school calendar this year after an enforced absence due to Covid. Sales of nativity scores and scripts are up 55% on last year, according to Out of the Ark Music, a leading children’s music publisher. But while some schools are hoping to put on a live production in front of an audience, others experiencing high rates of Covid are preparing to livestream or film their plays to reduce the risk of infection. With rehearsals already under way in many schools, headteachers are closely tracking infection rates in their areas before making a final decision on whether to invite parents to the show. James Connelly, the head of Loxley primary school in Sheffield, said his pupils usually put on two nativity plays for parents. “It’s lovely to get all the community together. The children really enjoy it,” he said. “Last year we really didn’t want them to lose the opportunity of performing in the nativity – they are only in reception once, they’ll never get that magical feeling again.” In the end, the school did a livestream and posted a video on YouTube so parents could watch at home. “This year we’re very close to making a decision,” Connelly added. “A lot of parents are saying how nice it is to be able to come into school again. They feel like part of the community again, but we’re worried about the infection rates.” The nativity was cancelled altogether last year at St Jude’s Church of England primary school in Southwark, south London, as the school struggled to remain open with staff off sick. This year the plan is to go ahead with an audience, but it’s a watching brief, said the assistant headteacher, Matt Jones. “Today the plan is we are doing a nativity,” he said. “But the one thing that this experience has taught us is that everything can change very quickly. It’s under constant review.” Jamie Barry, the head of Yew Tree primary in Walsall, in the West Midlands, said: “We’re hoping to [put on a nativity play] if all goes according to plan. We haven’t had any outbreaks here. Just depends how local and national data goes.” “We are livestreaming,” said Chris Dyson, the headteacher of Parklands primary school in Leeds. “We are upset that we can’t open the doors to parents this year to watch their children perform their Christmas concerts. Sadly we can’t risk having 400 parents in the hall for each show.” Last year less than 5% of schools are thought to have put on a live nativity play, about half did not have a nativity play at all, and the rest that did go ahead were virtual. Some schools put on small-scale performances within class bubbles, in accordance with Covid safety guidance, and in some cases children performed using signing and percussion instead of singing, to minimise infection risk. Antony Copus, the head of education at Out of the Ark Music, welcomed the return of the school nativity and the boost in sales. “We’re thousands above where we were last year. November has been a very strong month, and we’ve seen days where we’ve been very close to pre-Covid nativity sales figures.” Among the titles being snapped up are Mary’s Knitting, The Innkeeper’s Breakfast, The Angel Who Nearly Missed it All, the Inn-Spectors, which takes a health and safety approach to the nativity, and Hay Ewe!, told from the perspective of a sheep. “Whether it be a full-school production or a virtual or ‘bubble-friendly’ approach, the angel wings and wonky crowns still shine through. We’re so pleased that nativities are back. It’s just another example of the resilience of schools,” Copus said. According to the Department for Education, there is no limit on group size for events, either indoor or outdoor, and it is up to schools to decide if they want to host nativity plays this year. DfE guidance suggests schools should take steps to improve fresh air flow in areas where gatherings are taking place. If schools have particularly high levels of Covid, local directors of public health may suggest that schools do not hold gatherings, as a way to reduce transmission.It could be a spectacular laser light show in a city park, tastefully illuminated gardens at a grand historic home or an arty trail with glowing installations in mysterious woods. Tell us about a Christmas light extravaganza you’ve visited – we’re particularly interested in hearing about less well-known events. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here The competition closes on 30 November 2021 at 9am If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereScientists have reacted with scepticism to claims by AstraZeneca’s CEO that low uptake of the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab among elderly Europeans could explain the current surge in Covid-19 infections in mainland Europe. Pascal Soriot told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that differences in T-cell immunity between the vaccines might mean that those who received the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab had longer-lasting immune protection against the virus. T- cells are a class of immune cells that educate antibody-producing B cells about the nature of the viral threat and directly kill infected cells. Soriot said: “It’s really interesting when you look at the UK. There was a big peak of infections but not so many hospitalisations relative to Europe. In the UK [the Oxford/AstraZeneca] vaccine was used to vaccinate older people whereas in Europe people thought initially the vaccine doesn’t work in older people. “What I’m saying is that T-cells do matter and in particular it relates to the durability of the response, especially in older people, and this vaccine has been shown to stimulate T-cells to a higher degree in older people. There’s no proof of anything … we don’t know. But we need more data to analyse this and get the answer.” Germany was the first European country to recommend not giving the AstraZeneca jab to people over 65 in late January, citing a lack of efficacy data for the vaccine in this age group. Other European countries swiftly followed with similar recommendations, including Italy, France, Poland and Sweden, although many later reversed this guidance after the publication of further efficacy data. Some eventually even said it should only be used in older age groups, after the European Medicines Agency (EMA) reported a possible link between the vaccine and very rare cases of blood clots. Possibly as a result of these mixed messages, many Europeans were initially reluctant to receive the jab. There are theoretical reasons why the AstraZeneca vaccine might trigger slightly different immune responses compared with an mRNA-based vaccine such as the Pfizer jab. Both equip cells with the genetic instructions to make the coronavirus spike protein, but the AstraZeneca vaccine does so with the help of a modified virus, which the immune system might also be responding to. Deborah Dunn-Walters, the chair of the British Society for Immunology’s Covid-19 taskforce and a professor of immunology at the University of Surrey, said: “It’s a slightly more complicated delivery system, so you might expect there to be differences – but trying to explain those differences would take a lot of research.” Danny Altmann, a professor of immunology at Imperial College London, said it would be “foolhardy” to try to attribute the differences in the shape of individual countries’ infection curves to any single factor. “I don’t know where you’d start to do that scientifically,” he said. “All of the vaccines are, to varying degrees, pretty amazing. They all induce the full gamut of immunity, including neutralising antibodies and [different types of] T-cells.” Prof Matthew Snape, of the University of Oxford, has compared antibody and T-cell responses in people receiving standard or mixed schedules of the Pfizer and AstraZeneca vaccines. Although his team found evidence that a single dose of AstraZeneca induced a better T-cell response, the response was very similar shortly after receiving two doses. “Intriguingly, the best T-cell responses seem to come if you give a first dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine followed by Pfizer,” he said. Finding ways to optimise the immune response to Covid-19 vaccines is an ongoing focus of research, and Snape is following up these studies to see how people’s immune responses shape up in the longer term. Understanding the differences between countries’ infection and hospitalisation rates is further complicated by factors such as when Covid-19 restrictions were lifted and to what degree, variability in the gap between first and second doses, the age of the population and the prevalence of other diseases, and the appearance of new variants, especially if they appear a long time after people have been vaccinated. “Drawing comparisons between countries presents many difficulties and is very likely to lead to conclusions which are not reliable,” said Dr Lance Turtle, a senior clinical lecturer and consultant physician in infectious diseases at the University of Liverpool. Earlier a former chair of the UK vaccine taskforce, Dame Kate Bingham, urged the government to do better in its preparation for future disease outbreaks. Writing in the Times, she said the machinery of Whitehall was “dominated by process rather than outcome, causing delay and inertia”, adding that the jab rollout would have been delayed if it had been left to the normal workings of government.British companies came under intense pressure to push up prices this month after they suffered the fastest rise in the costs of production on record. Steep increases in the price of raw materials, higher fuel costs and strong wage demands in November combined to increase the average cost burden at the most rapid rate since 1998 when comparable records began. According to a monthly survey by IHS Markit, while all private sector businesses were hit equally by the higher input costs, only manufacturers reacted by accelerating the rate at which they increase their own charges. The price of manufactured goods rose at the highest rate in 20 years. Service industry firms reported that on average they were unable to pass on all the extra costs after stiff resistance from customers. Analysts said the rising cost pressures were likely to give the Bank of England extra impetus to raise interest rates at its next meeting in December. Several officials on the Bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC), including the governor Andrew Bailey, have hinted that a rate rise is imminent to calm rising levels of inflation. Samuel Tombs, the chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said the survey evidence showing that firms continued to enjoy high levels of demand and were increasing employment “will reassure wavering MPC members that the economy can withstand a modest increase in interest rates at its next meeting on 16 December”. Chris Williamson, the chief business economist at IHS Markit, said: “A combination of sustained buoyant business growth, further job market gains and record inflationary pressures gives a green light for interest rates to rise in December.” There is intense speculation among investors that the central bank will raise the base rate from its pandemic emergency level of 0.1% to 0.25% before a further rise to 0.5% next February. MPC member Jonathan Haskel hinted that he was in no hurry to raise interest rates, saying that around two-thirds of the inflationary pressure on the UK economy came from forces beyond the BoE’s control. Speaking at Glasgow University’s Adam Smith Business School, he said: “Much of the variation in inflation is due to global factors such as imported goods and energy prices. I expect much of that variation to be transitory.” He added that when he votes for a rate rise it will be because a sustained recovery is in place, one that “reflects the success of fiscal, health and science policy in dealing with worst economic shock in 100 years”. The IHS Markit/Cips flash composite output index registered 57.7 in November, down fractionally from 57.8 in October, but comfortably above the 56.3 average seen in the third quarter of 2021. An index figure above 50 indicates expansion. “Survey respondents typically commented on rising client demand due to improving economic conditions and a continued boost from the roll back of pandemic restrictions,” IHS Markit said. Tombs said other surveys revealed a picture more in line with surveys by the Office for National Statistics (ONS), that show the economy slowing as it approaches the end of the year. “For instance, we estimate from the ONS’ Business Insights and Conditions survey that business turnover was 1% further below normal in the four weeks to 14 November than in the two weeks to 3 October. “In addition, the risk that the economic recovery stalls for a couple of months in the face of a winter surge of Covid-19 cases remains uncomfortably high,” he added. Economists have also highlighted government measures to cut spending and raise taxes that will combine with rising inflation to eat into real household incomes over the next year. “The outlook for a decline in real household disposable income over the next year, as businesses pass on higher costs to consumers and taxes rise, also suggests that the economic recovery will not better the third quarter’s pace,” Tombs said.The system for assessing who should be asked to pay for NHS services “incentivises racial profiling”, an investigation has found. A study by the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) found that overstretched NHS staff sometimes racially profiled patients in order to determine who was not “ordinarily resident” in the UK, and therefore must pay for their care. The report is critical of the more stringent charging regime introduced by NHS England over the past decade as part of a series of measures devised to create a hostile environment for people living in the UK without the correct immigration status. NHS trusts have appointed overseas visitors officers, responsible for identifying chargeable patients, as part of a cost recovery programme launched in 2014. One of the officers told the IPPR study they had felt forced to discriminate between patients based on their name. “If you’ve got a, I don’t know, Mohammed Khan and a Fred Cooper, you’re obviously going to go for [investigating] the Mohammed Khan … Even for someone who’s, you know, well I’d like to think hopefully open-minded, like myself, you’re just trying to save yourself time because there’s not enough hours in the day,” the officer said. A hospital employee also reported that discrimination on the basis of ethnicity was used to determine who should be billed for treatment. “It’s a system that is designed to benefit [white] people like me, not people like … the patient on intensive care who is black and British and was unconscious and sent a bill. So why did someone think he was not eligible for care? Given he was unconscious most of the admission, significantly unwell, probably not his accent, more likely his skin colour,” the health worker said. Under the rules, anyone “not ordinarily resident” in the UK should be charged 150% of the NHS national tariff for most secondary (non-urgent) healthcare, but the report found that processes varied across the country, with a lack of consistent training and widespread confusion over the 130-page rules for the charging system. Some healthcare staff told IPPR researchers that they disliked the extra burden of having to consider whether to refer a patient for charging, which they felt distracted them from their core medical responsibilities. The charging system was also found to have a deterrent effect, dissuading both people liable to be charged and those who mistakenly feared they might be charged from seeking urgent medical attention. The report, Towards True Universal Healthcare, recommends expanding eligibility for free healthcare to include all UK residents, regardless of their immigration status. Marley Morris, IPPR associate director, said: “The current system for NHS charging in England is unfit for purpose. Under these rules, many long-term residents are left facing extortionate bills for receiving critical treatment. These rules are debilitating for patients, stressful to enforce for doctors and nurses, and harmful to public health.” A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “Every taxpayer supports the health service and people who are not lawfully settled residents of the UK contribute towards the cost of treatment they receive while in the UK. “Racial profiling is completely unacceptable, and every patient should go through the same process when identifying who may have to pay for their healthcare. “We have always been clear that urgent care should never be delayed or withheld. There are wider exemptions for certain types of care, as well as for vulnerable groups including refugees, and asylum seekers.”The UK will continue to press governments around the world to cut greenhouse gas emissions urgently in the next year to limit global heating to 1.5C, after the UN climate talks that concluded last week, the president of the summit has pledged. Alok Sharma, the cabinet minister who led the Cop26 talks, said the world had shown in Glasgow that countries could work together to establish a framework for climate action but the next year must focus on keeping the promises made there. “The 1.5C limit lives,” he writes in today’s Guardian. “We brought it back from the brink. But its pulse remains weak. We must steer it to safety by ensuring countries deliver on the promises they have made.” Some argued the talks had failed because the pledges on emissions cuts made at Cop26 were insufficient to meet the 1.5C goal. Sharma acknowledged that countries must increase their pledges and turn them into action and policies. Referring to youth activists from around the world who urged political leaders to act in Glasgow, he said: “We owe it to all of them to deliver what we agreed.” Two weeks of Cop26 talks ended in dramatic fashion as Sharma feared the carefully constructed deal among nearly 200 countries was about to collapse at the last moment, when China and India objected to a reference in the final agreement to the “phase out” of coal-fired power. In the end a compromise was reached, with Sharma on the brink of tears as he apologised to developing countries for the change. The pledges on emissions cuts made at the talks would lead to heating of about 2.4C above pre-industrial levels, far above the 1.5C threshold, so the Glasgow pact also requires countries to revise their targets upwards in the next year. Under the UN rules, the UK will retain responsibility for climate negotiations for the next year, until the Egyptian government assumes the presidency next November. In his first public writing since the talks concluded, Sharma sets out his aims. “The UK’s work as the Cop26 presidency is really only just beginning,” he writes. “Over the course of the next year, we will work with countries urging them to take action and honour their promises. “There is no formal policing process in the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change system, and so we must keep up the constructive pressure, and build on the trust and goodwill generated through Cop26.” The lack of any policing process or sanctions for countries that fail to revise their national targets on emissions, known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs), means that the main ways of holding governments to account are through public scrutiny and political pressure. Australia’s government has already made clear that it does not intend to increase its targets, which are widely regarded as inadequate. The US and the EU have also indicated they do not intend to increase their ambition. Key countries under the spotlight are the world’s biggest emitter, China, whose promise to peak emissions by the end of this decade disappointed many analysts who argued it could go further; and the third biggest emitter, India, which announced new targets in Glasgow but has yet to formally detail them. Russia, Saudi Arabia and Brazil are also under scrutiny. Sharma argues that business and finance will play a key role. “Markets are falling into line, with the value of shares in coal firms around the world dropping since we sent a signal that coal is no longer king,” he writes. Green campaigners have told the Guardian that if the UK wants to show leadership this year, ministers must also look to their own actions. Proposals for a new coalmine in Cumbria, new oil and gas licences in the North Sea, airport and road expansion and dithering on green policy have tarnished the UK’s reputation, while above all the decision to slash overseas aid – even while the Cop26 talks centred on climate finance for poor countries – caused deep alarm. Sharma was widely regarded as isolated within the cabinet at Cop26, as insiders told the Guardian of a rift between the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and prime minister, Boris Johnson, over green measures. Sunak visited the summit briefly but made little impact on senior figures from other countries present. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, also played a little role in Glasgow. Rachel Kyte, a former World Bank top official on climate change, now dean of the Fletcher School at Tufts University in the US, told the Guardian that getting other donor countries to increase climate finance “was made even more complicated by UK Treasury’s insistence on cutting overseas aid. While this was then confirmed as being temporary the damage was done ... The UK lost moral authority, and leverage as the presidency which we saw them struggling with. Alok was liked and respected wherever he went but it was not lost on people that he was a little alone [in the cabinet as a champion of climate action]. ” Rachel Kennerley, a climate campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: “The fight to curb climate breakdown didn’t end with Mr Sharma’s gavel coming down on an underwhelming deal. Just next week the high court will hear about UK-financed gas drilling in Mozambique, so this is the perfect time for the government to withdraw support for that damaging project, laden as it is with climate hypocrisy. “Given the UK’s historical contributions to emissions alongside our role as Cop host, it’s right that we take a good look at the fact that we are still supporting fossil fuel extraction, here and overseas.”It only takes eight minutes of To the Moon before we hear the ripples of Debussy’s Clair de Lune, over a gorgeous vintage montage of embracing lovers. It’s the equivalent of Pomp and Circumstance at the Proms for Tadhg O’Sullivan’s beautifully succinct visual essay on the little guy in the sky; the moon’s beguiling apartness exerting a constant pull on our emotional and imaginative lives, paradoxically making it an inseparable part of us. As the opening quotation, from a Jennifer Elise Foerster poem, puts it: “Moon / Earth fragment / Remember us.” Appropriately, given the presiding deity here and its remit of the unconscious, O’Sullivan’s film is an estuarial wash of lunar-related images, sound and text – all the better to percolate straight into us. Beginning with limpid shots of the rising and setting moon, its impressively broad set of purpose-shot and archive footage – including films from 25 countries, including ones by Satyajit Ray, FW Murnau and Carl Theodor Dreyer – confirms the moon’s universal allure. Broken down into sections according to lunar phases, the structure is perfectly clear but still has suggestive leeway. Sometimes the presiding theme is obvious, as with the romance and madness segments in the film’s “waning” first half. Sometimes an abstract state of being seems to hold sway, as in the deathly, senescent preoccupations in the “new moon” chapter. Later, there’s a charming little digression with kids speculating about who might live up there; a family with red noses burnt by the sun, says one. O’Sullivan makes a sort of political statement in To the Moon’s penultimate “gibbous” section, positioning space exploration as a late step in a broader history of colonialism, at which point “the sovereignty of the moon had dissolved”. But it feels a bit lightweight and summarised, earthbound next to the almost hypnotic tide of more fundamental undercurrents elsewhere – a powerful nocturne hymning the moon’s pull on our bodies and minds. Maybe O’Sullivan should do a film for every planet and start his own cinematic universe. • To the Moon is released in cinemas on 26 November.A post-Brexit scheme to draw the world’s most celebrated academics and other leading figures to the UK has failed to attract a single applicant in the six months since it opened, it has been reported. The visa route open to Nobel laureates and other prestigious global prize winners in the fields of science, engineering, humanities and medicine – among others – was described as a joke by experts after ministers admitted its failure to garner any interest. “Chances that a single Nobel or Turing laureate would move to the UK to work are zero for the next decade or so,” the Nobel prize winner Andre Geim told New Scientist magazine, which first reported the news. The University of Manchester academic, who was awarded the Nobel prize for physics in 2010 for his work on graphene, added: “The scheme itself is a joke – it cannot be discussed seriously. The government thinks if you pump up UK science with a verbal diarrhoea of optimism – it can somehow become a self-fulfilling prophecy.” As part of the scheme, announced in May, the winners of some of the most prestigious global prizes were offered a fast track to a global talent visa allowing them to live and work in the UK without having to fulfil other criteria. For scientists, the programme covered Nobel prizes in physics, chemistry or medicine, and the Fyssen international prize, while for mathematics, just the Fields medal was listed. Those from computing, engineering and social science had a handful of eligible prizes, while a Brit award was also on the list. The Home Office said at the time of the announcement that people on the global talent visa route had to apply to one of six endorsing bodies, whereas the prestigious award route would “allow applicants who hold a qualifying prize to fast-track the endorsement application and instead make a single visa application”. The home secretary, Priti Patel, hailed it as a way of allowing “the best and brightest” to come to the UK. She said: “These important changes will give them the freedom to come and work in our world-leading arts, sciences, music, and film industries as we build back better. This is exactly what our new point-based immigration system was designed for – attracting the best and brightest based on the skills and talent they have, not where they’ve come from.” But, six months later, New Scientist has reported – citing a government response to its freedom of information request – that not one person working in science, engineering, the humanities or medicine has applied. “Frankly, having precisely zero people apply for this elitist scheme doesn’t surprise me at all,” the magazine quoted Jessica Wade, a leading scientist at Imperial College London, as saying. “UK scientists’ access to European funding is uncertain, we’re not very attractive to European students as they have to pay international fees, our pensions are being cut and scientific positions in the UK are both rare and precarious.” The shadow science minister, Labour’s Chi Onwurah, added: “It’s clear this is just another gimmick from a government that over-spins and under-delivers. It is not surprising that the government has failed so comprehensively to attract scientists from abroad, given their lack of consistent support for scientists here.” The Home Office told New Scientist the programme makes it easier for those at the “pinnacle of their career” to come to the UK. “It is just one option under our global talent route, through which we have received thousands of applications since its launch in February 2020 and this continues to rise.”By any measure, the Glasgow climate pact signed at Cop26 is a historic agreement. It was the result of two years of marathon work, and a two-week sprint of negotiations, but we achieved what we wanted. We can credibly say that we kept the goal of limiting global warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels in reach. And besides that, we have won historic commitments from countries to act on coal, cars, cash and trees. These are valuable agreements that begin to fill in the details of how we will navigate this immense, worldwide challenge. Cop26 was the biggest political gathering of any kind ever held in the UK. Glasgow hosted representatives from 194 countries, and 120 world leaders, with 38,000 accredited delegates attending. From outside, the negotiations may have appeared incredibly technocratic. But they were so much more than that. They were ultimately about protecting the lives and livelihoods of those on the frontline of the climate crisis. And protecting future generations who, if we fail, will be condemned to live in a dangerous, uncertain and depleted world. Science tells us that the world is already on average 1.1C warmer than in pre-industrial times, and many millions of people are already suffering from the acute effects of a changing climate. Extreme weather is on the rise across the world and climate change does not recognise national borders. Ultimately, the Glasgow climate pact is an outcome of which all parties can be proud. The cooperation we have seen in this process should give the world hope. In a world of fractured global politics, countries have shown a unity of purpose on the issue of climate. Yes, there were difficulties with these negotiations, particularly in the final hours when an agreement looked in real jeopardy. But overall we saw a willingness from countries to compromise. There was growth in trust between nations, and a genuine determination to reach agreement. Driven by the latest science, our pact recognises the gulf between where countries are on emissions reductions and where we need to be. It emphasises the urgent need for faster action. It commits countries to revisit and strengthen their 2030 emissions reductions targets and develop mid-century net-zero strategies in 2022. The pact makes progress on adaptation, finance, and loss and damage resulting from the climate crisis. And, for the first time, it commits to a plan to move away from coal power and inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies. After six years of wrangling, Cop26 also finalised the outstanding elements of the Paris rulebook – the rules governing the Paris agreement – the resolution of which will unleash its full potential. Outside the negotiating halls, we welcomed commitments that speed up the move to clean power and clean cars, that put the brakes on deforestation, and that increase the finance flowing to climate action. We can count an $8.5bn (£6.3bn) Just Energy Transition Partnership with South Africa; manufacturers representing around a third of the global car market committing to ending the sale of polluting vehicles; a pledge from countries home to more than 90% of the world’s forests to halt and reverse forest loss and land degradation; and the highest single mobilisation to the Adaptation Fund, which supports climate-vulnerable communities. I could go on. With so many positive announcements, it could be tempting to become complacent. But this would be a mistake. The 1.5C limit lives. We brought it back from the brink. But its pulse remains weak. We must steer it to safety by ensuring countries deliver on the promises they have made, and on the expectations set out in this pact to increase climate ambition to 2030 and beyond. And this is why the UK’s work as the Cop26 presidency is really only just beginning. Over the course of the next year, we will work with countries, urging them to take action and honour their promises. There is no formal policing process in the UN framework convention on climate change system, and so we must keep up the constructive pressure, and build on the trust and goodwill generated through Cop26. Because the world has now shown that it can work together to accelerate the pace of change. And markets are falling into line, with the value of shares in coal firms around the world dropping since we sent a signal that coal is no longer king. We must grasp this moment. We know what we need to do. The world must now step up and take the fight forwards on finance, on adaptation, and on 1.5C. At the outset of the conference, the activist Brianna Fruean of Samoa told us “2C could mean the end. 1.5C could mean a fighting chance”. So many others like Brianna came to Cop to tell world leaders what climate change means for them. We owe it to all of them to deliver what we agreed in Glasgow. Alok Sharma is president of Cop26 and the Conservative MP for Reading West“My delight is in the neatness of everything,” wrote Samuel Pepys in his diary in 1663, “and so cannot be pleased with anything unless it be very neat, which is a strange folly.” He was referring in part to the fastidious organisation of his magnificent collection of books. By the time of his death in 1703 he had amassed 3,000 of them, which he left to his alma mater, Magdalene College, Cambridge, to be housed in a dedicated building with his name above the door. He gave strict instructions that his library be kept intact for posterity, without addition or subtraction, its contents arranged “according to heighth” in the bespoke glass-fronted bookcases he had especially commissioned. The responsibility came with an added threat: if one volume goes missing, he instructed, the whole library must be transferred to Trinity. The precious gift had a downside. The sanctity of Pepys’ collection meant that a functional library for students to study in always took second place, tucked into cramped side rooms of the grade I-listed building, unrenovated since the 1960s. Now, over 300 years since his bequest, a brand new college library has been built right next door to Pepys’ precious trove. Its modern collection of books may not be arranged in height order, but it’s fair to imagine that the meticulous diarist would be delighted by its neatness. “There was a great sense of trepidation about building a new library in such a sensitive location,” says Níall McLaughlin, the London-based Irish architect of the project. Thankfully he has form in daunting contexts. From inserting a museum into the princely surrounds of Auckland Castle in County Durham, to erecting a little stone temple for harpsichord recitals in the middle of Trinity Hall, his buildings manage to hold their own while respecting their stately neighbours. They fit in, but have their own forceful tectonic presence, avoiding the common pitfall of being overly deferential to the weight of history. The venerable context can have a paralysing effect on Oxbridge college clients and their architects, forcing some to opt for lifeless pastiche. Selwyn College, for example, has just completed a new library and auditorium that looks like something from a neoclassical toy town, a clumsily proportioned box, crowned with a bizarre campanile. Designed by Porphyrios Associates, it is comically misjudged, the search for gravitas resulting in something more redolent of a Poundbury Holiday Inn. The new Magdalene library, by contrast, is an accomplished reinterpretation of tradition. “Settled” was the adjective that the then-master of the college, Dr Rowan Williams, kept returning to during the design process, to describe how he wanted the library to feel, and McLaughlin has responded deftly with a building that has a timeless air. Facing the Fellows’ Garden with a row of tall brick chimneys, flanking pitched gables and oak bay windows, the library takes an almost Jacobean form, only filtered through a stripped, modernist lens. Its facade recalls the striking row of chimneys along Trinity College’s south range, which march like sturdy sentinels down Trinity Lane; but, rather than rising from fireplaces, here the flues provide natural ventilation, expelling air from the reading rooms. McLaughlin cites Louis Kahn as his chief inspiration, whose 1950s Richards medical research laboratory in Philadelphia was structured around great brick flues. “I like Kahn’s idea that the chimneys simultaneously carry the load of the building down, and warm air up,” he says. “In our building they also provide the overall structure, creating a sort of ‘tartan’ grid that organises the whole space.” The tartan structure is evident as soon as you walk in. Pairs of chunky glulam timber beams shoot across the ceiling, intersecting with beams running in the other direction, forming a kind of hashtag motif where they cross. They support the weight of cross-laminated timber floor slabs, transferring the load on to concrete lintels, which are then tied into the tall brick piers, the materials carefully stitched together as in a piece of fine tailoring. Everything you see is doing its job: this is not skin-deep cladding for a hidden concrete structure, as is so often the case, but the actual stuff that holds the building up. “I wanted the language of load and support to be legible,” says McLaughlin, channelling shades of the brick-whispering Kahn. Oak bookshelves and desks are slotted in between the structural elements, demarcated as pieces of furniture, so as not to be confused with the load-bearing bones of the building. The tartan grid creates an alternating rhythm of narrow and wide spaces, the former used to house stairs and bookcases, the latter defining square reading rooms and group study areas. The rigorous structural logic is then played with across the three levels, with floors removed in places to form lofty double- and triple-height voids. The various openings mean that you get continual views across, up and through the three-dimensional grid of books, desks and students at work, creating a vertical theatre of studiousness. Each square bay is crowned with a vaulted lantern roof, glazed on each side to bring daylight flooding in from all directions, making the building feel like an airy pavilion in the garden, nestled among the ancient yew trees. The layout creates inviting niches and cosy cubbyholes, with desks set into bay windows, slotted between the chimneys, and arranged around the galleries, so you can be tucked away, but also feel part of the bigger collective whole. “Students come to the library so they can work separately but together,” says deputy librarian Tom Sykes. “It’s motivating to see other people working, but you also need to be able to concentrate, or hide away. This building provides a wonderful mix of spaces, so there’s something for everyone.” It caters to all tastes, from the recluse to the exhibitionist. One desk projects right out into the middle of a triple-height void, visible from all sides – what McLaughlin calls “the prima donna desk,” for the student who wants everyone to know they’re working. Others are tucked between the chimney breasts in secluded dens of oak joinery, with arrow-slit ventilation flaps that open to give a glimpse of the river beyond. “It’s great that the students can control their own immediate environment, with manual blinds and shutters for fresh air,” says Sykes. “We’re open 24 hours, so it’s important that the building can just function on its own without too much management.” On first sight of the open-plan design, he feared it would be an acoustic nightmare, but the building has proved remarkably quiet so far, thanks to acoustic buffers hidden in the ceilings. A dedicated social room – named after Rowan Williams – provides a release valve for eating, chatting and generally lounging around with a view of the garden, while the next-door gallery offers space for temporary exhibitions, lined with big oak doors that open out on to the lawn. The building has received rave reviews from students so far, although some are nostalgic for the musty carpet aroma of the old library. “It’s still there,” says Sykes. “Maybe we can cut it up into pieces and offer it to people who miss the smell.”A 20-year-old student activist who was arrested while attempting to seek asylum at the US consulate in Hong Kong has become the youngest person sentenced under the city’s draconian national security law. Tony Chung was sentenced to three years and seven months in prison after being convicted of secession and money laundering. The secession charge related to an activist group that had disbanded in Hong Kong, social media posts, and possession of independence materials which had been made illegal by the national security law. The district criminal court judge Stanley Chan said Chung “played an active role in promoting the independence of Hong Kong”, through the group he founded, which was called Studentlocalism. Chan said even though Chung had disbanded Studentlocalism when the national security law was established – making such activities illegal – Chung “continued his endeavour and the pursuit of his political ideas” through the establishment of a US-based division. Prosecutors had presented as evidence pro-independence T-shirts, flags and books seized from Chung’s home in a police raid in 2020, and a PayPal account Chung had run until October 2020 to receive donations. During mitigation Chung’s legal team had said the money received was used for the organisation’s operations, and that Chung had no intention to make a profit, according to local media. Earlier this month Chung pleaded guilty to the charges of secession and one count of money laundering, but pleaded not guilty to a second money laundering charge and one of sedition. Those charges were left on the court file. The judge granted a 25% reduction in sentence due to the guilty pleas, ordering 40 months for secession. The 40-month sentence for secession and 18 months for money laundering will be mostly served concurrently for 43 months. Beijing imposed the security law in June 2020. The law punishes anything deemed as subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces with up to life in prison. Since its enactment, Hong Kong has taken an authoritarian turn, with most democratic politicians now in jail or in self-exile. Dozens of civil society organisations have folded, and some international rights groups have left the city. Chung has been in detention since October 2020, held on remand since his arrest outside the US consulate. In December 2020 he was also sentenced to four months in jail for insulting the Chinese flag and unlawful assembly. Chung and two others were detained by unidentified men at a coffee shop near the US consulate, where they had been waiting for it to open. His supporters said at the time Chung had been intending to seek political asylum. They said Chung had submitted his paperwork weeks earlier, but fear of an imminent arrest prompted him to seek shelter inside the consulate. Johnny Patterson, the policy director of the UK-based advocacy group Hong Kong Watch, said: “Tony Chung’s sentencing is disproportionate, draconian, and sets a dangerous precedent for other young Hongkongers whose only crime is using social media to protest the dismantling of Hong Kong’s freedoms. “At 20 years old, Tony Chung is the youngest person to be sentenced under this draconian law. He will not be the last.”When a series of deep pits were discovered near the world heritage site of Stonehenge last year, archaeologists excitedly described it as the largest prehistoric structure ever found in Britain – only for some colleagues to dismiss the pits as mere natural features. Now scientific tests have proved that those gaping pits, each aligned to form a circle spanning 1.2 miles (2km) in diameter, were definitely human-made, dug into the sacred landscape almost 4,500 years ago. The structure appears to have been a boundary guiding people to a sacred area, because Durrington Walls, one of Britain’s largest henge monuments, is located precisely at its centre. The site is 1.9 miles north-east of Stonehenge on Salisbury Plain, near Amesbury in Wiltshire. Prof Vincent Gaffney, of Bradford University, an archaeologist who headed the team that made the discovery, said science had proved that this was indeed a huge neolithic monument. “Some of the debate about the discovery and Stonehenge seemed bonkers to me,” he said. Soon after the discovery was announced in June 2020, one doubting archaeologist referred to the pits as “blobs on the ground” and said linking them to Stonehenge was “entirely hypothetical”. Another argued that archaeologists who had previously looked at some of the pits had suggested they were natural hollows, and that they could “be trusted to recognise a natural feature when they encounter one”. The arguments shocked Gaffney, who recalled one archaeologist suggesting his team should have had a geologist on site to recognise natural features. In fact, he said, they had two. While part of the circle has not survived, owing to modern development, Gaffney said the latest fieldwork involved scientific analysis of nine of the pits. “We’ve now looked at nearly half of them and they’re all the same. So effectively this really does say this is one enormous structure. It may have evolved from a natural feature, but we haven’t located that. So it’s the largest prehistoric structure found in Britain.” Each pit is about 10 metres across and 5 metres deep, and science supports the theory that the neolithic people who constructed Stonehenge also dug this monument. The previously unknown subterranean ring is 20 times bigger than Stonehenge. It adds to the evidence that early inhabitants of Britain, mainly farming communities, had developed a way to count, tracking hundreds of paces to measure out the pits. It gives new insights into the complexity of the monumental structures in this landscape. While Stonehenge was positioned in relation to the solstices, the boundary of pits may have had cosmological significance. Specialists in remote sensing technology that can search below ground have now investigated ancient features in the landscape that traditional archaeology could never detect. They can pinpoint where the ground has been disturbed, even after thousands of years. The cutting-edge technology includes optically stimulated luminescence (OSL), which can date the last time that sediment was exposed to daylight. The tests were conducted by Dr Tim Kinnaird, of the school of earth and environmental sciences at the University of St Andrews, who said: “These proved beyond doubt that the pits date to around 2400BC.” He spoke of the “exciting” findings, including “the remarkable consistency across the cores, the identification of multiple and distinct fills, the suggestion that the pits were infilled at a similar time.” Detailed analytical work in the laboratory further confirmed that “these were not natural features”. He added: “It’s confirmed that the [pits] are all very similar, which is fascinating.” If these were natural features such as sinkholes, they would be different sizes. Gaffney, who has studied Stonehenge for 20 years, said: “There’s a real revolution in dating technology happening with OSL. You date the sediments directly. Traditional dating relies on us finding a bit of bone or charcoal and then we date that. We don’t date the soil. OSL does that.” The data showed that the pits were being used from the late neolithic until the middle bronze age, after which they were left to silt, he said. “So these things are being maintained beyond the monumental phases of Stonehenge.” The discovery is explored in a Channel 5 documentary titled Stonehenge: The New Revelations, to be aired on 9 December (9pm).Donald Trump’s pollster thinks he will run for the White House again in 2024, with a path to victory through five states he lost to Joe Biden in 2020: Arizona, Georgia, Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin. But Michael Cohen, Trump’s former attorney and fixer who is fresh out of house arrest, thinks he will not. “His fragile ego cannot stand to be considered a two-time loser,” Cohen said on Monday. Trump lost the five states in question by narrow margins – defeats he refuses to accept, continuing to promote the lie that Biden won thanks to electoral fraud, which led to deadly violence at the US Capitol on 6 January. Politico obtained a memo from Trump’s pollster, Tony Fabrizio, which said a poll carried out for the former president’s fundraising committee put him up over Biden in all five states, by margins ranging from three points in Georgia to 12 in Michigan. In recent books about the Trump administration, Fabrizio is depicted as willing to give Trump polling news he did not want. But he told Politico: “Poll after poll clearly demonstrates that … Trump is still the 800lb gorilla in the [Republican party] and would be its 2024 nominee should he run.” “This new data clearly shows that today the voters in these five key states would be happy to return Trump to the White House and send Biden packing.” With Biden struggling in the polls, Trump dominates both his party and Republican fundraising, with a huge post-election haul. He also remains in extensive legal jeopardy. The Washington Post revealed details on Monday of his legal troubles, including how the Republican party is paying some of his legal bills. Cohen, one of more than 10 Trump associates who have been convicted of crimes, has completed his sentence for his role in illegal hush-money payments to women to help Trump’s 2016 campaign and lying to Congress about a project in Russia. “Donald will not run,” Cohen told CNN. “Why? Because first of all, he has an incredibly fragile ego. He lost by 9m votes the first time [actually a little more than 7m]. He will lose by more than 9m the second and his fragile ego cannot stand to be considered a two-time loser.” Asked if Trump would again react to defeat by simply saying he won, Cohen pointed to Trump’s political fundraising, which has brought in more than $100m. “This is nothing more than the world’s greatest grift,” Cohen said. “He’s bringing in money greater than when he had the Trump Organization with all of its assets. So why would you give this up? “He will drag this thing on all the way to the end. I have an original document … whereby he decided not to run in 2011. And of course, the reasons he talked about was his real estate, it was, you know, The Apprentice and so on. “He’s going to do the same thing. The only difference this time versus last is that he’s making money each and every day by sending out more texts. ‘Oh, Donald won. Send $25.’” Alluding to pictures of Republicans including the House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, at Trump’s Florida resort, Cohen said Trump “doesn’t need to be the president in his mind to be the man behind the power, which of course goes to his adage, right? ‘Come and kiss the ring.’ “He says that all the time. They’re all coming to Mar-a-Lago to kiss the ring.”We would like to hear from Generation Z about their experiences of the workplace – and what they would change about it. As a young person, what kind of workplace culture do you want to see? Are there certain things that you want or expect in a workplace? Do you feel that remote working? is the way forward? How do you feel about being in the office? If you started work during the pandemic, how has this affected your view of work? Tell us all about your experiences below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.House sales tumbled by more than half during the first few weeks after the end of the extended stamp duty holiday in England and Northern Ireland, leading to the quietest October property market for almost a decade. After a record surge in activity earlier in the year, transactions across the UK slumped by 52% in a month to reach 76,930 in October after thousands of homebuyers rushed to complete their purchases and beat the government’s end-of-September stamp duty holiday deadline applying to buyers in the largest market, England and Northern Ireland. Elsewhere, the withdrawing of property-purchase tax breaks happened earlier: in Scotland the end date was 31 March this year, while a similar measure in Wales ended on 30 June. HM Revenue and Customs, which published the new data, said UK house sales in October were also 28% lower than in the same month last year. HMRC said that after “significant forestalling activity” by homebuyers in September, there had been “an expected but noticeable decrease” in sales the following month. Forestalling is when advanced action is taken to prevent an anticipated event – in this case, the phasing-out of the stamp duty holiday. The threshold at which the tax begins returned to its pre-pandemic level of £125,000 on 1 October in England and Wales. While last month was the slowest October since 2012, according to HMRC, other measures of the market – in particular, the various house price surveys – depict a market continuing to fire on all cylinders. Halifax said earlier this month that UK house prices rose for a fourth month running in October, adding 0.9% to the average cost of a home and taking the typical figure above £270,000 for the first time on its measure. The rival lender Nationwide said property values increased by 0.7% in October, which meant the price of the average property had gone up by more than £30,000 since the coronavirus pandemic began in March 2020. The HMRC data underlines the rollercoaster nature of the housing market during the past 18 months or more. It revealed that house sales in the second quarter of 2021 hit their highest quarter-two level since official records began to be compiled in this way in 2005, and also hit their highest total for any three-month period since 2007. The figures prompted many commentators to predict that the market was heading for a winter “hibernation”. Sarah Coles, a personal finance analyst at the investment company Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Property sales plummeted in October, but … we always see drops like this after the end of a tax break, and we tend to see buyers hunker down for winter, so the combination of the two was always going to mean a quieter few months.” She added: “The monthly drop looks spectacular, as sales almost halved, but this was from an enormous peak created by the final stamp duty holiday deadline. A major chunk of sales we would otherwise have expected this winter were rushed through in time for the deadline at the end of September.” One factor that may have kept house prices buoyant is the reported shortage of homes for sale. Earlier this month, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors said that “a lack of new properties being listed for sale continues to drive house prices up”. It added that despite a rise in the number of new buyer inquiries, estate agents currently only had 37 properties on their books on average.AO World has warned of shortages of electrical products and delivery drivers before Christmas, as coronavirus disruption pushed one of the pandemic winners into a £10m loss between April and September. Issuing its second profit warning in two months, the online retailer said shortages had been particularly acute in electronics such as Apple’s iPhone and games consoles including Sony’s PlayStation and Microsoft’s Xbox. AO World, which started selling mainly white goods such as washing machines, said it was experiencing “meaningful supply chain challenges with poor availability in certain categories, particularly in our newer products where we have less scale, experience and leverage”, before popular shopping periods including Black Friday. The company highlighted a shortage of components for manufacturers, which are in a global battle for supplies of semiconductor chips that are used in devices from toothbrushes to electric cars. AO World shares fell by 15% by midday to about 105p, knocking nearly £90m from its market value. The company’s market value has fallen from £2.1bn in January to just over £500m on Tuesday afternoon, a loss of three-quarters of its worth. AO, founded by its chief executive John Roberts in 2000, had soared in value during the pandemic, as store closures for large parts of 2020 and 2021 plus increased household savings adding to consumer spending power. That helped the company surge past its 2014 float price of 285p a share, and it broke above 400p for the first time in December as investors looked for companies that could continue selling through lockdowns. AO said it had remained “resilient”, with revenues up 6% year on year to £761m in the six months to 30 September. However, it lost £10m before tax during that period, compared with a profit before tax of £18m in 2020. Adding to concerns about price increases that have prompted the Bank of England to prepare to raise interest rates, AO also warned that “shipping costs, material input prices and consumer price inflation remain challenging uncertainties”. Roberts highlighted rising prices for oil, plastics and metals that have been passed on by manufacturers. He added that the company had spent £15m extra on drivers’ wages to make sure it could recruit enough to get 1,000 vans on the road each day. He said the company had “inevitably been affected by the constraints and uncertainty seen across our industry” but he believed AO will benefit as more people shop online. “The practicalities in terms of the macro disruptions are very much out of our control, but we made the decision to invest in our infrastructure,” he said, adding that he believed customers would eventually “reward” the company for investments such as a fridge recycling facility in Telford, Shropshire, England.The government has admitted there are no routine checkups on fish welfare at slaughter, after an investigation found no department would take responsibility. Campaigners have said this means fish face cruelty with no repercussions for those who fail to meet their welfare needs, and have asked that fish are given the same oversight as other farmed animals. An undercover investigation by Animal Equality into a Scottish salmon slaughterhouse this year showed fish having their gills cut while conscious and being repeatedly and painfully clubbed, with it taking up to seven blows to stun the animals. Campaigners said the fish faced “vicious and imprecise bludgeoning”, and many fell to the floor to suffocate. Unlike farmed land animals, which have legislation for them to be slaughtered as humanely as possible, the fish farming industry sets its own standards regarding humane slaughter. A government spokesperson admitted that in England and Wales, there was no routine animal welfare inspection programme at farmed fish processing premises. While they claim the Animal and Plant Health Agency (Apha) did checkups in Scotland, freedom of information requests submitted by the Humane League to the Scottish government reveal there is no established process for regular welfare inspections at fish processing sites. The Humane League did not include Northern Ireland in the scope of its investigation. Apha confirmed that it did not have “a routine programme of official inspections at fish processing sites”. Scotland is the third biggest producer of farmed salmon in the world. The biggest, Norway, has a law mandating the pre-slaughter stunning of farmed fish. Scotland, England and Wales do not. The most recent estimate, from 2017, was that 22-52 million farmed salmon are farmed and slaughtered in the UK each year. The same issue applies to trout farming in England. The trout industry has its own certification scheme, Quality Trout UK (QTUK), including standards for pre-slaughter stunning, but these are not enforced by the government and there are no routine checks. Responses to freedom of information requests show not one public body has a clear understanding of what regime is in place, with the Food Standards Agency, the Fish Health Inspectorate, local government environmental health departments and Apha all confirming they do not conduct checks on fish farms in England. This means no government officials are monitoring fish welfare at the time of killing. Cordelia Britton, the head of campaigns at the Humane League UK, said: “It is alarming that apparently zero government officials are inspecting fish welfare at slaughter. From our correspondence it seems clear that no relevant agency knows what’s going on, with each institution passing the buck to another. Without proper oversight, cruelty goes unnoticed. It is time for the government to take responsibility for how farmed fish are slaughtered, as they do for other farmed animals.” Campaigners are calling for farmed fish to be given similar rights to other farmed animals. In the last few years there has been debate among scientists over the extent to which fish can feel pain, which is a growing area of research. In 2018 the science writer Ferris Jabr found that “the collective evidence is now robust enough that biologists and veterinarians increasingly accept fish pain as a reality”. Dr Vicky Bond, the managing director of the Humane League UK, said: “Fish are often forgotten in discussions and decisions on animal welfare, and this is wholly unjustified. The scientific and public consensus is that they feel pain, so refusing farmed fish the same protections afforded to land animals is completely irrational. The government animal welfare committee suggested the law be updated with detailed stunning requirements back in 1996, and 25 years later farmed fish still have the same inadequate safeguards. This needs to change.” A Defra spokesperson said: “The UK has some of the highest animal welfare protections in the world, including when animals are slaughtered or killed. We are carefully considering issues raised in the review of the welfare of animals at the time of killing (England) regulations, including detailed protections for the welfare of farmed fish.”Interruptions interrogates the rights and wrongs of political leadership in an unnamed state. Written by the late Stephen Jeffreys and first performed under the direction of Annabel Arden in 2001, this is a knotty and intriguing drama about social order, change and tyranny that has been newly adapted for a reduced cast. It opens on the eve of an election in a socialist democracy which is defined by thudding, Marxist clichés of “comrades”, “the people” and “the bourgeoisie”. Characters debate whether to re-elect a people’s party committed to social reform four years ago but which has since left them disappointed. The election is won over the course of the play but is followed by a military coup. Directed by Guy Woolf for the theatre company Represent, its six-strong cast (Aaron Douglas, Samarge Hamilton, Sarel Madziya, Nemide May, Emily Pemberton and Loussin-Torah Pilikian) switch roles in seven non-sequential scenarios. Each of these encapsulates a group’s relationship to power, from fighting chefs preparing a feast for the new president to members of a desert monastery, looking for signs that will help them decide on a new successor for their order, and intellectuals-turned-manual-workers in a socialist state that has tipped into tyranny. Some of these fragmented scenes feel deliberately abstruse and static, demanding our concentration. There is one in which factory workers play a game of throwing a can that points to far bigger power dynamics. One scene about a film crew, repeatedly going over the same scene, builds its sense of threat in miniature as the bigger, bloodier terror of the coup kicks off. Rose Farbrother’s sound design further raises the stakes with sirens, machine gunfire and the rumble of upheaval, along with Bethany Gupwell’s scrutinising lighting on sides of the stage. The play explores debates around political disengagement and the power of the vote, and there is no neatly packaged message nor soapbox polemics aside from a few clumsy moments. One character in the filming scene mocks the fact that everything in the screenplay has a “hidden meaning” and he could be speaking for Jeffreys’ script itself. The strong ensemble switch roles with ease and balance the tone between political speechifying, spiky comedy and a sense of dread. They move in choreographed mime or dance sometimes but also freeze in the middle of a scene and seem purposefully artificial in their manner, such as the strained smile of a head chef, which appears threatening, and emphatically spoken lines, which gives the drama a slightly non-naturalistic air. Because of its formal experiment, sense of repetition and elliptical scenarios, the play comes to feel drawn out by the end. But there is richness in its tricky and demanding nature and this powerful play is well worth watching. At Jacksons Lane, London, until 4 December. Livestreamed on 25 November.Jennifer Lawrence has defended the higher salary paid to Leonardo DiCaprio for Don’t Look Up, their forthcoming film for which they receive equal billing. Speaking to Vanity Fair, Lawrence said: “Leo brings in more box office than I do. I’m extremely fortunate and happy with my deal.” A recently published report in Variety suggested that DiCaprio will receive $30m (£22.5m) for the movie, and Lawrence will be paid $25m ($18.7m) – meaning DiCaprio’s fee is 20% higher. Lawrence added: “In other situations, what I have seen – and I’m sure other women in the workforce have seen as well – is that it’s extremely uncomfortable to inquire about equal pay. And if you do question something that appears unequal, you’re told it’s not gender disparity but they can’t tell you what exactly it is.” In Don’t Look Up, a satirical comedy directed by The Big Short’s Adam McKay, Lawrence plays a PhD student who discovers a comet that threatens to destroy Earth, and DiCaprio the professor who joins her in trying to warn humanity. Lawrence also revealed that she had asked to have a slightly more prominent credit than DiCaprio. “I was number one on the call sheet, so … I thought [the credits] should reflect that. Leo was very gracious about it.” Saying that originally they were to have a “Laverne &amp; Shirley” credit, aka “diagonal billing”, Lawrence says she requested her name to appear fractionally earlier. “I guess maybe somewhere down the line, I kicked the stone further, like, ‘What if it wasn’t equal?’” In 2015, Lawrence publicly criticised Hollywood’s gender pay gap, in an essay in Lena Dunham’s Lenny Letter newsletter in which she acknowledged the problems “aren’t exactly relatable” – but after revelations she was paid considerably less than male co-stars, she “got mad at myself”. She added: “I failed as a negotiator because I gave up early. I didn’t want to keep fighting over millions of dollars that, frankly, due to two franchises, I don’t need.”Buy-now-pay-later lenders should be regulated urgently to prevent young consumers taking on a mountain of debt they may be unable to afford, the Labour MP Stella Creasy has said. Creasy, the MP for Walthamstow, called a debate in parliament on Tuesday to draw attention to the rapid growth of companies such as Klarna. “My concern is that the speed at which this industry is moving, with the failure of the government to act as quickly, will have very severe repercussions for consumers this Black Friday, and this Christmas,” she told the Guardian, in advance of the debate. “I think politicians have consoled themselves that during the pandemic people have paid down their debts, they’ve saved more, they might be in a stronger financial position – but it’s only those people who had money to save in the first place who were in that position. And there is a growing inequality that we haven’t picked up on.” She added: “You’ve already got a smouldering fire of debt, and there were people before the pandemic who were using credit cards and high-cost loans to cover their costs – who were already spinning and juggling. And into that picture has come a new form of credit, that is being aggressively marketed and shoved down their throats, without any protection at all.” Buy-now-pay-later (BNPL) lending allows consumers to pay for goods in several instalments instead of meeting the full cost up front, and many mainstream retailers now offer it to customers as a routine part of online shopping. Citizens Advice, which is also calling for the sector to be regulated, recently warned that one in 10 people are expecting to rely on buy-now-pay-later to cope with Christmas spending. The firms charge no interest, but borrowers unable to meet repayments can find themselves charged late payment fees and pursued by debt collectors. Citizens Advice research found that one in 10 BNPL users – or one in eight younger users – had been chased by a debt collector over the past year. Its director of policy, Matthew Upton, recently described using it as, “like quicksand”. Creasy called on retailers to stop using BNFL until it is properly regulated. The government agreed to regulate BNPL lenders after an independent review chaired by City expert Christopher Woolard, published in February, warned that the sector represented a “significant potential consumer harm”. But Creasy points out that the Treasury only published a consultation on how to do that last month, which is not due to close until the new year, and will be followed by a separate consultation by the regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). By that time, she says, young consumers will have taken on millions of pounds more in debt. Creasy previously campaigned vociferously against the payday lender Wonga, which ultimately went into administration after a government crackdown, amid allegations of irresponsible lending. A Klarna spokesperson said: “UK consumers are choosing BNPL as a more responsible way to pay, saving them money and helping them manage their finances compared to alternatives like credit cards. We offer short-term interest- and fee-free BNPL products with structured repayment plans, keeping people out of debt.” A spokesperson for the FCA said it was vital that the law kept pace with the changing nature of the credit market. “We plan to consult on new rules soon after the Treasury’s consultation is finished and they have decided which firms and activities will be regulated. We are already working on what our regulation of these firms will look like,” they added. The Treasury was approached for comment.Total deaths across Europe from Covid-19 are likely to exceed 2 million by March next year, the World Health Organization (WHO) has said, adding that the pandemic had become the number one cause of death in the region. Reported deaths have risen to nearly 4,200 a day, double the number being recorded in September, the agency said, while cumulative reported deaths in the region, which includes the UK, have already surpassed 1.5 million. Describing the situation as “very serious”, the WHO said it expected “high or extreme stress” on hospital beds in 25 of the region’s 53 countries, with intensive care units in 49 countries set to come under similar strain. On current trends, the region’s cumulative death toll would surpass 2.2 million by 1 March, it said. As Europe again becomes the centre of the pandemic, with tighter controls mainly on the unvaccinated and heated debate in several countries about making vaccination obligatory, Austria this week became the first west European country to re-enter lockdown since inoculation began earlier this year. The increase in cases was being driven by the highly transmissible Delta variant which is now dominant across the region, the WHO said, fuelled by a widespread relaxation of preventive measures, such as mask wearing and physical distancing, since the summer. With more and more people gathering indoors in the colder late-autumn weather, a large number still not vaccinated, and vaccine efficacy against severe forms of the disease waning, “many people are left vulnerable to the virus”. Dr Hans Kluge, the WHO’s regional director for Europe, said it was essential that countries adopted a “vaccine plus” approach. “This means getting the standard doses of vaccine and taking a booster if offered,” he said, “but also incorporating preventive measures into our normal routines.” In combination with the vaccines, Kluge said, wearing a mask, washing your hands, ventilating indoor spaces, keeping physical distance, and sneezing into your elbow were “simple, effective ways of gaining control over the virus”. He added: “All of us have the opportunity and responsibility to help avert unnecessary tragedy and loss of life and limit further disruption to society and businesses over this winter season,” by avoiding “the last resort of lockdowns and school closures”. The WHO said more than 1bn vaccine doses had been administered in the WHO European region and 53.5% of people had completed their inoculation programme, but added that the figure “hides wide differences between countries”, with some populations less than 10% vaccinated and others more than 80%. The vaccines were “are a vital tool to prevent severe disease and death” and had saved hundreds of thousands of lives, it said, calling for governments to do more to increase coverage, including by working with behavioural and cultural scientists to understand individual and community reluctance. But with evidence growing that the vaccines’ protection against infection and mild disease declined over time, it urged that booster doses “should be given to protect the most vulnerable, including the immunocompromised, as a priority”, as well as to the over-60s and heathcare workers as a precaution. Data showed only 48% of people across the region wear a mask when they leave home, it said, estimating that 95% mask usage could prevent more than 160,000 deaths that could otherwise occur before 1 March. “Today, the Covid-19 situation across Europe and central Asia is very serious,” Kluge said. “We face a challenging winter ahead, but … all of us – governments, health authorities, individuals – can take decisive action to stabilise the pandemic.”Bulb customers have reacted with dismay to the news that their supplier has gone bust, although a significant number also described how the quality of the firm’s customer service had fallen away in recent months. On Monday the company, which supplied energy to about 6% of UK households, became the biggest casualty of the energy crisis so far after telling Ofgem it could not carry on. About three-quarters of customers who contacted the Guardian described a positive experience, particularly those who joined the company early on in its six years of trading. Emma, a 32-year-old marketing executive from London, was unhappy at the news administrators had been appointed. “I’ve been a Bulb customer for nearly four years and have always been incredibly impressed by their customer service and ease of use of their website and app … I dread being taken on by another provider now, as I know the customer experience won’t be as good.” Rob, a 31-year-old researcher from Yorkshire, who had switched to the firm in part because it offered green electricity, was equally disappointed. “I’ve always found Bulb to be very good. On the rare occasion I’ve needed to speak to them, customer services has been very good and issues have been resolved quickly.” Overall, customers appear to have liked the fact that the company – in contrast to bigger rivals – offered one clear tariff. In the past it was not uncommon for other suppliers to have 10 or more to choose from. Many said they had signed up because the firm sold 100% renewable electricity. The £50 referral bonus paid to customers who signed up friends was also seen as a big hit for users. This contributed to its rapid growth, with people’s extended families all being signed up. However, other readers reported doing battle with the company in recent months after it tried to up their direct debits, seemingly in an attempt to improve its cash position. Clare, who described herself as an author, wrote: “Ten days ago they contacted us to say our account was £17 in debit so they were doubling our monthly electricity payment to £230. There was no explanation, justification or right to appeal. I have so many friends whose payments were doubled in the past few weeks that it’s clear that Bulb was using customers as a cash-cow to make up for not being able to secure finance to stay afloat.” One reader, a 42-year-old accountant from Edinburgh who wanted to remain anonymous, said: “My account was in a reasonable amount of credit (normally between one and two months’ usage), but despite this there were constant demands to increase my payments … It felt like Bulb were trying to use their customers as unofficial investors with no return.” Eleanor, from Wales, left Bulb about 15 months ago after noticing that prices had begun to increase, one of multiple respondents to complain of this. “By then, customer service had deteriorated, with emails going unanswered or taking a long time to receive a reply,” she wrote. A number of readers questioned whether the energy sector had been properly regulated, given that so many suppliers have now collapsed. Many older readers also described fearing what the next few months could hold, given that the price cap is set to be raised again in April. Iain, from Glasgow, summed up the mood. “I am concerned about who I will be transferred to after Ofgem stops running Bulb. Not sure how we’ll afford energy [this winter] when we’re looking at a suggested 78% monthly increase among other [price] increases. The government needs to do something to help, and they need to do it now,” he said.A German football coach who resigned over allegations that he forged his vaccine certificate has drawn condemnation and derision after it emerged that he attended a carnival party this month that was exclusive to people who had received the jab or recovered from the virus. Markus Anfang announced his resignation as the head coach of German second division club Werder Bremen on Saturday morning after the state prosecutor in the northern city revealed there were doubts about the authenticity of the document supposedly proving the 47-year-old had received two doses of the BioNTech/Pfizer vaccine. The coach, who had joined Bremen in mid-June after stints at Kiel, Cologne and Darmstadt, cited “the extremely stressful situation” for his club, team and family, but did not confess to having faked the documents. On Monday the state prosecutor for the first time published details about the inconsistencies around Anfang’s vaccine certificate. When Anfang joined Werder Bremen in the summer, he said he had not yet had the chance to be vaccinated but would soon do so. In August the club checked on his vaccination status after one of its players tested positive for Covid, and told him to quarantine after it emerged he had not yet received a jab. When another Bremen player tested positive in November, Anfang was suddenly able to brandish a certificate supposedly proving he had been vaccinated twice – first in April and then in June. The location and timing in the document aroused suspicion. Anfang claimed to have received his first dose in Cologne on the same day his then club Darmstadt played a match in Würzburg, 200 miles south-east of the city. The batch number on the certificate could not be matched to the central database, and the vaccination centre in Cologne said it had no records of Anfang’s visit, the senior public prosecutor Frank Passade told the Werder Bremen news portal DeichStube. Anfang, whose assistant coach Florian Junge has also stepped down over similar questions relating to his vaccine certificate, could face a fine for forgery of official documents, as well as the loss of his coaching licence. Shortly after the Bremen coach’s resignation on Saturday morning, football fans reacted with mockery. At that afternoon’s match against Schalke 04, visiting supporters chanted “Markus Anfang no longer has a vaccine pass” to the tune of Belinda Carlisle’s song Heaven is a Place on Earth. However, the mood changed on Monday when several German media outlets published pictures showing Anfang at a carnival party on 11 November wearing a chef’s costume. In keeping with new restrictions in several regions around Germany, the Cologne carnival event was held under so-called “2G” rules, meaning only those who had been vaccinated or recovered from the virus could attend. “His visit to the carnival in the middle of the pandemic is absolutely irresponsible”, wrote the tabloid Bild. “It doesn’t get more brazen that that, Mr Anfang!” Meanwhile, the husband of outgoing chancellor Angela Merkel made a rare intervention in political debate, saying that vaccine hesitancy in the country could partially be traced to “a certain laziness and complacency of Germans.” “It is astonishing that a third of the population does not follow scientific findings,” Joachim Sauer said in an interview with Italian newspaper La Repubblica. “In part, this is due to a certain laziness and complacency of Germans. The other group are people who follow a personal conviction, a kind of ideological reaction to what they consider a vaccination dictatorship,” Sauer said, a cohort he said also included doctors and scientists. Like his famous wife, Sauer is a quantum chemist, and was in Italy on an academic visit. AFP contributed to this reportSo-called crises over asylum seekers have become a central part of UK politics over the past three decades. They follow a depressingly familiar pattern: every few years, there is a new wave of scare stories about increasing asylum numbers, governments make the laws stricter, and people die trying to cross borders. On Friday, Keir Starmer waded into the latest version of this debate. He made a statement about the current “crisis” in the Channel, attacking the government for not reducing the number of people trying to make the journey, and criticising cuts to international aid and Priti Patel’s inability to secure a “strong” agreement with France to stop people making this journey. Two days later, the shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, was repeating much the same messages on the Sunday morning TV rounds. He said Labour would strike a deal with the French and renegotiate the Dublin regulation, under which member states can deport people to the EU country they reached first. Although he also argued for reinstating the Dubs scheme (under which 3,000 unaccompanied child asylum seekers would be allowed to come to the UK) and restated Labour’s resolute rejection of the government’s proposals for offshore detention centres. Labour’s big statement on migration seems to be that it also wants to externalise the problem. The government is suggesting that people seeking asylum belong elsewhere. In response Labour is opposing some of the most draconian proposals, but isn’t disagreeing with the premise of the overall approach. Instead, the party is simply suggesting it would handle it better. Presumably, Labour is trying to appear “sensible” and say what it thinks the electorate wants to hear. It is drawing on a favoured strategy of Starmer’s and going after Patel’s “incompetence”. The party is trying to cast itself as the capable adults in the room, who could actually hash out the kind of difficult diplomatic agreements that would be needed to make the “issue” go away. But it is also conveniently woolly with some of the words it uses and the arguments it makes. There’s some truth to Labour’s analysis, but the framing and solutions play into the exact same kind of moral panic the Conservatives have been whipping up. Take the Channel crossings. Labour is right that they are incredibly dangerous. Few would argue with that. People are risking their lives trying to get here – some die in the process. But its response is to focus almost exclusively on agreements with France to stop people from crossing, and “people smuggling”, while the domestic border policies that make it so difficult for people to get to the UK safely are seldom mentioned. This is even as the Conservatives’ nationality and borders bill is set to make this much worse and much more dangerous. This is not a problem of “incompetence”, but political choice. The government chooses to close down routes that would allow refugees to travel here safely. It chooses to force people to cross the Channel. It chooses not to grant people asylum. This is what is at the centre of the current situation: inhumanity, not inefficiency. These kinds of exclusion have a telling history. From the 1980s onwards, asylum regimes tightened as periodic panics over the number of people arriving took centre stage in national debates. This change, says political sociologist Lucy Mayblin, coincided with people from the global south – predominantly black and brown people who have historically been classed as less than human – increasingly coming to Europe to claim asylum. This logic of panic and response has defined successive governments’ approaches. When New Labour were in office, it attacked a “broken” asylum system, promised to crack down on people smugglers and made the rules much, much stricter. But those draconian asylum policies are usually left out of the story about how Britain ended up where it did in the years that followed. With the rise of Ukip, Brexit and the hostile environment policy, the retelling we’re used to is that New Labour was “too soft” and “let too many people in”, causing a backlash of “legitimate concerns”. Its intense anti-asylum stance – and the role this played in stoking racism and xenophobia – barely gets a mention. But this past tells us exactly what not to do, and outlines the political tradition Labour risks contributing to, where both it and the Conservatives push for harsher and more exclusionary policies. There are alternatives, and Labour should promote those instead. The prison scholar Ruth Wilson Gilmore encourages us to think of reforms that would open up an avenue to transform the world altogether, rather than just tweak the current system. Here, that means creating a world where everyone has both the right to move and the right to stay. We cannot ignore that some people have no choice but to leave their homes. Instead of championing policies that reinforce the imagined need for borders, we should break with the anti-asylum cycle by demanding safe routes of travel for everyone. Maya Goodfellow is a writer and academic, and the author of Hostile Environment: How Immigrants Became ScapegoatsLush has announced it is closing its accounts on Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and TikTok until the social media sites do a better job of protecting users from harmful content. The campaigning beauty retailer said it had “had enough” after the allegations of the Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen, who claims the company puts profit ahead of the public good. The Lush chief digital officer, Jack Constantine, said the company would not ask customers to “meet us down a dark and dangerous alleyway”, adding that some social media platforms were “beginning to feel like places no one should be encouraged to go … Something has to change.” Constantine said the company spent a lot of time inventing products to help people to unwind and look after themselves. Social media platforms had become the antithesis of this, he argued, with algorithms designed to “keep people scrolling and stop them from switching off and relaxing”. The Poole-based retailer, best known for its fragrant soaps and bath bombs, has run campaigns over the years linked to social causes, with subjects ranging from the targeting of activists by undercover police officers to preventing the extinction of hen harriers. “When it gets to a point that our customers’ wellbeing is being put in jeopardy because of the channels on which we are trying to connect with them, then something doesn’t sit right for us,” Constantine said. As anyone who has tried knows, giving up social media is not easy. This holds true for Lush too, as this is the second time the company, which has more than 400 stores in 48 countries, has said it is quitting the sites, having previously announced the step in 2019. The company blamed “Fomo” (fear of missing out) for the relapse. But by quitting social media Lush is also switching off a channel for criticism of the company, something for which it may be grateful. It faced a social media backlash last year after its charity pot made a £3,000 donation to Woman’s Place UK, a group that has faced heavy criticism for its stance on trans issues, with critics accusing it of seeking to limit trans people’s rights. The retailer ended up issuing a grovelling apology. In 2020, Lush, which prides itself on its handmade products and ethical supply chain, also came under fire for poor working conditions in the chain’s Australian factory and poor systems which meant it underpaid workers for nearly a decade. Lush said it hoped the platforms would introduce strong best practice guidelines, and that new laws would be passed to protect users. Until then, the company said it was trying to “shield our customers from the harm and manipulation they may experience while trying to connect with us on social media”. All Lush’s brand, retail and people accounts around the world will close from Friday. The retailer said it planned to find better channels of communication elsewhere, as well as using tried and tested routes. For the time being it will continue to have a presence on Twitter and YouTube. Haugen, a former product manager at Facebook, leaked tens of thousands of internal company documents after becoming frustrated that it was not publicly acknowledging the harm its platforms could cause. The documents have triggered a maelstrom of allegations, including that Facebook knew its products were damaging teenagers’ mental health, were fomenting ethnic violence in countries such as Ethiopia and were failing to curb misinformation before the 6 January Washington riots. In a statement responding to Haugen’s accusations, Facebook said it continued to make significant improvements to tackle the spread of misinformation and harmful content, adding: “To suggest we encourage bad content and do nothing is just not true.” In relation to the story about Facebook being harmful to teenagers’ mental health, the social media site pointed to a blogpost by its head of public policy, Karina Newton, that said the report had “focused on a limited set of findings and casts them in a negative light”.Shot inside a New York hospital at the start of the pandemic, this documentary is an overwhelming emotional watch. In March last year, City of Ghosts director Matthew Heineman started filming on the wards of the Long Island Jewish Medical Center; he stayed for four months, through the worst of it. It looks like a war zone: death everywhere, pagers buzzing, constant tannoy announcements of “code blue” critical emergencies, medics sprinting to the next crisis. Anyone watching who had to say goodbye over FaceTime (a nurse holding up a phone in a clear plastic bag for their dying loved one) will find this traumatising. What is comforting is how the hospital’s overworked exhausted staff pay attention to the human life in front of them – holding hands with the dying, tenderly stroking their faces. It’s an intimate documentary: hard to watch but not gruelling. Heineman’s camera is a gentle presence, in the room with people at the worst moment of their lives – and they open up to it. The medic we spend most time with is Dr Nathalie Dougé, a woman of superhuman courage, resilience and empathy. Because Covid-19 is a new disease, there are no familiar patterns. Patients who seem to be improving deteriorate suddenly and die: “You are always on edge. You can never breathe a sigh of relief.” Dr Dougé is first generation Haitian-American and the majority of her patients are Black, Hispanic or immigrants. Every time someone is admitted she thinks: “This could be my mom.” And the film is alert to the disproportionate effect of Covid-19 on ethnic minorities. It follows two patients: both frontline workers of colour under 40. Brussels Jabon is a nurse originally from the Philippines, heavily pregnant when she caught the virus. She was given an emergency caesarean before being put on a ventilator. Thirty-six-year-old African American Ahmed Ellis works for the NYPD and has two small children. The hospital staff are desperate for him to survive: “Every time I look at him, I see his kids,” says a nurse. This remarkable film feels like it could become a time capsule, showing future generations what it felt like in 2020 for those on the frontline. • The First Wave is released on 26 November in cinemas.A statue of Thomas Jefferson has been removed from city hall in New York, because the founder and third president enslaved people. A work crew spent several hours on Monday freeing the 884lb, 7ft statue from its pedestal in the council chambers and carefully maneuvering it into a padded wooden crate, for the short journey to the New York Historical Society. The city public design commission, whose members are appointed by the mayor, Bill de Blasio, voted earlier in the day to exile the statue, sculpted in 1833, to the society on a 10-year loan. Some members wanted it to remain on public display instead of standing in the lobby of a venue, on Central Park West, that charges $22 admission, the New York Post reported. The decision to remove the statue was made earlier this year, after a period of introspection in the wake of neo-Nazi disturbances in Charlottesville, Virginia, in 2017. Yet historians were already changing their opinions of Jefferson, long thought of as a benevolent owner of about 600 enslaved people. A 2012 portrait in Smithsonian magazine highlighted the darker side of a man who described the slave trade, in the first draft of the Declaration of Independence, as an “execrable commerce” and an “assemblage of horrors”. In 2000, the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation conceded there was “a high probability” that he fathered children with enslaved people at his Monticello plantation, near Charlottesville. There has been lively public debate over the fate of the New York statue, which was crafted by the French artist Pierre-Jeanne David d’Angers as a model for a bronze statue on display in the US Capitol rotunda. Moves by Black and Latino council members to have the statue removed gained traction amid a national reckoning over racism and controversial historical figures, leading to the removal of memorials elsewhere. In July, activists celebrated the toppling of a statue in Charlottesville of the Confederate general Robert E Lee, once a rallying point for white supremacists. In New York, opinions are mixed about the removal of the Jefferson statue. Charles Barron, a member of the New York assembly and a former council member, told the New York Times: “It should be destroyed. A statue should be for those who we honor for their exemplary service and duty to all of this country, not just the white race.” But Michele Bogart, professor emeritus of art history at Stony Brook University, said the statue’s removal “deflects attention” from the actions of such controversial figures. “I have a philosophical problem with removing it from city hall,” she said. “If you can remove the Thomas Jefferson statue, then you can remove works from other city buildings.”Pets at Home is expecting its biggest ever Christmas, with a surge in sales of dog spa days and advent calendars, as it launches a Deliveroo-style quick delivery service to meet rising demand from new owners. Sales at the retailer rose by 18% to almost £678m in the six months to 7 October, helping to boost profits by 81% to £70.6m for the period. The company said it now anticipated making full-year profits at the top end of expectations as pet ownership, which rose during the Covid pandemic, continued to grow at levels stronger than predicted. The group has already sold 130,000 dog advent calendars, up by almost a fifth on last year, as well as 19,000 pet Santa hats. About 30,000 dogs are expected to be booked in for a grooming session before Christmas, with the vast majority of those spots already booked. Peter Pritchard, the chief executive, said: “Without question the biggest driver is change in people’s working practices towards working from home. [Being away from home] was always the biggest barrier to dog ownership and now many people are working three days a week in the office, if that.” He said the biggest growth in pet ownership was among people in their 20s and 30s who were typically getting a dog or cat as a step towards having a family. He said the trend had been encouraged by more workplaces and social settings, such as shops and pubs, now accepting pets. “There has been a fundamental shift, driven by Covid,” he said. The company now predicts it will make annual sales of £2.3bn over the medium term, up from £1.4bn last year. Pritchard said the market was expected to grow by up to 5% a year, up from between 3% and 4% in the past, with the number of people signing up to its pet care plan increasing 45% and its puppy and kitten club membership doubling year on year. Last week the company began offering fast-track delivery of pet food and other products from 35 stores, and it is expected to extend the service across the country in the next two years. Pritchard said the service was intended to “out-convenience Amazon” as the group used its store presence to get items to buyers more quickly. With millions more pet owners and a trend towards humanisation of animals – through special food, clothing and gifts – Pets at Home is predicting its best ever Christmas sales. Pritchard said Pets at Home was not immune to widespread supply chain problems but had been somewhat insulated as it bought 80% of its products in the UK and directly employed its own HGV drivers. He said the company’s products had a long shelf-life and so items for Christmas had arrived in its warehouses in June ready for the peak selling season. He said the group had not suffered from a shortage of vets any more than in prior years as its practices were run by owner-managers who typically stayed with Pets at Home for 20 years. “We are not anticipating any major issues,” he said.Boris Johnson is physically well and has a full grasp on the prime ministership, Downing Street has said following his rambling speech to business leaders on Monday in which he lost his place for about 20 seconds. People who watched the speech Johnson gave to the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) conference were impressed with it, his spokesman argued, adding that cabinet ministers could speak freely if they had any concerns. The speech at the Port of Tyne, which included a vocal impression of a revving car engine and a section on the lessons for capitalism and officialdom presented by the children’s cartoon character Peppa Pig, prompted worries from a number of Tory MPs. Asked if Johnson “has a grip”, his spokesman replied: “Of course. I’d point to the CBI themselves, who when asked about the speech said leaders would be heartened to hear the prime minister talk passionately about the role of the private sector working in partnership with government to achieve our shared ambition for a high-skilled, high-investment economy.” It would be wrong to read too much into the section of the speech where Johnson paused for a long period and shuffled the pages of his speech, muttering, “forgive me” three times. “The prime minister briefly lost his place in the speech,” the spokesman said. “He’s given hundreds of speeches. I don’t think it’s unusual for people, on rare occasions, to lose their place in space.” Johnson had appeared to be struggling with a cold last week, but his spokesman insisted he was in good health, saying: “The prime minister is well. He’s focused on delivering for the public.” The spokesman declined to comment on a BBC report that an unnamed “senior Downing St source” said there was “a lot of concern inside the building about the PM”, and a feeling that ministers should demand changes. “I’ve seen a number of anonymous source quotes, and I’m not, as you know, going to respond to anonymous sources,” the spokesman said. However, he rejected the idea that ministers felt unable to tell Johnson if they felt he was on the wrong course: “The prime minister has an entire cabinet to draw on, who provide advice, as you would expect, and the cabinet is used for that purpose. “Of course the prime minister wants people to be able to speak freely and give their views. That’s what cabinet meetings are for. That’s part of the function of government, to have open conversations.”The Road might go “ever on and on” for Bilbo Baggins, but it has come to a sharp end for the developer of a cryptocurrency called JRR Token, after the estate of JRR Tolkien took legal action to block it. The Lord of the Rings-themed cryptocurrency, with the tagline “The One Token That Rules Them All”, launched in August. It came with a video endorsement from Billy Boyd, the actor who played Pippin in the films, and the head-scratching claim that “Saruman was trying to unify Middle Earth under centralised rule whereas the fellowship wanted decentralisation. Cryptocurrency is literally a decentralised network.” The Tolkien estate was not convinced. It took action almost immediately via the World Intellectual Property Organization’s arbitration procedure, where it argued that the product infringed its trademark rights to JRR Tolkien’s name, and that the domain name was “specifically designed to mislead internet users into believing that it and the website to which it resolves have some legitimate commercial connection” with Tolkien. It pointed out that only the letters “L” and “I” were omitted from the domain name. The developer said in response that JRR Token was intended to reference “a unique form of digital currency”, rather than the late fantasy author, and that the fact that the domain name “brings to mind” the name JRR Tolkien is parody rather than bad faith. “The introductory header on the website homepage ‘One Token That Rules Them All’, referencing the famous phrase ‘One ring to rule them all’ … produces a humorous difference in order to invoke the desired effect of a parody,” it said, in the WIPO’s summary of its argument. The WIPO’s arbitrator, however, said that “the respondent does not specify why the disputed domain name is humorous, funny or nail-biting, and not just a domain name chosen due to its similarities with the [Tolkien estate’s] trademarks to take commercial advantage of its evocation”. The developer also asserted that he chose JRR for his domain name because “JRR” stands for “Journey through Risk to Reward” – a claim the WIPO dismissed, saying that “it is not clear to the panel what ‘Journey through Risk to Reward’ actually means, and why the term ‘journey’ is relevant to the purchase of tokens”. The Tolkien estate has now recovered the domain name JRRToken.com. It has stopped the developer operating under that name, and has obtained their undertaking to delete any infringing online content, it said on 23 November, and the US-based developer has also paid the estate’s legal costs. “The Tolkien estate is vigilant in preventing unauthorised parties from taking advantage of the JRR Tolkien name and the content of JRR Tolkien’s literary works. This was a particularly flagrant case of infringement, and the estate is pleased that it has been concluded on satisfactory terms,” said its solicitor Steven Maier.As Christmas approaches, ‘tis the season for getting family and friends together for visits to winter wonderlands across the country. But these festive experiences don’t always go to plan. If you have worked at these events, we want to hear about your winter wonderland disasters. Was Santa not as jolly as you had planned? Were the reindeer nowhere to be seen? Or had the entire winter wonderland shut down before you had the chance to begin? And if you have attended them – how did the mishaps unfold? Tell us below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Police have arrested an alleged cryptocurrency fraudster who is suspected of swindling his victims out of more than €500,000 (£421,000) while living a life of luxury on the Costa del Sol, staying in exclusive hotels and villas, eating in expensive restaurants and buying designer clothes. The Guardia Civil force described the Latvian man, who had been sought by Interpol since 2015, as “one of the biggest cryptocurrency con artists based in Spain”. He was arrested in Latvia last week after an operation by the Guardia Civil’s cybercrime department and its central operational unit. The force said that more than 1,000 people had fallen victim to the alleged scam, in which investors in a new virtual currency known as “Hodlife, the Unicorn Token”, were promised a share of the commissions charged on transactions using the electronic money. The Guardia Civil said: “To spread word about the project, the arrested man used the most common digital communication channels to stage aggressive publicity campaigns on Twitter, Telegram and on a bespoke webpage. “He very quickly amassed a large community of users who, thanks to the messages sent from these platforms, were duped into depositing their cryptocurrencies in the new business.” To appear even more convincing and professional, the alleged scammer also employed an actor to appear in promotional videos posing as the currency’s creator. At the end of June, however, Hodlife investors discovered their money had disappeared and realised they had been conned. The “rug pull” – or cut-and-run – led the Guardia Civil to open an investigation. Their inquiries led them to wallets linked to a 29-year-old Lithuanian man who had spent long stretches of time in Spain since 2020. By analysing the different internet connections used in the scam, police established that the alleged conman had been operating from one of the most exclusive areas of the Costa del Sol. “Officers on the trail of the suspect uncovered the high-end lifestyle enjoyed by both him and his accomplices,” the statement said. “They lived in luxury villas that cost more than €1,000 a day to rent, they hired top-of-the-range cars, and they spent enormous sums of money in designer clothes shops and in the Costa del Sol’s finest restaurants.” Analysis of the different internet connections used by the gang also revealed that it alternated between villas and hotels, using the internet there to access different cryptocurrency sites and to transfer the stolen funds to their own wallets. Eventually, officers realised that the alleged scammer had been using false documents for years and was in fact Latvian and not Lithuanian. The statement continued: “Once his identity had been established beyond doubt, the Guardia Civil activated all the relevant mechanisms of international police cooperation and picked up the fraudster’s trail through different countries as he hired cars and mansions and obtained credit cards and bank accounts with false documents.” Officers also discovered that the US had issued a search, arrest and extradition warrant for the suspect in 2015 in connection with alleged fraud. A spokesman for the Guardia Civil said investigations were ongoing, adding it was unclear what charges the man could face and in which jurisdictions.Luisa Omielan’s last show, Politics for Bitches, ostensibly about public affairs, devolved into a personal tale of her mother’s death. No surprise then that God Is a Woman, purportedly a feminist take on religion, is more concerned with Omielan’s journey into and through filial grief. The set handbrake-turns halfway through, leaving its scriptural subject matter for dust. But if the show has a split personality, it also has – as ever with Omielan – a big personality, and an urge to communicate her depth of feeling and feminist conviction that’s hard to resist. It begins with our host putting three Abrahamic religions in their place. Omielan parlays her slight knowledge into dismissive authority, as – with a sacrilegious swagger – Islam, Judaism and Christianity are deemed sexist, prudish and lost in translation. This is well-trodden standup terrain, but the ebullient, fast-talking Omielan gives it real bounce, and a handful of big-hitting routines – like the one about twentysomething sex, hopelessly in thrall to porn; or the sexy carpentry dialogue between Jesus and Mary Magdalene, whose lost gospel supplies Omielan’s supposed source material. The weakest sections come as Omielan transitions from biblical to biographical content, when she expounds her sex-positive, spread-the-love worldview, and digresses into inclusive but joke-lite material celebrating gay and trans people. When we emerge from this, it’s into the thick of our host’s trauma at the painful death from cancer of her mum. She buys a dog. She moves to Birmingham. Her home floods. And she meets someone – a Good Samaritan, you might say – who coaxes her back to functioning life. Only in retrospect is there any narrative shape to Omielan’s one-thing-after-another chronicle, which feels so dislocated from the show’s first act. And it’s as notable for its emotional candour as its jokes. But both are endearing, and there are lovely moments when they combine – as when our host wells up with fellow-feeling for the reject Bernese mountain puppy who, four years on, now shares her stage. The show is as shaggy and baggy as its canine mascot, and almost as lovable. God Is a Woman is touring until 25 November. Then at Clapham Grand, London, 20 December.The trial has begun of the 25 men accused of masterminding the 2019 Easter bombings in Sri Lanka, which killed almost 300 people when churches and luxury hotels were targeted by Islamic terrorist suicide bombers. The lengthy process to reach trial after more than two years has been heavily criticised by families of those killed and the Christian church in Sri Lanka, who have accused the government of failing to take proper action against those responsible. The suspects are facing over 23,000 charges in total, including conspiracy to murder, aiding and abetting the attacks, and collecting arms and ammunition. Lawyers involved in the trial in the capital, Colombo, warned that the sheer scale of charges, and the thousands of witnesses listed in the case, could mean it drags on for up to a decade. The case will be heard before a special panel of judges. All eight of the suicide bombers who carried out the Easter Sunday attacks on the three five-star hotels in Colombo and three Christian churches died in the blasts. However, their associates and relatives stand accused of being involved in planning and masterminding the terrorist attacks, the worst in Sri Lanka’s recent history. They include YM Ibrahim, the father of two of the suicide bombers, Inshaf and Ilham Ibrahim, who targeted two hotels in Colombo and Mohammad Naufer, a Sri Lankan national accused of affiliation with Islamic State and masterminding the attacks. Several other members of National Thowheed Jamath (NTJ), a home-grown extremist Islamic group believed to be behind the bombings, are also among the 25 standing trial. The attacks, which took place on 21 April 2019, killed 269 people, including 45 foreign nationals. In the aftermath of the attacks, a state of emergency was imposed on the country for four months and hundreds of Muslims have since been arrested, including a Muslim member of parliament. However, in recent months senior members of the church accused the police and the government of dragging their feet over bringing the case to trial. A press statement released by the archdiocese of Colombo in August said: “It is clear from this procedure that after such a long time the government has no interest in finding out the truth about the attack and they are going to cover it up and wash their hands.” They accused the government, led by strongman president Gotabaya Rajapaksa, of capitalising on the Easter attacks to come to power at the end of 2019 on a mandate of security for Sri Lanka, but failing to live up to their promises. The head of the Catholic church in Sri Lanka, Cardinal Malcolm Ranjith said last week that the families of victims were struggling to move on while they felt that justice had not been served. “We are not here to take revenge upon anyone, nor have we called for anyone’s blood. But we need justice,” he said. On Sunday, members of the Catholic community held large demonstrations pushing for faster action. Members of the Catholic community allege they are now being harassed for their actions demanding justice. Fr Cyril Gamini, director of the National Catholic Centre for Social Communications who has accused the authorities of complicity with the attackers, was recently subjected to three days of questioning by Sri Lanka’s central intelligence department. The trial is one of three that will be held in connection with the attacks. On Monday, the trial began for several senior officials accused of criminal negligence for failing to act on intelligence information that could have prevented the bombings. Sri Lanka’s former police chief Pujith Jayasundera and former defence secretary Hemasiri Fernando are among those who will stand trial, with Jayasundera alone facing a total of 855 charges.One of the biggest challenges for businesses right now is deciding how to adapt their processes so they thrive in a climate of post-pandemic change and uncertainty. For a growing number, workforce management technology is providing the solutions. These systems enable more effective staff scheduling as they can help predict workload fluctuations and identify potential gaps in coverage. They can also help to boost employee productivity and wellbeing, and play a role in talent management. “The problem for many businesses is that managers are spending more time on admin than on the most important job – managing the business. Workforce management solutions can map out for you how to get your job done more efficiently,” says Nicole Bello, group vice president, EMEA at UKG (Ultimate Kronos Group), a leading global provider of human capital management (HCM), payroll, HR service delivery, and workforce management solutions. Take the charity OnSide Youth Zones, which is behind a network of youth zones designed to give young people living in some of the UK’s most disadvantaged areas somewhere to go and something to do in their spare time. Working with UKG it was able to streamline processes across the network, achieving a 60% reduction in time spent on payroll-related tasks in each youth zone, and a reduction in manager administration time to just 10 minutes every other day. Bello says: “Workforce management has huge benefits for businesses, and it can make life easier for employees as well. Take planning a holiday with family or friends, for example. Instead of having to wait until you are in the office to put a request in for annual leave, with mobile access to the system you can potentially get your request approved right away. This has a lot of value for employees.” UKG works with organisations worldwide to help them to achieve better business outcomes and was recently named by the tech consultancy Gartner as a market leader in the provision of cloud HCM suites for enterprises with more than 1,000 employees. Over the past 18 months there has been a sharp rise in demand for workforce management systems, largely because of their ability to be configured to mitigate the risks associated with Covid-19, as Sam Grinter, senior principal analyst at Gartner, explains: “Initially this was around health screening. The system allows you to incorporate a survey that asks people as they clock in for work how they are feeling, or whether they’ve been in contact with anyone with Covid. Responses that are concerning will trigger the system to offer the appropriate advice. It can also help with contact tracing, by logging when people are working on a specific site.” Workforce management can also help to alleviate some of the staffing problems caused by the post-pandemic rise in workers handing in their notice, dubbed the “great resignation”. Grinter recalls the example of a large UK retailer that was experiencing high attrition rates among drivers. He says: “When we looked at why this was happening, we discovered that the drivers worked either a 10-hour shift or a 12-hour shift, but only found out which when they turned up for work. Using scheduling systems, as part of workforce management, would improve workforce flexibility by, for example, configuring preferences in terms of the length of time worked.” As well as solving administrative challenges, workforce management is also about retaining and managing talent, and being seen as an employer of choice. “Placing the right talent in the right place at the right time is a challenge for businesses,” says Bello. “Now, with a smaller talent pool, leveraging talent in the best possible way to drive the business forward is even more difficult. It involves a two-pronged approach; how can we make sure people are engaged, happy and productive, and more likely to stay with the company? And how can we place them in the right roles at the right time in order to achieve our business objectives? This is how we have positioned our solution to help businesses meet all of those requirements.” Workforce management technology shouldn’t just be introduced for staff at a particular level, she says. “It needs to be embraced at every level, and people are more likely to embrace it when they see their leader doing so.” In organisations with multiple sites, starting the implementation process within a smaller population of staff can help to win their confidence in the new system. “One large retail organisation decided to implement it store by store,” says Bello. “The first stores that adopted it loved it and championed the new system by posting what they liked about it and what they’d learned about it, on their company intranet, which got the rest of the business excited to use it as well.” UKG delivers award-winning workforce management and HR service delivery solutions to help organisations across the globe drive better business outcomes, improve HR processes, and help make work a better, more connected experience for everyone. To find out how your organisation can benefit, head to ukg.co.ukAfter two years of stress, soul-searching and burnout due to the pandemic, workers have decided they want more from their jobs. In what’s been dubbed the Great Resignation, many people are said to be lining up to hand in notices as they look for more fulfilling roles or those with better working conditions. This is putting employers under pressure to keep hold of staff, and one way to do that is to improve working environments. In the past that might have meant anything from free beer to unlimited holidays – but the secret ingredient to a happy workforce is actually a lot simpler. It comes down to autonomy, giving employees control over their working lives, something that business psychologist Dr Lucy Ryan believes is intrinsic to happiness and a sense of self. “What we need if we’re to feel fulfilled is a sense of our own destiny,” she says. “When that’s offered to someone, then they get a greater sense of purpose, are more passionate, engaged and have self-direction.” Giving staff more control Autonomy can take many different forms. Organisations may let employees set their own schedules, choose how to do their work or to work from home – something many of us have become used to during the pandemic. No matter how autonomy is defined, when people are empowered with more latitude the results are impressive – from greater employee commitment and better performance to improved productivity and lower staff turnover. This is something the business Saint-Gobain PAM UK, which manufactures iron products for the construction and utilities industries, has experienced first-hand. To manage workforce shifts, the company introduced software from UKG Ready, which specialises in HR solutions, and included a system to enable employees to swap shifts more easily. As a result, the company has benefited from reduced overtime and absenteeism, and greater employee engagement. For Dr Chris Mullen, executive director of The Workforce Institute at UKG, a global thinktank that helps organisations drive performance by addressing workforce management and human capital management (HCM) issues that affect both hourly and salaried employees, the key is to concentrate on creating a positive employee experience, and engagement will follow. “It’s easy for employers to focus too much on the concept of employee engagement, but while engagement numbers are a good barometer, they are not the journey. A good employee experience leads to positive engagement, which results in business success.” He adds that workforce management technologies play a crucial role in this. “These tools help employees to communicate better with their managers, giving them greater control over their work and holiday schedules, and freeing up valuable time by reducing the administrative burden through automation.” The importance of trust Giving staff more control over their work and working patterns requires trust; and it’s an issue many managers are facing now that more companies are embracing a hybrid model, which allows a mix of remote and office-based working. More than half of employees say trust has a direct impact on their sense of wellbeing, career choices and mental health, according to Trust in the Modern Workplace, a report from The Workforce Institute at UKG. As Aron Ain, chairman and CEO at UKG, a leading global provider of HCM, payroll, HR service delivery, and workforce management solutions, says in the report: “Trust is the magic glue that makes personal and professional relationships thrive. When we trust each other, everything becomes possible.” So how should managers and staff build mutual trust? The best way to show you genuinely trust employees is through meaningful action, says Ryan, author of Lunchtime Learning for Leaders. She adds that any control you give up as a manager has to be seen as permanent. Trust is fragile and reneging on freedoms soon after they have been given will damage that relationship. Communication is also key in helping employees understand what their new-found autonomy means and what is expected of them. Ryan points out that the advantage for leaders now is that people are already far more autonomous than they were pre-Covid. She advises companies to identify areas where people already have more autonomy and to build on those first, before extending it to other aspects of people’s working lives. Employee expectations The pandemic has also altered people’s expectations of work – something managers need to be aware of. According to Mullen: “As work environments continue to reopen and adapt in the light of Covid-19, it will be especially important for HR departments and people managers to understand what the varying expectations of the workforce are, how they have changed, and how HCM technologies will be fundamental in facilitating these expectations.” Take the example of flexible working – a freedom that is now widely expected. A business must not immediately assume that an employee cannot work flexibly because he or she has a role that requires presence, says Mullen. It’s rather a matter of “rethinking what work is done, how it is done, and by whom”. A manager’s role The critical role that managers play in ensuring an organisation has a happy and engaged workforce cannot be underestimated. After all, it’s been said, people tend not to quit their jobs, they quit their bosses. “Managers sit at the perfect point of happiness and engagement,” says Ryan. “If they’re able to get this balance between direction, clearly showing their vision, communicating purpose, giving people a choice and autonomy over how they want to progress, and with the right support to achieve that, they’re doing something really good.” UKG delivers award-winning workforce management and HR service delivery solutions to help organisations across the globe drive better business outcomes, improve HR processes, and help make work a better, more connected experience for everyone. To find out how your organisation can benefit, head to ukg.co.ukMore than 18 months after the pandemic hit, most organisations are now fully focused on what comes next. What should the new world of work look like? How should hybrid working models operate in practice? And what should employers be aiming for? But while employers are right to be thinking about these matters, one thing is clear – there is no straightforward end goal. For a start, every business is different and the right solution may be different for everyone. And second, the new world of work will continue to shift and evolve. “Companies will always have to evaluate their workforce strategies, because every few weeks things could change. So being nimble and adaptable is critical,” says Dan Schawbel, author and managing partner of the HR research and advisory firm Workplace Intelligence. “No leader will make the right decision all of the time. The biggest challenge is knowing what to do and when to do it. They will need to rely on data when making decisions.” Making it work Given the extraordinary amount of change experienced over the past 18 months, every employer wants to make this work. Peter Harte, from UKG (Ultimate Kronos Group), a leading global provider of human capital management (HCM), payroll, HR service delivery and workforce management solutions, says that an organisation’s first step should be to do a full digital assessment, to understand how systems need to improve. “You need to assess where you are in the digital landscape,” says Harte, who is group vice president, EMEA at UKG. “And whether you have the tools you need to support hybrid working.” This means making sure the basics are in place, allowing workers to access the systems they need anywhere, and that you have the security necessary to make that safe. Once that’s done, he says, technology can be used to improve people’s working lives and make them feel more connected to the company. “Apps can, for example, manage shift swapping, whereas in the old days, people had to go via line managers,” Harte says. “Even getting access to your own information is important. These sorts of systems really do connect employees to their company.” The next step is to rethink leadership. Harte points out the qualities needed in a great leader have changed – this needs to be articulated and reflected in training throughout the organisation, at all levels of leadership. Closely linked to that is culture. “Organisations are rushing to be great places to work,” says Harte. “They’re now thinking about the wellbeing of people and how employees really feel.” Listen to employees Schawbel agrees this is critical. But, he says, the most common mistake companies are making is ignoring employees. “One of the biggest things I’ve seen over the last year is that not all voices in the workplace are heard equally. While the employee voice is becoming more important because we’re more decentralised, it’s easy to overlook certain voices.” He says that essential workers and younger people aren’t heard often enough. “If someone doesn’t feel they’re being treated fairly or heard equally, they’re more likely to leave, and replacing them is time-consuming and expensive.” In a report on the employee voice by The Workforce Institute at UKG, a think tank that researches workplace issues, 83% of UK employees surveyed felt that people at their organisation were not heard fairly or equally — and nearly half (46%) said that underrepresented voices remained undervalued by employers. The best way to hear employee voices, Schawbel says, is by using pulse surveys – short, quick surveys that are sent to staff regularly. Schawbel says: “Don’t just send out an employee satisfaction survey once a year, make it a daily pulse to understand how people are feeling and what their struggles are. Then use your data, whether it’s surveys or conversations, to make better decisions.” Harte agrees, adding: “If people feel fairly treated and that they can contribute to ideas, it goes a long way to establishing strong teams.” He says that thinking of technology as something that is designed to serve people, not just business processes, is a big part of becoming a people-oriented company – particularly as flexible and hybrid working take hold. Don’t go backwards While many employees were impressed by their employers’ ability to respond quickly to the pandemic, many now fear a slide backward. In a survey of 4,000 people, conducted by Workplace Intelligence for The Workforce Institute at UKG, 38% of respondents are fearful their employers will revert back to the “old way” of operating as soon as possible. This is despite 86% saying they enjoyed the benefits of the new technologies. If employers are to come out of the pandemic thriving, an engaged workforce will be an absolute must. It might not be possible to predict how the world of work will change in the future, but a strong culture, sense of engagement, and adaptability will be a crucial part of success – whatever that ends up looking like. UKG delivers award-winning workforce management and HR service delivery solutions to help organisations across the globe drive better business outcomes, improve HR processes, and help make work a better, more connected experience for everyone. To find out how your organisation can benefit, head to ukg.co.ukWe’ve come to know our colleagues a little better of late – their pets, their kids, their kitchens. The Covid-19 pandemic forced employers to rustle up the tools and mindset required for remote working in record time, and the resulting changes have prompted a collective rethink. Now, with many employees seeking long-term flexibility after experiencing a different way of working, we need to work out how best to combine working and living. “The pandemic has allowed us to shift the conversation around flexible working to a point that would otherwise have taken at least 10 years,” says organisational psychologist Dr Deirdre Anderson, a work-life balance expert at Cranfield School of Management. However, she stresses that as we consider future ways of working, organisations must consider all types of flexibility (flexi-time, compressed hours, job shares and so on), going beyond the current focus on how many days in the office versus home. “The boundaries of nine to five are long, long gone,” says Cecile Alper-Leroux, a workforce expert who’s speaking from a wood-beamed farmhouse kitchen in Provence, where the internet connection is decent and she’s opted to spend a month. She’s vice-president of human capital management (HCM) innovation at UKG, a leading global provider of HCM, payroll, HR service delivery, and workforce management. “Employees can be more authentic, be themselves. The pandemic accelerated what was happening anyway.” But the flexibility afforded by technology hasn’t been entirely beneficial, says Alper-Leroux. Some remote workers are struggling to carve out boundaries, whether in time, space or in their heads. Headline after headline warns that burnout is rife and working hours have spiked. “Employers must help staff put life before work, or this level of burnout will continue,” says Alper-Leroux. “That’s why we need a shift to what we call life-work technology, which allows an awareness of people’s lives.People need to feel valued – and managers need to create a culture of belonging.” Anderson points out that blurred boundaries “make it very difficult to switch off the electronic leash”, and this is where skilful managers, with the ability to set out expectations, come into their own. “We need to remind organisations of the flexibility that existed prior to the pandemic, and then explore how to go beyond that, looking at job design to incorporate greater flexibility as an inherent part of a given role,” she says. The greater use of technology is part of that flexibility as it can allow staff to feel more engaged and to collaborate more easily. Online meetings have allowed more employees to be included – and remote working helps people who might feel marginalised in an office to be involved. “Research shows remote working is better for diversity and inclusion,” says Anderson. But will this shift make for a healthier work-life balance? According to Anderson, rather than seeking an artificial division, we should be looking at overall satisfaction, the ability to deal with the demands of work and of life outside work in the round. “It’s the ability to devote the time and energy you want to all those different elements,” she says. This is what Alper-Leroux means when she refers to “life-work”, rather than the more frequently used “work-life”. She explains life-work as “acknowledging you have a life and it’s not just about work”. This is particularly pertinent for frontline staff who work hourly shifts and must be present to do their jobs. While they may not be able to benefit from remote working, it is possible for employers to provide them with some of the control they yearn for over their schedules, and greater flexibility. In the future, it may even be possible for them to undertake some aspects of their role remotely, such as training. This type of control and flexibility is something “organisations are going to have to get creative at offering”, says Alper-Leroux. And while technology won’t create flexibility alone, she adds, it can make a difference if well deployed. Staff at the train operator Greater Anglia are reaping the rewards of greater control over their working day, and more transparency, since the company introduced UKG Dimensions. This technology, which replaced an outdated legacy system, enables staff to sign on for shifts, view their shifts and track approvals of overtime owed. “That level of visibility is absolutely key for employees,” says Himesh Patel, Greater Anglia’s head of IT service delivery. And it’s a win-win for everyone, he adds, as managers find it easier to fill shifts and to organise the labyrinthine staffing logistics that keep trains running on time. “It’s so flexible and adaptable, we’ve been able to work with staff and unions to work on what is important for them to have visibility and ease of use.” For Alper-Leroux, this may well be the tip of the iceberg when it comes to flexibility. She predicts that artificial intelligence could help tailor shifts around employee preferences, allowing, for instance, parents to specify that they want to pick up children on certain days. When technology is mentioned, staff can become concerned about digital surveillance, but she says: “Technology is not about monitoring staff – organisations have to communicate that better, or risk losing their best employees. If employers are trying to understand staff needs, and prompt them, say, when they are working too hard, it becomes about employees rather than the business. Organisations that protect their staff will get payback in loyalty, commitment and productivity.” Workers have won more choice, autonomy and authenticity since the pandemic, says Alper-Leroux, but the ball is now firmly in the employers’ court. “I’m optimistic because we’ve reached a tipping point where employees have found their voice and confidence. And leaders need to say: ‘We are going to continue to trust you.’” UKG delivers award-winning workforce management and HR service delivery solutions to help organisations across the globe drive better business outcomes, improve HR processes, and help make work a better, more connected experience for everyone. To find out how your organisation can benefit, head to ukg.co.ukThe on-demand groceries business Getir is acquiring its rival Weezy, in the first sign of consolidation in the UK’s fast-growing rapid delivery market, in which companies aim to bring goods to customers in as little as 10 minutes. Getir, founded in Turkey in 2015, operates in more than 50 cities in its home market, and has aggressively expanded since the start of the year into eight other countries, including the UK and US. The company – whose name means “bring” in Turkish – offers customers a selection of about 2,000 grocery items, ordered online and delivered to their door within minutes at any time of day. The ultra-fast delivery of products including milk, bread, beer and toilet paper has become the latest trend in online retail, as shoppers get a taste for avoiding a visit to the supermarket. Goods are sourced from local “dark stores”, which are not open to the public, enabling their speedy arrival on the doorstep. Multiple rival firms including Getir, Gorillas, Dija, Zapp and Jiffy have been battling it out to dominate the UK market, offering discounts to consumers to win them over. Getir said it had reached a “definitive agreement” to buy Weezy, the first rapid grocery business founded in the UK, as it looks to roll out its services to more places across the country. Getir declined to disclose the value of the deal, which it said further solidified its “long-term commitment to the UK market”. Weezy, which was founded by two entrepreneurs in late 2019, delivers to customers in London, Manchester, Brighton and Bristol – all cities where Getir already operates. Motorcycle riders wearing Getir’s purple and yellow brand colours have become a familiar sight on the streets of the capital and other UK cities in recent months. Since its arrival in the UK in January, the business has expanded to 15 cities including Manchester, Birmingham and Liverpool. Turancan Salur, the UK general manager at Getir, said: “Teaming up with Weezy, which has quickly established itself across the UK, is an exciting opportunity and one that complements our people-first belief and business approach.” He added: “We look forward to welcoming Weezy’s customers, employees and partners to the enlarged group.” Getir, which employs 2,500 people in the UK, said it would “join forces” with Weezy’s 700-strong workforce. All of Getir’s UK workers, including their delivery riders, are employed by the company, meaning they are entitled to sick and holiday pay, which has long been a demand of gig economy workers. Weezy employees will be entitled to the same pay and benefits when they move over. “We are incredibly excited to continue our journey in disrupting the skyrocketing ultrafast grocery market,” said Kristof Van Beveren, the chief executive and co-founder of Weezy. “Our alignment in purpose and culture is a winning formula for expansion globally.” Investors have been pouring billions into the highly competitive rapid grocery delivery market in recent times, totalling more than $14bn (£10.5bn) globally since the start of last year, according to analysts at PitchBook. Istanbul-based Getir has said it is valued at $7.7bn, and it announced in June it was expanding into the US, France and Germany after raising more than $550m in a funding round. Some of the country’s largest supermarkets are taking notice of the rapid delivery market, and Tesco announced the first partnership of this kind with the German group Gorillas. It will test out 10-minute deliveries from a small number of its London stores.Ryan Babel releases his autobiography on Friday. Nothing extraordinary in that, you might think; he is 34 and in the final stages of an eventful career, after all. But this autobiography is an eight-track rap album written and performed by the former Liverpool forward. “The whole point was to try to do something different, something creative and something that hasn’t been done before,” says Babel. As with the best autobiographies, it does not hold back. “I was inspired to do it,” explains Babel, who is in Amsterdam to promote The Autobiography – Chapter 1 and an accompanying short film during time off from Galatasaray in the international break. “When I was back at Ajax a little under two years ago a journalist approached me and asked if I was willing to start the process of writing an autobiography. My feeling was it was a little too early. I wasn’t ready. But then we went into the first lockdown and had to stay at home and I got bored. And that’s where the idea came from. I thought: ‘Why don’t I take the concept of the autobiography in music format?’ So I called a few music friends here in Holland to see how busy they were and explained the concept. They were very excited to help me and that’s how the journey started.” Friends in the music industry were not hard to find. Babel has been immersed in music since he was a teenager and wanted to pursue a dual career in rap and football while graduating through the ranks at Ajax. That was discouraged, he says, by “general public opinion, the football media. At that time it was not as common as it is today for football players to do it. I was one of the only football players here who was doing that and I felt intimidated by these opinions. I was 18, 19 years old and so I thought I should take a step back and not get involved in the forefront of the music side so much.” He established a music management company instead, 12 years ago, and has appeared on songs by other Dutch hip-hop artists. Writing and producing eight songs about his own life, however, brought a different challenge. The Netherlands international admits: “I was aware that, if I wanted to make it authentic, I had to share stuff that maybe isn’t always comfortable to tell. But at the same time I was prepared mentally to do that and the process of writing was very inspiring with the people who were involved. I’m really proud of what I was able to tell in the final product and the way I was able to tell it. In the past when I was making little things in the studio it was more like bragging, you know how rappers do in general. It’s easy to lie and say, ‘Oh, I’m rich this and rich that’ but that wasn’t interesting for me and definitely not what I wanted to do. I wanted to be as authentic as possible and share my truth.” Babel has released two singles from the album so far – Young Champ and Reminder. A third, Open Letter, caused a stir in the Netherlands for criticising his former international teammate Ibrahim Afellay. Former coaches, and the racist abuse that Bukayo Saka, Marcus Rashford and Jadon Sancho were subjected to after the Euro 2020 final, are also addressed. “Open Letter is a song that is divided into two parts and has two different beats,” Babel says. “The first part of the song is basically me taking you back on a journey I have walked from the very start. I describe moments where I felt certain coaches didn’t believe enough in me. I describe conversations with old football players like Winston Bogarde, who had a tough conversation with me and told me that if I wanted to make it I needed to step it up. I involve the current head coach of the Netherlands, Louis van Gaal, who at the time was the sporting director of Ajax and didn’t believe enough in me to give me a contract but still did because the coach, Danny Blind, believed in me. I talk about those things that happened back in 2003-2004 and I have never shared before. “There is also a moment where I describe my little relationship with Rafa Benítez at Liverpool, and then you go to the second part of the song which is more about the current time and where I give my opinion on journalism in Holland and a situation with an old colleague who became a journalist [Afellay]. People in Holland took it as a diss-song but it was more an expression of my disappointment in this individual because we had been teammates for so long and now he turned into a pundit who, in my opinion, tried to score points to make his position look good in the pundit world. “I also rap about a piece of racism by describing what happened to those English players after the Euros final and use a nice metaphor to translate it back to Holland. I say I was not surprised at what happened because we are dealing with the same issues here in Holland. For me it was nothing new.” Babel’s description of a “little” relationship with Benítez is revealing. The forward was one of the most coveted young talents in Europe when Liverpool bought him for £11.5m in 2007. He was 20 and went on to make more appearances for Liverpool than he has for any other club in a career that also includes Hoffenheim, Kasimpasa, Al Ain, Deportivo La Coruña, Besiktas and Fulham. But the Anfield chapter is one with regrets. “It was, in my opinion, a weird relationship [with Benítez] because when he signed me I looked at him as the big uncle who wanted to give me a chance and help me succeed. But then as we went on he left me totally on my own and only judged me for the things I didn’t do right instead of telling me how to solve or improve the things I had to improve. I was very young and I just needed guidance. I don’t want to blame the coach for me not having the ultimate career at Liverpool but I felt it could have been closer in terms of guidance and support. You can compare it to when you’re trying to teach someone something and it doesn’t stick, but then someone else says the same thing in a different way and all of a sudden it clicks. The way the coach at that moment tried to make things click, it didn’t click. “I felt he didn’t put in enough effort to guide a young player, not like you would see today with a Jürgen Klopp or many other coaches who take the time to get the best out of a talent. At that time I was one of the talents in Europe that people had expectations of and unfortunately in a lot of people’s eyes I didn’t fulfil that potential. Now looking back, maybe if I had the right support I could have been much better. That was for me a disappointing spell if you talk about my relationship with the coach. I felt he could have helped me more. Even players like Steven Gerrard and Fernando Torres who were always playing at that time were also confirming that type of relationship [with Benítez].” He looks at Liverpool with a different perspective now. “I am so jealous! I think it is incredible to be a young player now at Liverpool, especially working under a coach like Jürgen Klopp who tries to get the best out of players and also gives them chances to develop. It is a young player’s dream to have the feeling that a coach actually cares. That can make a real difference for a player.” Babel is in the final year of his contract with Galatasaray and, despite success in the music and property business, is not contemplating football retirement yet. “I’m open-minded,” he says of the future. “MLS is maybe something I would be interested in. If I still have a team in Europe I could play for I would definitely think about it. I had a great spell at Fulham and made good relationships there, so if Fulham was a place that would make sense at that time I would definitely try to go back to Fulham to help the club with my experience. There have been a lot of ups and downs but in general I am proud of my journey.”You may have heard the odd lie fall from the lips of Boris Johnson, but few are more solidly outrageous than Monday’s claim that he “loved” Peppa Pig World. Sorry, but no. I refuse to believe any adult human has attended this attraction and not spent a significant time in the queue for Miss Rabbit’s Helicopter Flight Googling “Mirena coil” or “vasectomies near me”. I know Johnson’s desire to bring unspecified numbers of children into the world is thus far irrepressible, but here, surely, is where these urges meet their Waterloo. The entire place reeks so powerfully of the nudge unit that I don’t even believe its genuine purpose is a theme park. It’s just a massive, brightly coloured loss leader for Big Snip. Anyway, by now you will be well across the prime minister’s speech to the CBI, in which he lost his place for more than 20 agonising seconds. This in itself feels a bit of a warning sign. As a public speaker, Johnson is such a determined recycler of his old stuff that every podium address constitutes little more than another extremely familiar dive into his greatest hits. “Losing his place” in his speech is a bit like Gary Barlow losing his place in Back for Good. Embarrassing in the short term, yes, but probably the reminder you need to book that cognitive function test. In the meantime, perhaps Johnson’s No 10 team would consider putting The Basic Speech on a thumb drive, allowing the prime minister to simply lip-sync and do the arm gestures. But what of the precious “cut through” – the trendy way of thinking about government that says anything from corruption to ritual sacrifice is fine as long as voters don’t notice it? Well, no one normal has the faintest interest in what happens at the CBI, obviously, but it’s not great when Ant and Dec open Monday night’s I’m a Celeb with a pisstake of the prime minister. Or as a senior Downing Street source reportedly told the BBC on Monday: “there is a lot of concern inside the building about the PM … It’s just not working. Cabinet needs to wake up and demand serious changes otherwise it’ll keep getting worse. If they don’t insist, he just won’t do anything about it.” Is that … Is that a positive review? Again, doesn’t feel brilliant, particularly when set next to the government winning its social care vote later that evening with a majority of just 26 and multiple pointed abstentions. As for other crises, it’s strange to think that almost a year ago to the day, Boris Johnson was greeting a report finding that home secretary Priti Patel had bullied staff and broken the ministerial code by ignoring said report, allowing the resignation of his standards adviser and telling his MPs that it was “time to form a square around the prittster”. Can’t help suspecting it will soon be “time to form a concrete overcoat round the prittster”, as Patel’s failure to deal with the government’s small boats issue becomes more and more of a liability for Johnson personally. It was as recently as August 2020 that the Johnson government was boasting: “At the end of this year we will no longer be bound by the EU’s laws so can negotiate our own returns agreement” for migrants. Like a lot of other things, this seems to have been less of a post-Brexit triumph than billed. As many Tory MPs will attest, the daily arrival of boats across the Channel is by miles the biggest thing they are buttonholed about, with anger at radioactive levels. Widespread failure to understand or care why most migrants reaching Europe tend to be young men is matched by widespread failure to understand or care that the migration crisis is simply going to get more pronounced, with surging numbers fleeing humanitarian crises such as that in Afghanistan merely the prelude to climate displacement. Yet apparently, “get used to it” isn’t the reply that their constituents are looking for. Alas, even in the short term, the timeline can always get worse. Enter Nigel Farage – or rather, re-enter Farage, given the former Ukip/Brexit party leader has had more farewell tours than Kiss, Barbra Streisand and Cher combined. Nigel last quit politics “for good” in March 2020. He currently has a slot on GB News – the secret-diary version of a Vegas residency – as well as a lucrative side-hustle on Cameo, where he can be easily tricked into recording pro-IRA greetings for cash. But now, he announces he’s mulling a return to frontline politics – by popular demand, of course. According to Farage, he has been “approached by several high-ranking donors”. Sperm donors or financial donors? He doesn’t say. We’ll go with financial donors for now, with Nigel assuring us they’re asking him “if I am considering getting back into the political arena”, with renewed Tory fears he will once more outflank them on the right. So with multiple complicated crises developing, and vaccines taskforce heroine Kate Bingham warning that Britain is put at risk by civil service groupthink, it seems fairly wild that the limit of much Tory diagnosis is that “the prime minister desperately needs a big moment where everyone says, ‘boom, he’s back’”. That is really the absolute last thing the country needs. The entire Johnson premiership has consisted of people veering between suggesting he’s unassailable for 10 years, to suggesting he’s had his worst week ever and is on his uppers. To misquote Gordon Brown, it would be nice to think we could end “boom-he’s-back” and “boom-he’s-bust” politics. I’ve lost count of the number of times we’ve been up and down on this ride, but – given the scale and complexity of the challenges – strongly recommend refusing to queue for it again. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistMaliha Aziz was understandably nervous about her 19 November trip from St Louis, Missouri, to her native city of Karachi, Pakistan, for her nephew’s wedding. Aziz, a former principal of an Islamic Sunday school in St Louis, and her husband traveled to three weddings over the summer and experienced numerous flights delays and cancelations. On a Friday in June, they were stuck at a gate at the St Louis airport for more than two hours and missed a rehearsal dinner in Omaha. Then while at the wedding, Aziz received a text informing her that the airline had canceled their return flight and rebooked them for a flight more than 24 hours later. “None of those were pleasant trips,” said Aziz, 61, who lives in a St Louis suburb. “Even simple trips, when they should not have any problems, either they did not have enough crew to fly the plane, or the plane is there but they don’t have enough staffing, or the luggage is in the plane, and it can’t come out because they don’t have enough staffing.” Aziz’s summer travel experience and worries about Thanksgiving – she is flying back to the US on 28 November – are not unique among the tens of millions of people hoping to see friends and family for the annual holiday. That’s because while people are expected to again travel at levels similar to a pre-pandemic Thanksgiving, airlines are still contending with staffing shortages, which could lead to additional flight cancelations. “It doesn’t really matter if a travel disruption is coming from a lack of staffing or shortage of routes or weather, it’s still something that is very frustrating for customers,” said Lindsey Roeschke, travel and hospitality analyst for the Morning Consult, a market research firm. In spite of the Covid-19 pandemic, Thanksgiving flight bookings in the United States are up 78% from 2020 and 3.2% from 2019, according to an Adobe Digital Economy Index report published earlier this month. “When it is busy, it’s very possible that [flights] will be over capacity – and that means the possibility of things going wrong is very high,” said Narendra Khatri, principal of Insubuy, a travel insurance company. Over the Halloween weekend, American Airlines canceled more than 2,000 flights because of weather and staffing problems. In letters to employees, David Seymour, chief operating officer of the airline, described the weekend as a “brief irregular ops period” and said that “on the schedule front, we’ve ensured that November and December are built to meet customer demand and that they are fully supportable by our staffing”. Southwest Airlines also canceled hundreds of flights over an October weekend. Both airlines have since offered staff increased pay to work over Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year’s. A union representing American Airlines flight attendants accepted an offer for 150% pay to fly during peak holiday periods and an additional 150% pay for attendants who do not call in sick between 15 November and 2 January. But a union representing American Airlines pilots rejected an offer for 50% additional pay on peak travel days during the holiday season because of the pilots’ frustrations with the airline’s scheduling system, among other issues. When weather forces a cancelation, the airline has struggled to fix the schedule, which has spiraled into further cancelations, said Dennis Tajer, a spokesperson for Allied Pilots Association, the union for the airline’s pilots. The union would like to see the airline allow pilots more flexibility to swap flights so that when a pilot’s flight from St Louis to Dallas is canceled, a pilot already in Texas can pick up that pilot’s next flight from Dallas. That often can’t happen because of issues in the information technology system and limits on how much a pilot can fly each month, Tajer said. An American Airlines spokesperson declined a request for an interview. “This recovery has just really pulled back the covers on the infrastructure problems at American Airlines,” said Tajer, who is also a pilot. “We know where the solutions are – they probably have solutions – but they are not even willing to talk about them.” In spite of the uncertainty, not all analysts predict that Thanksgiving will be a mess. In the wake of the Halloween weekend cancelations, Seymour reassured staff that almost 1,800 flight attendants had returned from a leave of absence and that the airline would hire 600 new flight attendants by the end of December. Mike Malik, chief marketing officer at Cirium, an aviation data firm, attributes the airlines’ October meltdowns to the fact that some companies “wound down too fast” when air traffic slowed. As people have again begun traveling, they are still working through difficulties in trying to meet that demand, he said. “The hits that have been taken in the last month or so, the airlines have adjusted for that, and I think they are very much geared up for Thanksgiving,” said Malik. Ajay Jain, a 23-year-old software engineer, also has confidence in American Airlines despite the recent issues. He follows the industry closely through social media and websites such as the Points Guy and has seven flights booked with the airline before the end of the year, with the goal of achieving Gold status for 2022, meaning he would receive free upgrades. He has flown about 30 times since he started traveling again after being fully vaccinated against Covid-19 and has not had any flights canceled. But in May, he missed an American Airlines flight from Austin to Dallas when an airline reservation system operated by Sabre, a technology company, went down. Jain was able to catch a flight an hour later, but other passengers’ plans were more disrupted. Jain said he explained to some what had happened, that it wasn’t American Airlines’ fault, and they calmed down. That hasn’t always been the case during the pandemic – and the hectic holiday scene at airports could prove especially volatile. Passengers have yelled at and assaulted flight attendants when asked to put their mask on. Others have spent hours on the phone trying to rebook cancelled flights. In the end Aziz, the former Sunday school principal, and her husband made it to Karachi without any problems. They were looking forward to the wedding, even though it would have only about 200 people – compared with more than 700 for her Pakistani family’s weddings in non-Covid times. Before their return flight 28 November, they must figure out where to get a Covid test, as is required for passengers entering the US. “Praying we won’t miss our flight from Chicago to [St Louis],” Aziz texted from Pakistan.Malikah Shabazz, a daughter of the civil rights leader Malcolm X, has died. She was 56. Shabazz was found unconscious by her daughter inside their home in Brooklyn on Monday afternoon, New York police said. “At this point in time, working with other authorities, the medical examiner, and speaking to the family, she had been ill for a period of time, and at this point, nothing appears suspicious,” the NYPD commissioner, Dermot Shea, told a local news outlet. Malikah Shabazz and her twin sister, Malaak, were the youngest of Malcolm X’s six daughters with his wife, Dr Betty Shabazz. Betty Shabazz was pregnant with the twins when Malcolm X was assassinated at the Audubon Ballroom in Washington Heights, a New York neighborhood, on 21 February 1965. Bernice King, a minister and daughter of the civil rights leader Dr Martin Luther King Jr, shared her condolences on Twitter. “My heart goes out to her family, the descendants of Dr Betty Shabazz and Malcolm X,” King wrote. “Dr Shabazz was pregnant with Malikah and her twin sister, Malaak, when Brother Malcolm was assassinated. Be at peace, Malikah.” Shabaz’s death came just days after two men convicted for assassinating Malcolm X were exonerated by a Manhattan judge, after two years of re-investigation. The judge dismissed the convictions of Muhammad Aziz and the late Khalil Islam after prosecutors and the men’s lawyers said the renewed investigation found new evidence that undermined the case against them.Pep Guardiola has insisted that Mauricio Pochettino is an elite manager despite having never won a league title in a 12-year, four-club career. Pochettino is one of the favourites to succeed Ole Gunnar Solskjær as permanent manager at Manchester United, who have said an interim will be appointed until the close season. Pochettino has won only the Coupe de France and the country’s equivalent of the Community Shield and Guardiola was asked whether the Argentinian – or anyone – could be considered elite without a major trophy. “You can be a top manager without titles, of course,” Manchester City’s manager said before hosting Pochettino’s Paris Saint-Germain in the Champions League on Wednesday. “The managers who have the chance to win titles are at top, top clubs with good investments and exceptional players. Otherwise – it is impossible to win. That doesn’t mean the managers in the Championship or in the Premier League but outside the top six cannot be excellent managers in tactics, and communication, leading the team, as human beings. It’s not necessary to win titles to be a top manager.” Guardiola believes that Pochettino, who has also managed Espanyol, Southampton and Tottenham is improving. “I’m pretty sure the managers get better every year,” he said. “Every season we go through you have a lot of learning; I’m pretty sure he’s an excellent manager.” Asked what challenges Pochettino’s sides offer, he said: “It’s completely different [each time] due to them being from different countries, having different players, shapes. Even with the same manager and same team it can be different from one year to another.” City need a point from their penultimate Group A game to reach the knockout phase. “I had the feeling every season is tougher to qualify for the last 16,” Guardiola said. “Opponents, managers, players: tougher and tougher. Tomorrow we have a chance to qualify and if we do that it would be so good for the club and players.” City lost September’s reverse fixture 2-0, with Lionel Messi scoring a first goal for PSG after joining in the summer. Guardiola, who previously managed the forward at Barcelona, was asked what the best way is to try to stop him. “It is so difficult,” said Guardiola. “Sometimes when he has the ball he doesn’t know what he has to do next. It also happens with Neymar, Kylian Mbappé, Ángel di María: all four are in the same team and each could be a star around the world. I’m happy he’s [Messi] still playing at this level and it will be nice to face him again and everyone knows the quality and personality that PSG and their players have.” Jack Grealish faces a fitness test but City will be without Kevin De Bruyne, who has Covid. Ilkay Gündogan, who missed the match at PSG, is available and is expecting a battle with Marco Verratti in midfield, the Italian having starred in Paris. “He had a great game,” Gündogan said. “Unfortunately I was not able to play because of injury but watched it at home and I totally agree he did really well. He didn’t lose any balls. It feels he is under pressure from one, two, three opponents and is still able to choose the right solution for every action. “We will be ready to face him again and are going to face similar qualities again. From my experience, playing a similar position where it always gets tighter and tighter – there is not much space in the centre of the game – these kinds of situations are the hardest and how he deals with these are quite impressive. “For us it is how we want to play: control possession and create chances and I have no doubt if we are able to do that the best way, with the right amount of patience as well, that we are able to play a really good game and get the three points.”You’d need to have the humbuggiest of hearts not to be charmed, even just a little bit, by this family Christmas movie – lavishly adapted, no expense spared, from a kids’ novel by Matt Haig. It begins in modern-day London, with Maggie Smith as the Mary Poppins-ish great-aunt to a trio of siblings. Their mum has recently died, so no one is feeling festive when Aunt Ruth begins telling them a bedtime story on Christmas Eve. Her fairytale is a Santa Claus origins myth, about a boy called Nikolas (played by delightfully urchin-faced newcomer Henry Lawfull). He lives in a forest in Finland with his poor woodcutter dad (Michiel Huisman). They are so poor that when the dotty king (played by Jim Broadbent with endearing spoiled-child petulance) offers a reward to anyone who can bring hope to the land, Nikolas’s dad goes off in search of Elfhelm, the fabled kingdom of elves. Enter Kristen Wiig, giving it the full Mrs Twit treatment as child-hating ’orrible Aunt Carlotta, who arrives to look after Nikolas. The unspeakable thing she does to his only toy – a doll carved out of an old turnip – is a genius stroke of kids’ writing. So young Nikolas runs away to find his dad, taking with him his talking pet mouse (voiced by Stephen Merchant). On his adventure, he acquires some dead giveaways as to his future career: a red hat with a white bobble, and a reindeer friend called Blitzen. When he finally catches up with his dad, there are some honest unglossed truths about how parents disappoint their kids – and the film has semi-unsentimental things to say about grief too. Still, above all this is A Christmas Movie, made for audiences from four to 94, little ones watching with nan on Boxing Day in front of the telly, everyone a bit drowsy on Quality Street. Maybe because of that, it feels kid-gloves at times: big-hearted and entertaining, but possibly lacking a little fun or oomph. A lovely warming film, though. • A Boy Called Christmas is released on 26 November in cinemas and on Sky Cinema.BIG CUP OF SORROW It’s fair to say Xavi could have asked for an easier start to life as Barcelona manager. First up in the league at the weekend was the derby – although, yes, admittedly Espanyol enter into these affairs with about as much chance of claiming local bragging rights as, say, Red Star Paris, 1860 Munich or Everton – and now comes a crunch Big Cup tie that could make or break their season. It’s been a while since Barcelona went out in Big Cup’s group stage. The last time was in 2000-01, when Leeds edged out a side featuring Rivaldo, Phillip Cocu and, er, Xavi. This time it’s Benfica in the role of Dominic Matteo and co. Barça were battered 3-0 on their trip to Lisbon in September and their only points (and only goals) in the group so far have come from a pair of 1-0 wins over Dynamo Kyiv. Ordinarily that would put them on the brink, but Benfica – third in their domestic league, the Portuguese equivalent of being anchored to the bottom of the table – have not exactly taken advantage, shipping nine goals to Bayern since that victory. So, for two European giants down on their luck, there’s everything to play for at the Camp Nou, with Barcelona desperate for a win before their daunting trip to Bavaria. “I see an opportunity, no pressure,” cheered Xavi. “Football always gives you a rematch. We’re Barça and we’ll go for it. I love challenges like this. Talking is easy, we need to show it on the pitch. Against Espanyol we were better. Barça aren’t in a situation to show off but we have reasons to be optimistic. If we win, we’ll qualify. We need to be brave and try.” Elsewhere, the Manchester United clown car clatters into Villarreal for a crucial Group F tie, while Chelsea – needing a point to reach the knockout stage – welcome Juventus to Stamford Bridge. In Group G, there’s the potential for fireworks where all four teams – Lille, Energy Drink Salzburg, Sevilla and Wolfsburg – can still top the group or finish bottom. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join our writers for hot Tuesday night Big Cup action, with Simon Burnton covering Villarreal 2-1 Manchester United (5.45pm GMT) before Will Unwin guides you through Chelsea 1-0 Juventus (8pm). QUOTE OF THE DAY “I gave a tackle to [Spain’s César Azpilicueta]. I did it on purpose. I’m not ashamed to say it because he did something stupid to my player. Acting big to my player. It was a stupid thing, but I would still do it to make him understand: ‘You don’t [effing] do that. You don’t have balls to do it against me. But I will show you what happens if you do it to me.’ That’s why I did it” – it’s safe to say Zlatan Ibrahimovic pulls no punches (or shoulder barges) in this big, big interview with Donald McRae. FIVER LETTERS “Re: Richard Hirst’s suggestion (yesterday’s Fiver) that The Fiver set up a judge-led public inquiry into disparities in Premier League goal differences. High hopes for an email whose only previous contact with the Beak has followed charges for Tin-fuelled hijinks” – Simon Riley. “As a Watford fan, not only do I get the joy of a new manager to fall in love with every nine months or so, but we are also now the Premier League’s official Bringers of Crisis. Our 13 points have been gained from wins against Villa, Norwich, United and Everton, plus a draw with Newcastle. All but one of these clubs later dispensed with their managers – and Rafa is looking nervously over his shoulder” – Jeff Lloyd. “May I be among the child-rearing pedants to note that it was Bambi’s mother who was shot (yesterday’s Fiver)? Also, Ed Woodward would have missed” – JJ Zucal. “In his Big Website interview, Zlatan Ibrahimovic says: ‘I did a stupid thing. But I will do it again.’ Is he going back to United?” – Krishna Moorthy. “Manchester United – not so much a football club, more a non-fungible token” – Tony Timms. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Jeff Lloyd. RECOMMENDED LOOKING Richard Dunne! Harry Enfield! The Eurasian Lynx! It’s David Squires on the hot mess at Manchester United. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … 30 November. Tickets are available now. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Mavys Álvarez, a Cuban woman who had a relationship with Diego Maradona two decades ago, has alleged that the Argentinian player raped her when she was 16. Álvarez, now 37, gave testimony last week to a Ministry of Justice court in Argentina. Rory Dames, head coach of NWSL side Chicago Red Stars, has resigned amid multiple allegations of abuse, ranging from verbal attacks to inappropriate communications. Tottenham have announced pre-tax losses of £80.2m for the financial year ending June 2021, with total debts increasing from £605m to £706m. Captain, leader, legend – that’s the verdict on Italy’s Giorgio Chiellini, according to Plain Old John Terry, who praised the Juventus centre-back in an interview with Italy’s Gazzetta dello Sport and was particularly enthused by Chiellini’s foul on Bukayo Saka in the Euro Not 2020 final. “To do what Chiellini did is not easy,” POJT swooned. “If you just think about it, it’s clear that you are a legend.” Pep Guardiola has been bigging up Mauricio Pochettino’s credentials before Manchester City’s Big Cup clash with PSG. “He is an excellent manager,” Guardiola hooted. “You can be a top manager and not win titles.” Liverpool have already won their Big Cup group and may make changes for Wednesday’s game against Porto with knack worries mounting. “We always respect the competition but we have to think about ourselves,” trilled Jürgen Klopp as he perused the club’s wide array of skinny, big-fringed youngsters. And Markus Anfang, the coach who quit Werder Bremen over allegations he faked his Covid-19 vaccine passport, is in more heißes wasser after being pictured living it up at a restricted local event. “His visit to the carnival in the middle of the pandemic is absolutely irresponsible,” fumed German tabloid Bild. STILL WANT MORE? “In the past when I was making little things in the studio it was more like bragging … but that wasn’t interesting for me. I wanted to be as authentic as possible and share my truth.” Former Liverpool winger Ryan Babel gets his chat on with Andy Hunter about the autobiographical rap album that has ruffled feathers in the Netherlands. “The puritan urges us: forswear ketchup, that you may know the greater glories in life. The hedonist counters: what is the point of life without ketchup?” Yes, Jonathan Liew on football’s ketchup wars is as tasty as it sounds. Kylian Mbappé was an outcast at PSG as the last transfer window closed – now he’s le grand fromage with Lionel Messi and Neymar trailing behind, writes Eric Devin. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! 25 YEARS AGO TODAYI first met Robert Richardson about 30 years ago at the Independent on Sunday. He was a regular on the subeditors’ desk, always full of joie de vivre and stories from old Fleet Street. When he bumped into you at the coffee machine his opening gambit would be: “Did I ever tell you about …” Perhaps he had – possibly more than once – but he was always so charming and engaging that it seemed churlish to say that you already knew the punchline. Years later I met him once again at the Observer; it was like being greeted by a favourite uncle who had just been wondering how you had been all this time. None of that “I’m sorry, I don’t think we’ve met.” If he had gone through a particularly grim piece of copy, he would often conclude by sighing and saying: “Same story, different people …” Wise words from one of the last of Fleet Street’s gentlemen subeditors.In 1986 the New York Times review of Robert Bly’s Selected Poems was headlined “Minnesota Transcendentalist”. It was perceptive to note his link with the New England poets of the 19th century, which was strong, but within a few years it would look absolutely prescient. For although he was one of the outstanding poets of his generation, Bly, who has died aged 94, may be remembered, like the two most enduring of the original Transcendentalists, for facets of his work other than poetry. Just as Ralph Waldo Emerson’s legacy is as an essayist, the influence of Bly’s essays on poetic theory and his many translations have resonated with readers and his fellow poets. But Bly is more likely to be seen as a 20th-century parallel to Henry David Thoreau. Like Thoreau, he made his mark with civil disobedience, and later with a hugely popular prose work concerned with the denaturing effects of civilisation. Bly’s early poetry in the 60s was his best, although its quality was often subsumed by controversy surrounding his anti-war positions. In 1966, he co-founded American Writers Against the Vietnam War. The following year, when he won the National Book award for The Light Around the Body, he donated the prize money to draft resistance. But his entire poetic career was thrown into the shadows by the remarkable success of Iron John: A Book About Men (1990). A meditation on his vision of American manhood being torn from its natural roots because fathers fail to initiate their sons properly into masculinity, Iron John spawned a movement combining encounter-group sensitivity with primal tree-hugging survivalism. Yet with his imagistic, often spiritual, poetry, his deep interests in mysticism, his rustic dress and his nasal, high-pitched voice, Bly often seemed an unlikely prophet of masculinity. Bly called his poetic technique “deep image”, and his highly visual, quietly surreal poems, often in rural settings, reflected his upbringing in Scandinavian-settled Minnesota. He was born in Lac qui Parle county, where his parents, Alice (nee Aws) and Jacob Bly, Norwegian immigrants, were farmers. At 18, after graduating from high school in Madison, he enlisted in the US navy. Discharged in 1946, he enrolled at St Olaf’s College in Northfield, Minnesota, but after a year transferred to Harvard, where he joined a precocious group of undergraduate writers, including John Ashbery, Richard Wilbur, John Hawkes, George Plimpton and, at Radcliffe, Adrienne Rich. It was at Harvard that he read a poem by WB Yeats, and resolved to “be a poet for the rest of my life”. After graduation in 1950, he moved to New York, writing and struggling to support himself with a succession of menial jobs and meagre disability payments for the rheumatic fever he contracted while in the navy. In 1954, he returned to the midwest, as a graduate student in the University of Iowa’s writers’ programme, teaching to pay his way. Again he found himself in a writer’s hothouse; his fellow students included Philip Levine, Donald Justice and WD Snodgrass, with Robert Lowell and John Berryman on the faculty. The proliferation of creative writing programmes on American campuses today owes much to the collective success of this group, the level of which, it could be argued, has never been repeated. He married the writer Carol McLean in 1955, and returned to Minnesota. The next year, he received a Fulbright grant to travel to Norway to translate poetry. There he discovered not only such Swedish poets as Tomas Tranströmer, Gunnar Ekelöf and Harry Martinson, but also, in translation, other writers relatively unknown in English: Georg Trakl, Pablo Neruda and César Vallejo. His translations of Tranströmer continued throughout both their careers, and the affinity between their poetry makes these some of the most effective ever done. On his return to America, Bly started a magazine to publish such writers. The Fifties, co-edited with William Duffy, would change its name decade by decade, and had an immense effect on American poetry, defining the deep image style. Through the magazine, Bly became close to a similarly inclined poet, James Wright, and with him translated Twenty Poems of Georg Trakl (1961). He also translated Knut Hamsun’s novel Hunger from the Norwegian in 1967. Deep image arose from the way the poets Bly admired drew on almost subconscious imagery, yet used it in a very deliberate way. He called it “leaping” poetry, once describing it as surrealism with a centre holding it all together. Out of these influences, in 1962, came Bly’s first book of poems, Silence in the Snowy Fields, whose bonding with the countryside would be echoed by later generations of creative writing professors in poems about chopping wood in denim shirts. But in Bly’s hands, the quiet of the northern landscape provided a deep, personal beauty. It was an immediate success, and led to a Guggenheim fellowship. Those poems gave no hint of the despair that became evident in The Light Around the Body, which not only reflected his feelings about the Vietnam war, but also his years of struggle in New York. They drew on the same imagery as his first book, but used it in a far more ferocious way. Studying Jung’s theories of mythic archetypes led to Bly’s mixing them into his politics in Sleepers Joining Hands (1973), whose long poem, The Teeth Mother Naked at Last‚ is a powerful condemnation of war as an affront to the Great Mother Culture. He placed a long essay, I Came Out of the Mother Naked‚ at the centre of this book, and prose poems would soon become an integral part of his poetics, culminating in This Body Is Made of Camphor and Gopher Wood (1977). After a divorce from Carol in 1979, in 1980 he married Ruth Ray, a Jungian psychologist, and moved to Moose Lake, Minnesota. He began working with men’s and women’s groups, producing books of poetry that reflected the transactional experience, most notably the love poems in Loving a Woman in Two Worlds (1985). After PBS Television’s Bill Moyers produced a documentary, A Gathering of Men, about those men’s groups, Iron John became an immediate bestseller. It was followed by The Sibling Society (1996), which lamented the “perpetual adolescence of modern American men”, and The Maiden King: The Reunion of Masculine and Feminine (with Marion Woodman, 1998). At the same time his translations expanded to include the 15th-century Sufi mystic Kabir and the Urdu poet Ghalib. Bly encapsulated his poetic career in the moving Meditations on the Insatiable Soul (1994) and Morning Poems (1997), and published his second “selected poems” collection, Eating the Honey of Words, in 1999. The US invasion of Iraq inspired the collection The Insanity of Empire (2004). In 2013 Airmail, selections from Bly’s decades of correspondence with Tranströmer, was published in English. It revealed both a deep friendship and a contrast in the way the poetry of this homespun American mystic and the Swedish psychologist made its “leaps”. Stealing Sugar From the Castle: Selected and New Poems was published in the same year, and a last Collected Poems appeared in 2018. Bly is survived by Ruth, by four children, Mary, Bridget, Micah and Noah, from his first marriage, and by nine grandchildren. • Robert Elwood Bly, poet and writer, born 23 December 1926; died 21 November 2021Stephen Colbert On the Monday before Thanksgiving, Stephen Colbert listed numerous reasons to be thankful this year: “personally, I’m grateful that on Friday, history was made,” when Joe Biden temporarily transferred presidential power to Vice-President Kamala Harris while undergoing a routine colonoscopy, making Harris the first woman to assume presidential power in the US. “Yes, 100 years after women got the right to vote, we finally got the first female president on a technicality,” the Late Show host said. “Turns out, this whole time, the glass ceiling was up Joe Biden’s butt.” Colbert also touched on the Kyle Rittenhouse verdict, who was found not guilty of intentional homicide for shooting two people dead during anti-racism protests outside Kenosha, Wisconsin, in August 2020. “OK, cards on the table: I’m not a legal expert, so I can’t tell you whether or not Kyle Rittenhouse broke the law,” said Colbert. “But I can tell you this: if he didn’t break the law, we should change the law.” The trial was largely seen as a referendum on white vigilantism, as Rittenhouse, then 17, drove from his home in Illinois with an assault rifle and began patrolling streets after curfew. “If Emily Post said it was perfectly proper to go to Thanksgiving, drop trow, and leave your ass print in the pumpkin pie, I’d be like, ‘OK, not illegal, but the system is clearly broken,’” Colbert added. The Wisconsin jury found Rittenhouse not guilty, “but only a complete moron would celebrate this clear tragedy by making this guy a hero,” said Colbert. Enter: Florida congressman Matt Gaetz, who tweeted “NOT GUILTY!!!!!!!” when the verdict was released. “Of course, Gaetz has a vested interest in juries finding people not guilty,” Colbert quipped, referring to a federal investigation into the congressman for sex trafficking minors, “especially when it involved a 17-year-old crossing state lines.” Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel acknowledged Biden’s birthday on Saturday, as he became the first president to turn 79 while in office. “To give you a perspective on how old that is, Bill Clinton – remember him? Guy who was president almost 30 years ago? – he’s 75 now,” Kimmel said. To mark the occasion, Biden received a physical, and “doctors said there were no traces of malarkey, everything looked good,” Kimmel reported. “Or everything looked as good as the inside of an elderly man’s butt can look.” According White House physician Dr Kevin O’Connor, Biden’s physical revealed a “healthy and vigorous male”. “Why does every presidential checkup sound like a Cialis ad?” Kimmel wondered. “We need him to run the country, not impregnate our women. Vigorous is unnecessary.” In other news, with booster shots now authorized for all American adults, still fewer than 60% of Americans have received a Covid vaccine. “Which is low, but that means there are hundreds of millions of people who are vaccinated,” said Kimmel. “So all these anti-vaxxers who said, ‘I’m going to wait and see how it goes?’ It went, OK?” “Most of us have had the vaccine in us for a year now and it’s fine,” he continued. “We’re not magnetic, we’re not infertile, our testicles aren’t the size of Casaba melons. You wanted us to be guinea pigs? Congratulations, we were. You did it. We’re dumb, you’re smart, now go get the shot.” Seth Meyers And on Late Night, Seth Meyers decried the “unhinged Republican party” as embodied by the “hysterical” performance by the House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, who delayed a House vote on the Democrats’ social spending bill with a nine-hour speech. The $1.75tn measure, which passed the House on Friday and is now headed to the Senate, would provide universal pre-K, mandate paid family leave and expand Medicare to include hearing aids. “All that stuff is apparently so unacceptable to McCarthy, he lost his mind in a tantrum that went past 5am while being heckled by Democrats in the back row,” Meyers said. McCarthy’s meandering and inflamed speech had “the amped-up energy of a fifth-grader telling you about a classmate”, Meyers said: “‘I have a friend and his name is Timmy and he went to the zoo and he met a donkey and the donkey took a big poop and it was so funny!’ “This guy is such a goober – he sounds like a substitute teacher complaining to the principal that his high school class won’t stop chucking things at him,” he added.The EU has published a draft law that would blacklist airlines and travel operators that fly people to countries on its borders as part of attempts to destabilise the bloc, in its latest response to the crisis at the Poland-Belarus border. The proposal does not specifically mention Belarus, whose authoritarian leader, Alexander Lukashenko, is accused of engineering the arrival of thousands of people at the Polish border, where a desperate humanitarian situation has played out in recent weeks. Companies could be banned from flying through the EU and landing and refuelling at EU airports, regardless of whether their involvement in attempts at destabilisation was intentional or not. The proposal closes a gap in EU sanctions laws, which are country-specific. The EU recently agreed to extend sanctions against Belarus, but it can only target Belarusian companies rather than foreign airlines involved in bringing people to Minsk from the Middle East. Ylva Johansson, the EU home affairs commissioner, said the law was needed in response to an unprecedented situation. She said Lukashenko was “trying to sell tickets to the EU”, charging people €10,000-€20,000 for a one-way trip to Minsk and onward travel to the EU border. “We see the need to reach out directly to those travel companies which – unintentionally, most of the time – are being part of a state-sponsored smuggling scheme orchestrated by a desperate and non-democratic regime,” Johansson said. European Commission officials believe much of the value of the law lies in the power to deter companies from getting involved in such schemes. “Hopefully we don’t need to use it,” Johansson said, adding that it had taken airline companies “some time to understand how they are being used”. Turkish Airlines and Iraqi Airways restricted flights to Minsk after EU officials began talks with Middle Eastern governments on the issue. Speaking to the European parliament, the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said the situation on the EU’s eastern border was “not a migration crisis, but an attempt by an authoritarian regime to try and destabilise its democratic neighbours”. “These migrants are being cheated by terrible false promises. We have to fight against this and that’s why we wish to establish a blacklist for all modes and means of transport on the basis of international legislation.” She urged MEPs to support the proposals to make sure they were approved quickly. The proposal also has to be approved by EU ministers. Belarus’s interior ministry announced that more people would leave the country on Tuesday, after 122 left on Monday. Lukashenko admitted in a recent interview with the BBC that it was “absolutely possible” that Belarusian state troops had helped people cross the border into Poland, although he denied being responsible for the crisis. Syrians, Afghans and Iraqis who have managed to cross the border and reach the Polish city of Białystok have told the Guardian they bought visa travel packages from agencies that appeared to be closely connected to the Belarusian authorities. Since the crisis began, about 7,500 people from the Middle East have reached Lithuania, Latvia and Poland via Belarus, and 8,000 have arrived in Germany from Belarus via Poland, according to EU officials. Last month Poland’s parliament passed a law allowing border guards to return asylum seekers across the border without hearing their asylum claims. Johannson, a Swedish Social Democrat responsible for the EU’s migration policy, said the commission had “issues” with the Polish law. “We think there are elements of this law that are not compliant with the EU acquis,” she said. Under the Geneva conventions, refugees cannot be penalised for illegal border crossings. People stuck in the no man’s land between the EU and Belarus have spoken of being pushed between both countries, denied entry to Poland and return to Belarus. Asked about widespread reports of pushbacks, Johansson said this was not EU policy. “We are not allowing pushbacks. We will not allow pushbacks.” She added: “We should not legalise pushbacks, but it’s also important to say member states are obliged to prevent unauthorised entries. Sometimes the debate is a bit black or white. We have to do both. We do not have free entry to the European Union … We have to protect our external border but we have to do it in a way that is compliant with European values.”Rudy Guede, the only person definitively convicted of the murder of the British student Meredith Kercher, has been freed from prison after completing 13 years of a 16-year sentence. A judge in the Italian town of Viterbo agreed to further reduce Guede’s sentence, which had been due to end on 4 January, by an additional 45 days due to good behaviour. Francesco Maresca, the lawyer representing the Kercher family, said that while it was normal for sentences to be reduced, maybe a “moral reflection” was warranted over whether “such a low sentence could be sufficient for a murder of this kind”. Guede was initially sentenced to 30 years in prison in 2008 after a fast-track trial, but that was reduced on appeal to 16 years. “It will be another aspect I need to explain to Meredith’s family,” Maresca told La Stampa. “Each time, beyond the legitimacy, it further renews their unspeakable suffering.” Kercher, a 21-year-old student from Coulsdon, Surrey, was murdered in her home in the university town of Perugia in November 2007. Her body was found in her bedroom, partly undressed with multiple stab wounds. She had also been sexually assaulted. The convictions of two other suspects, Amanda Knox, an American student who shared the house with Kercher, and her Italian former boyfriend, Raffaele Sollecito, were overturned. Guede has always denied murdering Kercher, even though his DNA was found on Kercher’s body and in her bedroom. “My first thoughts are with the family of Meredith Kercher who have had to face this painful affair,” Guede’s lawyer, Fabrizio Ballarini, told the Italian press, adding that he was “very satisfied with the re-education” that Guede had done. He was first granted day release from Viterbo prison in 2017 to complete a master’s degree in sociology, and in December last year was entrusted to social services to carry out the rest of his sentence doing community service. Guede has spent his mornings volunteering for the Catholic charity Caritas and afternoons working in the library of Viterbo’s criminology centre. Claudo Mariani, who teaches at the criminology centre, told Ansa that Guede “now just wants to be forgotten”. “There is nothing more to add to this story apart from the fact that the life of a young English girl was cut short and, from her family, we are able to learn the great dignity and value of silence,” said Mariani. Knox and Sollecito spent four years in prison after initially being convicted of Kercher’s murder. They were acquitted in 2011 before being convicted again in 2014 by an appeals court in Florence, which ruled that the multiple injuries inflicted on Kercher’s body proved that Guede could not have acted alone. Italy’s highest court overturned the decision in a definitive ruling in 2015, because of what it described as “stunning flaws” in the investigation that led to the convictions of Knox and Sollecito. Responding to Guede’s release, Sollecito told the news agency Adnkronos: “Amanda and I risked conviction for something we didn’t do because of his lies. I’m just sorry that he has never regretted what he did, killing that poor girl.”Anthony Watson has been reprimanded by a Rugby Football Union disciplinary panel for conduct prejudicial to the interest of the game after comments made on social media criticising a match official. The Bath and England wing has been given a one-week suspended ban for a tweet he posted last month, hitting out at the decision by the referee Ian Tempest to send off his teammate Mike Williams in Bath’s defeat by Wasps. Watson is currently sidelined with a long-term knee injury – which led the disciplinary panel to suspend his sentence until the end of next season – but the RFU’s insistence that he had “disrespected” Tempest’s authority sends a clear message, hot on the heels of World Rugby’s punishment of Rassie Erasmus following his outburst at match officials. Williams was sent off in the 47th minute of Wasps’ 27-17 victory for a dangerous clear-out on Jimmy Gopperth. The forward was subsequently suspended for four weeks while the Bath kit manager Steve Middleton was also banned for a match for comments he made to Tempest. Watson, who tweeted: “Here we go again. Where is he supposed to wrap?! Obsurd [sic] decision,” has also been instructed to deliver a presentation to his Bath teammates and academy players on the use of social media. The 27-year-old accepted the charge and issued a statement expressing his remorse, citing his long-term injury lay-off suffered a week earlier, as context for his behaviour. “I would like to record my remorse for my actions, it was never my intention to bring the game into disrepute and my ignorance surrounding the matter is not acceptable,” Watson wrote in a statement. “My actions cannot be explained simply by shifting the blame or placing extreme emphasis on my circumstances, I understand I must be accountable for my actions. “However, contextually I believe it’s important to understand how difficult the past month or so has been for me. A week prior to this game I suffered a potentially season-ending knee injury, which alone is not the easiest thing to deal with. However, when coupled with the fact that a mere two years ago I spent 13 months on the sideline watching my team and rehabilitating a double ruptured achilles – [that] can explain some level of the frustration I am feeling.” The disciplinary panel also heard from the Rugby Football Referees’ Union, which highlighted concerns over the acute shortage of match officials at grassroots level following the pandemic-enforced layoff. “It is no secret that the number of referees taking up the whistle again after such a prolonged lay-off, is causing concern,” read a statement. “A situation exacerbated by many of our members leaving the game having become disillusioned with, amongst other things, persistent challenging of their decisions and unfortunately, some serious incidences of match official abuse. Worse still, enticing new referees, especially young match officials, into the game becomes that more challenging. “The refereeing community is a relatively tight-knit one and incidents of abuse and disrespect for the role soon permeate amongst officials, undermining their confidence and commitment. Furthermore, we cannot stress the impact that poor behaviour towards match officials, be it challenging decisions, appealing, disrespect or abuse, within the professional end of our game has on the wider game.”Service stations are a new source of public angst, with their red neon signs searing the psyches of drivers worried about how much their next filling will set them back. Petrol prices are emerging as a political touchstone again too, with $2 a litre in major cities in prospect for some grades. That’s a real chance as the summer driving season approaches and the desire to put lockdowns in the rear-view mirror adds to the lure of the wide, open dual-carriageway. Here’s what you might like to know: What’s happening to prices? Remember those halcyon days last year when petrol prices averaged 129.7 cents per litre in our five largest cities? No, we don’t either, because we were either locked down or worried that we might stray into a Covid ambush. But at such prices, you could brag that petrol in real terms (after stripping out inflation) was at its cheapest in 22 years, according to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. (Hint: when the Holden Commodore ruled the roads.) Ah, nostalgia. Since then, it’s been mostly one-way traffic. As the Australian Bureau of Statistics told us earlier this month, the maximum average daily unleaded petrol price reached a record high of $1.65 a litre during the September quarter, helping to push up the wider consumer inflation index. What’s driving the rise? For the ABS, the push for higher prices came from “higher global oil prices amid economic recovery and supply disruptions”. Let’s take that on face value for now. Yes, Australia’s petrol prices are pegged to international markets, specifically the Singapore benchmark known affectionately as Mogas 95 to some petrolheads. Prices have see-sawed a bit, such as during a brief period when oil futures became negative for the first time in April 2020. At the time, holders of the contracts briefly had to pay people to take the fuels off their hands because demand had dived in major economies. A recovery in demand and some Covid-linked supply snafus have pushed oil prices back to about $US75-80 a barrel of late, depending on your blend of crude. That’s a bit shy of double the average price in 2020, so you’d expect to see some added cost flow on at the bowser. Supply issues are key too. Opec regularly meets to set production levels among its cartel members, and overnight the US and other nations agreed to coordinate the release of some of their strategic oil reserves in a bid to force crude prices lower. Filling up with local costs On top of the shipping costs to get it here, the government applies an excise fee of 43 cents a litre, indexed twice yearly. That’s a flat tax that all road users pay (unless you’re a mining company, or an electric vehicle owner – more on the latter later). The Australian Automobile Association, representing the various state and territory motorist groups, says fuel excise will tip $11b into commonwealth coffers this year and $49.3b over four years. The cost of transport for an average metropolitan household has now climbed above $400 a week for the first time, the AAA said this week. The $401.86 tally was up as much as $58 a week compared with 2020. For those in Sydney, for instance, the cost was $477.56 a week, while Wagga Wagga somehow managed to keep their household transport bill to $309.41. Regional variation The wonder of Wagga, though, hints at a flaw in the “it’s just the free market (plus taxes) at work” response to what steers petrol prices one way or the other. The ACCC has launched numerous investigations into petrol prices over the years. It lists a range of influences, including changes in the value of the Australian dollar against the greenback (in which all major commodities are priced). It also publishes a neat table of petrol price cycles for major cities, updated a couple of times a week. The results, though, suggest something else is at play or otherwise price trends would move more in lockstep than they do. An ACCC spokesperson said “like many markets, the degree of competition varies according to location, and some locations have more competitive markets than others”. “Competition is influenced by a number of factors including the size of the market, the location of the market, the number and type of businesses in a market, and the pricing strategies of the businesses,” the official said. “The degree of competition changes over time.” Not sure, though, that explains those city-by-city shifts, nor what gives in Wagga. Going the extra mile Petrol and other fuels are unusual because the seller is required by law to make the prices public. That alone triggers unusual behaviour among consumers that doesn’t happen with, say, asparagus, where prices are harder to compare according to Richard Denniss, head of economics at The Australia Institute. Denniss, himself a former “petroleum transfer engineer” (AKA servo employee) in his youth, says it wasn’t uncommon to see a driver drop a U-turn across double lines, braving fines, to save one cent a litre by not filling up at a service station across the road. “They’d save 40 cents and then pay $10 for bottled water,” he says. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The same price signals drivers see are also obvious to rival petrol stations. As with airlines that lift seat prices as the flight day nears, so do service stations if a weekend or holiday nears. “Petrol stations do exactly the same, because they can,” Denniss said. Shopping around can save some money and various apps can help, he adds. Still, over time the shift to electric vehicles should leave consumers less at the mercy of the market. For instance, driving 100 kilometres at 10 litres of petrol costs this author about $16 in fuel alone, while his EV can do that in about $3 at current current prices. (Servos are handy for pumping up tyres but that’s about it.) And for those recharging from their own solar panels, the fuel is effectively free.Senator Gerard Rennick’s use of Facebook to push unverified stories about vaccine side-effects is potentially dangerous, a top health expert has warned, as fresh doubt is cast on the legitimacy of a story he helped promote. Rennick, an LNP senator, has vastly increased his Facebook following in recent months after posting a deluge of stories about the Covid-19 vaccine, which he concedes he does not know are true. On Tuesday Guardian Australia revealed that in one now deleted post, he boosted a letter falsely linking vaccines with still births from a “retired GP” as a credible source of information, despite her calling for the execution of New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern over her government’s vaccination program four weeks earlier. Rennick said he was unaware of the woman’s comments about Ardern, and conceded he “should have” checked the source of the letter before sharing it. Rennick also conceded to Guardian Australia that he does not verify the accuracy of the dozens of third-party claims he has published about severe vaccine side-effects before publishing them, despite the posts being shared thousands of times among vaccine-hesitant groups online. In one example earlier this month, Rennick published an account from a woman which claimed she had developed severe neurological side-effects “caused” by her Pfizer vaccination. The account, which was included with a video of the woman jerking and grunting on a bed, was purportedly relayed by the woman’s mother, who claimed her daughter had been in “constant pain always that’s excruciating” since receiving the vaccine. She claimed her daughter had struggled to walk and “was sent home from hospital with false information on her discharge papers and meds for anxiety and schizophrenia”. Since it was posted by Rennick, the video, along with the account from the woman’s mother, has been viewed more than 174,000 times, shared more than 8,000 times and has more than 11,000 “interactions”. But the post has been cast in serious doubt thanks to a “clarification” from an online fundraising platform. A friend of the woman set up a fundraiser on a crowdsourcing platform. As of Tuesday it had raised $8,846 NZD. But on Tuesday the company added its own post-script to the fundraiser stating that it had made “amendments” to give “clarification on some points”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “[Her] symptoms did start after receiving the Covid vaccine however her doctors have not yet conclusively determined if all her symptoms are a reaction to the vaccine or not – it was previously stated on the page that doctors had confirmed this,” the post from the company stated. The clarification raises serious questions about the claim in the post that the woman’s illness was caused by the vaccine, although there is no suggestion that the woman, her mother or the fundraisers have deliberately posted false information. Guardian Australia attempted to contact the woman’s mother but did not receive a response by deadline. After he was made aware of the change, Rennick said he would amend the post to remove reference to the Pfizer vaccine causing her injury. “I’m happy to change that,” he said. “As I said in the context of the post, that was from ‘[name removed’s] mum’… I’m happy to change that from ‘caused’ to ‘after’.” His posts – which have variously linked vaccines to appendicitis, stutters, seizures, among other things – have frustrated health experts, who warn they are without evidence and threaten to undermine public confidence in the vaccine. Associate professor Nick Wood, who works with the National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance and runs the AusVaxSafety program, said there was a danger in Rennick’s posts. “He’s obviously in a position of power, so people look up to him and he therefore has a sense of credibility,” Wood said. “But the fact that he has admitted he hasn’t checked them and he’s just posted them on, that’s a problem.” “I think that is a danger because it feeds into: ‘is there a cover-up here, we’re not being told things’. That can potentially impact public confidence.” The AusVaxSafety program conducts surveillance for vaccine injuries or side-effects in the Australian population. It has surveyed four million recipients. There was no evidence of vaccines causing appendicitis or stutters. “In four million people, you’d think if there really was a signal for appendicitis, and that appendicitis was really happening in the days after the vaccine, we’d be picking that up in our system,” he said. “We have picked up the common side-effects and we have picked up chest pains.” West Australian president of the Australian Medical Association, Mark Duncan-Smith, the said posts about vaccination side-effects should be left up to the experts. He said it was crucial to remember that just because something happened after a vaccine, it was not necessarily caused by it. “I would say that in my position as AMA WA president, I wouldn’t be doing social media posts on how to pass legislation,” he said. “I would be leaving that up to the experts in drafting legislation and the parliamentary process. I think equally the distribution of scientific and medical information should be left up to the experts such as the TGA and ATAGI.” Asked whether his posts were dangerous, Rennick said it was his duty as a politician to present “two sides of the story”. “They can say it’s dangerous, well OK I don’t dispute that there is a risk of that, but I’ve also got a responsibility as a politician to put two sides of the story as well,” he said. “The government’s saying ‘get the vaccine, get the vaccine, get the vaccine’. OK, fair enough, but I don’t think it’s wrong to put the other side of the story out there as well.” Rennick said he accepted that not everything that happened after a vaccine was caused by it. But he said he was operating on “the balance of probabilities”, unlike the medical indemnity scheme. “Medical doctors are saying you’ve got to conclusively prove that it was the vaccine, where I’m saying it should be the balance of probabilities,” he said.A Labor government would appoint a new commissioner for family and sexual violence, and fund 500 new community sector workers under a $153m women’s safety policy . The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, will announce the policy on Wednesday before the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women on Thursday. The new family, domestic and sexual violence commissioner would act as an advocate for victim-survivors, coordinate national safety policies, provide reports that track progress against the national plan, and work with states and territories to gather data. The opposition will also pledge to fund 500 new community sector workers, with half of these to be located in rural and regional communities. These workers will include case workers to help women leave violent relationships, financial counsellors for women in financially abusive relationships, and support workers for children. “Right now, women fleeing violence are being turned away from accommodation and services because of insufficient funding towards sector workers, and the failure to recognise this tragedy as a national priority,” Albanese said in a statement before the announcement. “Women fleeing violence are being turned away from services because this government has not funded enough workers to help them. “Not enough workers are funded. It’s past time to stop just talking about it – and elevate women’s safety to a national priority.” Labor says the move to fund case workers in regional areas will create employment opportunities for people outside major cities and “ensure that no matter where you live you have access to services to build a safer, better life”. The policy builds on previous women safety commitments to invest $100m in crisis accommodation, legislate for 10 days of paid domestic violence leave, progress on a national definition of domestic violence that includes coercive control, and $79m for justice reinvestment for First Nations communities. The pledge comes as the Morrison government faces pressure over its funding commitments for domestic violence services, after service providers questioned the distribution of $17.1m promised in the last budget. According to the Office for Women, one woman is killed by a partner every nine days, with one in four women having experienced violence by an intimate partner since the age of 15. The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare estimates that violence against women and children costs the economy $26bn annually. The Covid-19 pandemic has seen a surge in demand for family violence services with frontline workers saying there haven’t been enough resources to meet demand for chronically underfunded support services. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. If you or someone you know is impacted by sexual assault, family or domestic violence, call 1800RESPECT on 1800 737 732 or visit www.1800RESPECT.org.au. In an emergency, call 000. International helplines can be found via www.befrienders.org.Australia faces a summer of weather perils as back-to-back La Niña events increase the likelihood of riverine flooding, and unusually warm ocean temperatures provide extra fuel for tropical cyclones. Insurers are bracing for another busy season of claims as repeated bouts of widespread rainfall – with another sweeping across eastern Australia later this week – elevate the risk of flash floods. Tuesday’s declaration by the Bureau of Meteorology that a La Niña event is under way in the Pacific confirmed what forecasts have been observing for some time. “For all intents and purposes we’ve been in a La Niña year for quite a few months now,” Insurance Australia Group’s (IAG) principal research analyst, Bruce Buckley said. “You don’t need as much rainfall as you would have done a year ago [to cause damage] because the catchments are now what we call primed for flooding.” As an island continent, Australia’s weather is influenced from all directions, with seasonality playing a central role. In winter and spring, the Indian Ocean often holds sway for rainfall for southern and eastern Australia, while the Pacific influences tend to take over from spring into summer. Relatively warm waters off north-western Australia have favoured the driving of moisture across the continent in recent months. They are still playing that role, as seen by Cyclone Paddy’s current contribution to the rainfall heading eastwards now, meteorologists said. The La Niña’s influence in the Pacific will mostly be felt along the eastern seaboard from now into February when the pattern is forecast to break down, the Bureau of Meteorology said. During La Niña years, the typical east-to-west trade winds strengthen, pushing rain-bearing clouds towards Australia, Papua New Guinea and beyond. Tropical cyclones are also more likely during La Niña years than during their opposite event, El Niños. The bureau estimates there is a two-in-three chance Australia will have more than the seasonal average of 11 cyclones in its region. Buckley said sea surface temperatures in a wide arc from the Pilbara across Australia’s north to the Coral Sea in the east are as much as 1.5C to 2C warmer than average, providing additional heat for tropical tempests to draw upon. “It’s much easier for tropical cyclones when they do form to intensify rapidly,” he said. “Obviously, the more intense the cyclones, the greater the potential for damage if they do cross the coast.” While there is natural variability, climate heating also has a role, since each degree of warming enables the atmosphere to hold 7% more moisture. That means “the ability to get heavier rainfall is much easier”, Buckley said, adding it’s a sign of the “much warmer climate that we’re now experiencing and will continue to experience into the future”. While a damp and relatively cool summer will probably snuff out the bushfire risk for most of eastern Australia, the same is not true for Western Australia. Recent rain has hampered fuel-reduction efforts and the climate influences point to a drying out and elevated fire threat. “We are looking at a pretty active bushfire season and I would expect that will spill through to South Australia and the western half of Victoria too,” Perth-based Buckley said. A spokesperson from Suncorp, the other big insurer in Australia, said last year’s La Niña had already resulted in a higher number of natural hazard events than usual. These included a significant hailstorm in October 2020 in Queensland and the widespread rain and flood damage in New South Wales and South-east Queensland in March 2021. The company, whose brands include AAMI and GIO, has a natural hazard allowance of $980m for the current financial year but predicts actual costs will exceed that by $125 to 150m, it said in a market update earlier this month. Head of the natural perils unit of IAG, Mark Leplastrier – whose brands include NRMA and CGU – said he couldn’t recall a below-average summer in terms of risks “for almost 15 years”. More data is helping communities and insurers become better prepared for extreme weather, with agencies like the National Recovery and Resilience Agency funnelling funds to priority areas, Leplastrier said. Improved standards for housing exposed to cyclones are just one area of research. “We’ve got so much capacity to engineer our way out of a lot of things,” he said. “We just need some forethought.”Bad weather across the country is downgrading the quality of one of the largest forecasted winter crops on record. Favourable seasonal conditions led the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences’ (ABARES) to predict in September that total agricultural production would surpass the $70bn mark for the first time, but experts say Australian crops could lose billions in value due to weather. As the Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology declared a La Niña weather event in the Pacific on Tuesday, farmers are already feeling the effects first-hand. Richard Heath, the executive director of the Australian Farm Institute, said the forecast would “definitely” come in lower than predicted. “It’s been extraordinary weather all around the country, all the cropping areas have received very untimely rain.” “The fact that it was a cool temperate spring had added to the crop yields being so good, but the flipside is now we’ve gotten into the harvest period and the La Niña is really expressing itself and we’ve gotten all this rain,” Heath said. Brett Hosking, chair of Grain Growers and a farmer at Quambatook, said the economic losses would be significant, “possibly tens of millions”. With flood waters still moving and forecasts for significant rainfall still to come, he said it was too early to be able to provide a more exact estimate of the losses. Some growers have avoided rainfall, as summer rainfall events tend to be isolated storms that may impact one grower and not another one, Hosking said. “Growers call it storm lotto,” he said. Andrew Whitelaw, an analyst at Thomas Elder Markets, predicted the economic loss was likely to be in the billions of dollars and described the situation as “scary”. Whitelaw said previous wet harvests had typically centred only around one area, but this year’s conditions were unusual in seeing downgraded crops across the country, including NSW, Victoria, Western Australia and South Australia. “We were going to produce a massive crop, but the quality of that crop is in decline,” Whitelaw said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “In Australia we produce high protein wheat which is good for producing human food such as bread and pasta. But what happens when you have a wet weather event over harvest [is] it tends to degrade the protein … changing wheat from being good quality grain to being feed quality grain.” Andrew Watson, a grain farmer from the Liverpool Plains, said he’d had 105mm of rain since Saturday, which followed 70mm the previous weekend. Without rain, Watson’s durum wheat crop would have received a premium grade price but the 10% already harvested has been downgraded because of rain. He said the remaining 90% will be downgraded further to feed wheat, if he can harvest it at all – a cut that will cost him approximately $500 a tonne for 3,000 tonnes of grain. Whitelaw says for a lot of people producing a lower quality crop will be the best-case scenario, as the risk is far worse for those who have had crops completely wiped out by flooding and no income and no insurance to claim for that circumstance. “For those that had a complete wipeout, you might as well have had a drought. But with a drought you wouldn’t have spent as much money growing the crop,” which this year has been more expensive than usual due to factors such as the higher than usual prices of fertiliser Whitelaw says. Much of Watson’s unharvested fields are also flooded at the moment. “It’s not just rainfall, it’s going underwater, having a swim. It’s pretty heartbreaking,” Watson said. He is also worried for his upcoming summer crop of cotton, which is underwater and will only survive if the water keeps flowing. Dylan Hirsch, a grain farmer in the north of Western Australia’s wheatbelt, said it had been one of their wettest years on record. While that had generally been positive for growing conditions in the region, extensive damage due to frost had seen farmers lose approximately 35% of their wheat yield and 10-15% of barley. Hirsch said the quality of many crops “isn’t great to start off with” but farmers are hoping to avoid further rain which would see downgrading occur. Mark Swift, a cereal and chickpea farmer outside Forbes, says the damage to his crops will be “imminent” from the 50-100mm forecast in the area for the next few days. Between having a big crop, knowing it’s going to be damaged but not being able to do anything about it, Swift says “it’s just a shit sandwich”. “The cruelty is we have crops ripe enough to be damaged but not ripe enough to harvest,” he said. Watson said amid the damage, there are silver linings. “The flip side is we have water in our dams for irrigation, the current growing summer crops [corn, sorghum and cotton] all have full moisture in the soil so they’ll be growing really well and grass growing for our cattle [means] they’ll all be fat,” Watson said. A department spokesperson told the Guardian the effect of recent bad weather events would be taken into account in the next ABARES Australian crop forecasts within the next month.On the home screen of my iPhone – on the very left, second row from the top – sits an app I frequent regularly. In fact, according to my diagnostics, an average of six minutes a day. The small rounded-square logo – yellow, white and grey – is designed to depict the top section of a notepad. But like most people, I don’t use it like a notepad. The Notes app – which has its off-brand equivalents for Android users – is my favourite of all the apps. It feels trustworthy. It’s safe. It feels like a safe, in which to store my secrets, my afterthoughts, my memory-doubts. It’s an old friend to confide in; a place where I can be completely vulnerable. It’s also a place to write haphazard measurements of a new fridge. That this one place can be both for wholly secret thoughts and the most mundane details of life: this is what gives it its unique charm. And it’s why, for the last few years, I have been asking my friends to share their Notes with me – and why I’ve begun collecting and cataloguing them. In her 2017 debut essay collection, Too Much and Not the Mood, writer Durga Chew-Bose describes shopping and to-do lists as “un-poems”. Texts of meaning which are, for others, indiscriminate and unintelligible. It’s the same with the Notes app. The language we use is often so prosaic that it becomes a poetry of its own kind. An unlikely tapestry sewn together by proximity. A place where we digress intentionally. There’s no judgement in this app. No grammar is considered, there’s no reason to use spell check. It’s a completely raw depiction of our thoughts, messy and muddled and page after page of items that are rarely titled, from dog names to salad recipe to things I didn’t think I’d say today. Looking at them out of context can bring about a sense of art. It’s jazz – or, honestly, it’s punk. Sometimes I share my own Notes at dinner parties: the perfect conversation starter with phones close at hand. I watch my friends across the table go through their own apps as the conversation begins; from curiosity to realisation, to mental cataloguing, and then the sudden discovery of some tidbit of information they thought lost – but now really need to share. Looking through someone else’s Notes feels voyeuristic, dirty, almost illegal. The app, when used often, holds our idiosyncrasies and disturbingly human qualities, so much so that they could be considered personality graffiti – marrying boredom with fleeting thoughts, like the words etched into cubicle stalls. They are also a time capsule, packed with outdated references, numbers and titles, revealing past personas, fears, plans and anxieties. If the theory of multiple universes is true, I believe the intersection could be found through our Notes. One set of listed items across our multiple lives, running in parallel with each other. For those who use the app, it’s a secret reliance we all share which – like those spots just out of focus in your eyes when you close them – give us something else to turn our attention to every once in a while. Since writing this I have asked many people about how they use their Notes. One friend uses the app to draft every single important text message she’s ever sent; another has made a habit of cataloguing his drunken thoughts in the cab home from a night out. My girlfriend’s father simply uses it to write down all the measurements he needs on the building site. How people use this tool can tell us a lot about them. This is why Notes is my favourite of all the apps, and why I continue to collect them as screenshots, nearly all anonymous, stored in a folder on my phone. The more I collect, the more I come to understand they will always be forever personal. Only the author can see each Note for what it truly is.Several countries in Europe are in the grips of a fourth Covid wave and have had to reintroduce restrictions to try to control outbreaks. So far Australia’s case numbers have remained low, despite Melbourne and Sydney relaxing most restrictions for fully vaccinated people. But as Australia continues to reopen to the world, could the same thing happen here? How bad are Covid cases in Europe? The World Health Organization (WHO) has warned an increasing trend in Covid-19 cases and deaths throughout Europe, with more than 2.1m new cases and more than 28,000 new deaths reported in the week to 17 November. This marks increases of 8% and 5% respectively compared to the previous week, and is the seventh consecutive week of increases. WHO regional director Dr Hans Kluge told the BBC that 500,000 more deaths could be recorded in Europe by March unless urgent action is taken. While some of the countries struggling the most have lower vaccination rates, such as Germany (68% fully vaccinated) and Russia (42.2% fully vaccinated), rises in cases and deaths are also being seen in Ireland, where more than three-quarters of the total population and almost 90% of those over 12 are fully vaccinated. There, curfews on venues and work-from-home orders have been reintroduced. Are our vaccination rates high enough to prevent a fourth wave? Australia has vaccinated a similar proportion of the total population to Ireland, with Covid-19 restrictions greatly easing in states such as Victoria and New South Wales despite the virus still circulating. In those states more than 90% of the over-16 population is now fully immunised. But will this be enough to prevent Australia following a similar path to Europe, Canada and the United States, with cases and deaths increasing again even as vaccinations increase? Head of the University of Melbourne’s school of population and global health, Prof Nancy Baxter, said it is difficult to directly draw parallels between what’s happening in those countries and what may happen in Australia due to differences in vaccination rates, public health measures, and populations. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “But there are still implications for us in terms of what we need to do to not be in their situation,” Baxter said. “A key factor is that they’re going into waning immunity right now as they were vaccinated earlier compared to us. It does make it clear how important it will be to get booster shots into people.” Though there are still new cases emerging each day in some Australian jurisdictions, reopening in states such as NSW and Victoria still occurred at higher vaccination rates and lower daily case numbers than in many other countries, which putsthem in a better position. How important is getting a booster shot and increasing overall vaccination? The federal health minister Greg Hunt has urged everyone eligible to get their booster shot, but at the same time the third shot will not be required to be considered fully vaccinated. Baxter said this advice may change. “I would say the Australian government are going to move towards requiring a booster,” Baxter said. “It may take them a while to get there, but I don’t think they’ll have a huge impact if they push that in Australia right now, just because so few people are due for it at this point. We need everyone boosted if we want to control this, but we have a bit of time to get there.” A higher proportion of Australians will also be eligible for vaccination if the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation [Atagi] recommends vaccination among 5 to 11-year-olds. Atagi is waiting for more data from the United States about the effect of the vaccine on children before making recommendations to government, with that data due in December. While a combination of cold weather, lower vaccine coverage in some countries and the dominance of the Delta variant have accelerated spread in some countries, by the time Australia enters into winter next year, the hope is much of the population will have been administered booster shots, and children from five years old will also be at least partially immunised. Few countries have started vaccinating those under 11 as they head into winter. Is vaccination enough? It will take more than high vaccination rates to prevent hospitalisations and deaths in Australia at levels that hurt the health system in future, Baxter said. “People in Australia really have done a fantastic job getting vaccinated, and I know we’d all like to think that is all we need to do,” she said. “But if cases do start to rise and we are asked to wear masks indoors again, if we do that early enough, that potentially could stop things from getting worse. “I know it looks like we’re always going to have 1,000 cases per day and that we’re just going to live with that, but it’s not how these types of infectious diseases work. They’re epidemic diseases. So they spike then come down, and then spike and come down again. There’s always a threat that you’re going to overwhelm the healthcare system if the spike goes high enough when you have an outbreak. You’re just better off pre-empting this as cases first start to rise by telling people to wear masks or have some distance requirements. “This will stop us from getting to the point of locking down a city or jurisdiction. That’s the hard lesson they’re learning in Europe right now that we need to notice.”One of only two remaining populations of an “ecosystem engineer” truffle-eating marsupial found in Queensland is much smaller than originally thought and could be declining further, according to new research. Scientists studying northern bettongs on the Mount Carbine Tableland in north-eastern Queensland have estimated the number of animals in that location is fewer than 50, sparking concerns about the viability of that population, even in the short term. Northern bettongs have suffered enormous declines since European colonisation and are among the Australian species at high risk of extinction. They live in eucalypt forest on the fringe of rainforest in the wet tropics world heritage area and have a diet that consists heavily of truffles. The 30cm-tall marsupials are sometimes referred to as “ecosystem engineers” because of the important role they play in dispersing fungi when they dig in the soil for food. Northern bettongs are found in only two locations, the first in Lamb Range in the Cairns region, where the population has been studied for about 20 years and numbers between 700 and 1,000. The second, the Mount Carbine Tableland population in the Mount Lewis national park, has been less studied. Researchers working with the Australian Wildlife Conservancy, the Western Yalanji Aboriginal Corporation and the Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service have been monitoring the Mount Carbine Tableland population since 2017. They used cameras, live-trapping and GPS collars to track numbers and how the animals were moving through the habitat. Manuela Fischer, a wildlife ecologist with the Australian Wildlife Conservancy, said prior to the surveys it was assumed the population in that area numbered up to 1,000. But after completing surveys every six months for the past four years, she said the reality appeared very different. “We’ve found that there may be as few as 50 animals left in that area which is much smaller than anticipated,” she said. “It’s a very small population and definitely on the brink of extinction.” Fischer said researchers found the animals in that area had a lower body mass index than the animals in Lamb Range, where almost every female bettong captured during survey work was carrying pouch young. “In Mount Lewis, it’s only 50-60% of the females, which is very concerning,” she said. Fischer said the low numbers and geographic isolation meant urgent work was needed to try to boost the population. Northern bettongs face multiple threats including from weeds, particularly lantana, and feral cattle and pigs that overgraze and dig, causing damage to their habitat. Pigs also dig for truffles meaning the bettongs face competition for shelter and food. The damage to their habitat puts them at further risk of predation by feral cats. Other threats include a lack of active fire management. Fischer said fire management regimes were essential for improving the structure of habitat and could help tackle problems such as lantana. Since the surveys, a fence has been built to block cattle from entering the area the bettongs are known to occupy and there has recently been a prescribed burn to enhance the habitat. “The next step is to muster the cattle out of the area and continue the ongoing fire and weed management strategies to improve the suitability of the Northern Bettong habitat,” said Richard Grogan, the chair of the Western Yalanji Aboriginal Corporation. A predator-free haven is being built at another location at the Mount Zero-Taravale Wildlife Sanctuary. This may be used in future as a breeding site for animals translocated from the Lamb Range population. Animals could then later be released to try to build the genetic diversity of the Mount Carbine Tableland population. “As specialist fungivores which eat and disperse truffles, northern bettongs play an essential role in maintaining the forest’s health,” Fischer said. “Losing them would not only be a tragedy in itself, it would also have ripple effects across the wider ecosystem.”Low-income Australians are completely priced out of the rental market, with housing affordability worse than pre-pandemic levels in some areas, and Hobart is now the least affordable city for renters, an analysis has found. The annual Rental Affordability Index (RAI) for 2021, released on Wednesday, shows while household incomes in Tasmania are significantly lower than the national average, rents are only marginally lower than on the mainland and the gap has been widening over the past four years. Rapid rises since 2020 have in the last financial year made the Tasmanian capital the most unaffordable it has ever been. For a single person on a jobseeker payment, all metropolitan and regional areas are severely or extremely unaffordable, the report found. The RAI examines national rental bond data against the average incomes of different types of renting households. Rental stress is defined as housing costs exceeding 30% of a household’s gross income, with 38%-60% representing severe unaffordability and 60% or more indicating extreme unaffordability. A single person solely reliant on jobseeker payments and rental assistance would require an income nearly triple the current level of about $19,802 per annum to move into the “acceptable” affordability category, in which only 20%-25% of household income went on rent. The situation is similar for single-pensioner households seeking to rent a one-bedroom dwelling, with moderate to extreme unaffordability throughout the country, including in regional areas. Even a single person on a full-time hospitality income of approximately $59,344 a year was destined for moderate to severe rental stress if they were working in the major capital cities, especially Canberra and Greater Sydney. Adrian Pisarski, executive officer of advocacy organisation National Shelter, said there was “nothing affordable for any low income group” across the country and the lack of affordable housing in regional areas was concerning. “There’s effectively nothing available right up and down the east coast of Australia for people even on an average income in those regions,” said Pisarski, whose organisation produced the RAI report with SGS Economics and Planning, the Brotherhood of St Laurence and Beyond Bank Australia. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Rents in Sydney and Melbourne have shifted unevenly, with the inner city becoming more affordable while the outer suburbs became more expensive. That uneven adjustment can be traced to the exodus of international students and migrant workers from the city when Covid hit, as inner-city households shifted to larger houses with more space to work from home – a pattern seen across the cities. The relatively stable situation for renters with average incomes masked “a really nasty and growing problem for people on low incomes”, Pisarski said. “Homeowners have had relief through low interest rates which have made repayments sustainable for those that have mortgages, but renters never get any relief at all. Rents keep going up and unaffordability gets worse.” Melinda*, 63, lives in a regional town on the eastern seaboard. (Guardian Australia has chosen to use a pseudonym for her due to the precariousness of her situation.) Melinda receives the Newstart allowance, which she needs to survive despite being a working artist. She has lived with the trust and tacit approval of her landlord for seven years in commercially zoned premises that she also uses as a studio and workshop space. It is the only place in town she can afford – she got it cheap thanks to the building having sustained storm damage – and she spends 70% of her Newstart allowance on rent. “Rents are absolutely insane, especially in this area,” Melinda told Guardian Australia. “I came here because the rent was cheaper, but that’s changing. Even if you’re working I don’t know how people afford it.” There is no bathroom or shower in the building, only the shared office toilets. Because she does not have a residentially zoned address, she cannot vote, claim rental assistance from Centrelink or get a no-interest loan from a social service provider. Prior to moving into the studio, Melinda spent 18 months living in her car. She counted herself lucky, she said. “The sacrifices we’re willing to make to retain our autonomy! If I didn’t have this place, I’d be back living in my car. And that was horrendous. It’s a horrible way to live.” Melinda’s story is not unique, Pisarski said. “We’ve seen an acceleration of older people’s homelessness in the last few census, but I suspect this is really biting much harder now,” Pisarski said. “Our whole pension system is based on the idea that you own your own home. But if you have to rent and you’re paying 60% of your pension just to rent – which is common – it just doesn’t leave you with enough money to live on. Especially at that point in your life when your health is deteriorating.” National Shelter is calling for governments to replenish the national supply of social housing stock. “People who want to buy a house rent for as low as they can to build a deposit. That puts pressure right through the rental market and pushes lower income households out of affordable housing,” Pisarski said. “Having a sufficient supply of social housing helps the overall housing market. It takes pressure out of the rental market but it takes it out of ownership as well. Every part of this is connected.”Households now face a reduction in spending power, unless after-tax wage increases match accelerating price rises. In Australia, the September 2021 quarter consumer price index rose 0.8%, or 3% over the year. In the US, the corresponding measure has reached 6.2%, the highest in nearly 30 years. Official figures probably understate the true extent of cost-of-living increases. Having underestimated inflationary pressures, central banking “soul searching’’ has yielded an emollient oxymoron: “longer-lasting transitory factors’’. Errant hobgoblins within nebulous supply chains are to blame. But there are three factors, two of which pre-date the pandemic, whose effects are overlooked. First, higher prices reflect Covid’s long economic shadow, especially debt incurred to prevent economic collapse. In 2020, global government debt increased by 13% of gross domestic product to a new record of 97%. In advanced economies, it rose by 16% to 120% of GDP. With government spending running above tax revenues for the foreseeable future, debt levels will increase further. Corporate debt in advanced economies was 102% of GDP at the end of March 2021, compared with 92% before the pandemic. Much of the borrowing was to cover lost revenue due to lockdowns and border closures. These debts will have to be paid for in higher taxes, where incurred by governments, or income, in the case of businesses. This will flow through into prices. Businesses have to repay hidden crisis liabilities, such as deferred rents, debt payments or assistance. Some industries, such as travel, granted credits to avoid cash refunds. Providing the service will result in costs but no new revenue. Restarting operations as well as meeting post-Covid-19 occupational health and safety requirements will require new expenditure. Firms will price to recover these pandemic losses and higher operating costs. Slow return of mobility will affect revenues for businesses, such as tourism and educational exports, as well as labour costs. Australia faces workforce shortages. The absence of about 300,000 holiday visa workers and international students is hampering agriculture and hospitality. A shortfall of skilled foreign workers affects major infrastructure projects central to the recovery. Higher wages and incentives may be needed to attract and retain staff. Australia faces higher transportation costs due to freight capacity constraints, partly driven by a shortage of seafarers from developing countries, where vaccination rates lag. This is one economic side-effect of global vaccine inequity. Expansive government spending, low rates and central bank largesse (purchases of government debt) have driven up property prices, which feeds into housing costs and rents. Pornographic real estate and share prices have boosted wealth, encouraging some older workers to accelerate retirement plans exacerbating labour market pressures. Second, the low inflation of recent decades was influenced by global trade, with its emphasis on cheap production in low-cost locations, such as China. Over recent years, rising global power competition, especially Sino-American wrangling, has led to trade barriers and sanctions which retard cross-border commerce and access to technologies and finance. This affects supplies of critical components, such as semiconductors and raw materials, creating shortages. The pandemic-induced emphasis on national control over strategic supplies and products exacerbates this trend. The US wants to secure crucial supply chains for semiconductors, batteries, rare-earth elements and vital pharmaceutical ingredients, on grounds of national security and ensuring that jobs and production remain in America. The required industrial reshoring may result in less-efficient production driving a structural rise in costs. Third, the inflationary effects of environmental factors and resource scarcity are largely ignored. Frequent extreme weather events, associated disruption of economic activity and damage to facilities is expensive. Commercial insurance availability and cost is increasingly problematic. Looming food and water shortages also affect price levels. The poorly thought through energy transition, with underinvestment in traditional and new energy infrastructure, may mean persistent high energy prices. Carbon taxes, levies on carbon-intensive imports and compliance with greenhouse gas reduction targets will add to costs. Perversely, hoarding of commodities as a hedge against inflation creates further price spirals. None of the identified factors are transient. Even Covid-19, considered temporary, may become endemic. The likelihood of substantial ongoing health costs (vaccinations or treatment) and intermittent interruptions to activity have not disappeared, as the recent resurgence in Europe shows. Former German central bank president Karl Otto Pohl compared inflation to toothpaste; once out of the tube, it is difficult to put back. The problem is complicated by the limited policy tools available to deal with inflation. Lower interest rates or printing money can’t eliminate the virus to restore mobility, reverse trade barriers, create commodities or reduce weather extremes. As US president Joe Biden’s waning popularity shows, hip-pocket issues and economic uncertainty are important to electoral fortunes. Facing an election, Australian politicians have taken note, each side bloviating as superior guarantors of stable prices. • This article was amended on 25 November 2021 to replace “seamen” with “seafarers” to reflect our style guidance. • Satyajit Das is a financier and author whose latest books include A Banquet of Consequences – Reloaded (March 2021) and Fortune’s Fool: Australia’s Choices (due for release in March 2022)For his new book, HG Nelson wrote about fairytales: specifically, those of a sporting nature. The Fairytale: A Real and Imagined History of Australian Sport, released last month, explores the idea that all great sporting moments are something of a fairytale. Because, as HG tells it, “only one horse can win the Melbourne Cup, only 22 players can win the AFL flag, only 17 players can win the rugby league. It’s not available to everybody.” But The Fairytale also looks at ruthless competitions of a different kind: reality TV, or “the fairytale that we can all win Masterchef”. “It is a fairytale, because you cannot imagine somebody actually progressing through all the stages to get to the place they don’t want to go to: elimination, or whatever it is,” HG explains through his trademark wheezing laughter. “Most of this is implausible rubbish. It’s doctored by the producers to tease out some sort of clickbait or faux drama. It’s just such a great fairytale.” That having said, HG adds, “I could watch Matt Preston shove a fork in his mouth for hours because he’s just brilliant. Cravat and fork, you don’t need anything more. That is a show.” HG also discusses some of the sporting careers of our political leaders, including John Howard’s attempts at cricket. The ball disastrously bowled by the then PM during a 2005 trip to Pakistan – an image still seared in the minds of many Australians – is the item HG claims he most regrets losing. Of course, as with all things Roy and HG, the truth of how corporeal HG’s ownership of said ball ever was is up to the audience. “The idea here, as with the book, is that you have to make up your own mind,” he says. Here, HG (not Greig Pickhaver, the man behind the character) tells us about that legendary ball, in an in-character take on our Three Things column. Spinning tall tales like this is all in a day’s work for one half of the long-time Australian comedy duo, who, now in his 70s, does not consider himself anywhere close to retired. “I’ll tell you what: write a book, start publicising a book, start reading a book for an audio book, then start answering questions you’ve never thought about, like, ‘what’s the thing you most regret losing?’ I consider myself flat out at work.” What I’d save from my house in a fire As a lot of people know, the great Australian icon Rooting King lives in Rooting King Lodge, which is in Lithgow. Rooting King is a well-established racehorse with a string of great victories over many, many years and if only authorities would still let him run in the Melbourne Cup, I’m sure he’d quid himself well. Now, Rooting King Lodge backs onto scrub in the Lithgow area. And the Lithgow area is prone to fires. And we are, as a community there, worried that Rooting King Lodge may go up in flames and obviously the worst could happen. Recently, the army let off a few live rounds in the area and started a fire, and then there was the famous fire that took out the Zig Zag railway. So it’s not immune to fire; this is a serious threat in the area and we’ve had to train all the staff at Rooting King Lodge, including myself and Rampaging Roy, in fire drills. We’ve had to put in sprinkler systems. But we’re not completely convinced that with these elevated temperatures that we’re seeing in fires now, we’ve done enough. So we guard against the fear every day that a wisp of smoke will curl above Rooting King Lodge and we’ll have to make a dash to rescue the King. It’s a very big and concerning issue, because it would be un-Australian to let the King go. My most useful object Here, I’ve got an idea of an object, and it’s the pencil. I notice the prime minister used the biro to underline passages in a book by Bill Gates which changed his mind about climate change. Now, that could be the most important pencil in the history of Australia. And get this, in New South Wales at the moment, the pencil is used as a measure of what is a tree. As you may or may not know, there was a very ambitious program of planting trees, until the Berejiklian government realised it was going to cost a lot of money and reduced the size of a tree to a big biro, which meant they could plant a lot of them. And then completely ignore them with follow-up watering, etc. The pencil is also very good for putting a line through dud ideas and creating good ideas, and drawing cartoons, obviously. It’s very old school but it does have a modern component: things like the Apple Pencil, which I understand is causing havoc in the artistic world as we speak. The item I most regret losing This is a bit of Australian history I’ve lost here. I don’t know how it happened, but can I blame a Marie Kondo clean-up emergency for losing it? In 2005, there was a very bad earthquake in the north of Pakistan. Now, the Australian Defence Force sent a medical team to help with the rescue operations and as luck would have it, the PM John Howard was at a loose end and went along. He loved getting into a green and gold tracksuit and representing Australia, but also loved cricket. One afternoon, they decide to have a cricket match. But there weren’t professional bats and stumps and so on as we have in Australia; it was very much like how we might play in backyard cricket, where you make do with what you’ve got. So the ball was a heap of local rubbish, which might have been old surgical gloves and plastic bags and bits of tubing, tied together with a lot of rubber bands. That, in this area of the world, is a very common thing. Anyway, this proved to be a handful for the PM when he opened the bowling from the Everest end. He has a terrific action when it comes to approaching the stumps, but because of the nature of the ball, he couldn’t get a grip on it and it just goes all over the place. He could hardly get it past his toes. He couldn’t ask any questions of the Pakistani upper order or put the ball in the corridor of uncertainty, or anything like that. All he could do was try again. And so this over is etched in the mind of a lot of cricket lovers, and political people who had nothing to do with cricket – this implausible sight of seeing John Howard trying to bowl a ball that was largely rubbish tied together with rubber bands. Now, obviously, the PM’s office knew my interest in cricket and knew Roy’s interest in cricket, having played at the highest level, and one thing led to another. Anyway, I end up with the thing. It comes to my place and I think, ooh, I’m guarding a bit of a historical artefact here. It really needs to be put into a museum. I had tried to make it available to Brendan Nelson when he was in charge of the War Memorial; I thought it would have been a great item to go in the foyer to demonstrate we’re not just about shooting people and killing people, we also live for cricket. Anyway, he turned it down. He said, “I don’t want any of that rubbish in my war memorial.” I said OK, fair enough, and put it on the shelf at home. But of course, time goes on and I think, what am I saving this rubbish for? Inspired by Marie Kondo, I tidy up the joint and all of a sudden I’ve thrown it out. Afterwards I went out to the tip where I knew the council dumped their rubbish, asked the people and they looked at me blankly. “What do you want to do HG, you want to come in here and dig it up and find a bundle of rubbish in the rubbish? Why don’t you take some of the rubbish off the top and make your own ball?” I said I can’t do that; people would not allow me to do that. Australian cricket would not allow me to do that. So this is the item I regret losing the most.Don’t be fooled by the sweet promotional image: Filippo Meneghetti’s 2019 debut feature film Two of Us is no gentle twilight-years romance. Both a tender depiction of a relationship pushed to its limits and an edge-of-your-seat domestic thriller, Two of Us gives the classic coming-out narrative a darker edge, without succumbing to the tired tropes of queer tragedy. Neighbours and longtime secret lovers Nina (Barbara Sukowa) and Mado (Martine Chevallier) have spent the last few decades living blissfully between their top-floor flats in Montpellier in the south of France, but now they’re ready to sell up and escape to Rome together. Before they can set off, widowed Mado must come clean to her two adult children Anne (Léa Drucker) and Frédéric (Jérôme Varanfrain) about her relationship with Nina, which started well before the death of her abusive late husband. After letting another opportunity to come out slide by, tensions between Mado and Nina come to a head, culminating in a heated exchange on the street. A frustrated Nina throws up her hands and shouts that nobody cares about “a couple of old lesbians!” But Mado cares. Meneghetti skilfully sidesteps any trite moralising about the correct way to come out and be proud in favour of something more nuanced. Mado must be the kind, widowed grandmother, devoted to her family and the memory of her late husband, while also trying to keep up with free-spirited Nina’s boundless enthusiasm for their shared future. Nina too has a lot to lose, a fact made abundantly clear when Mado suffers a sudden stroke and the pair are forced apart. What makes Two of Us so unnerving is the speed at which Nina and Mado’s lives are turned upside down. Sukowa is immensely compelling in the film’s second half when she allows herself to fully spiral out of control. Brushed off as nothing more than a friendly neighbour, an increasingly desperate Nina is pushed to extremes: shady payoffs, shouting matches, covert midnight missions to Mado’s flat. There’s a distinct Hitchcockian air to these scenes. The moments of tension are lightened with unexpected humour, as when Anne patronisingly gives Nina a kitten in an attempt to create some distance between her mother and this overbearing neighbour. Nina, of course, promptly ignores the kitten in a delightful rejection of the cat lady stereotype. Two of Us offers a delicate critique of the way society, including well-meaning adult children, tends to treat elderly people. After her stroke, conversations happen around Mado, not with her. In one poignant scene, she sits alone at the dinner table while her children quietly argue behind her. Staring morosely into the middle distance, Chevallier shows off her deft skill for portraying a complex blend of emotions without saying a word. The film slots neatly into a collection of French dramas, including Michael Haneke’s 2012 Oscar-winner Amour, that spotlight the narratives of ageing characters usually relegated to the sidelines. But Two of Us goes a little further. Portrayals of mature queer love are rare; rarer still are those that show older women continuing to enjoy a satisfying sex life. It’s refreshing to see two people in their 70s still struggling to keep their hands off each other. The chemistry between Nina and Mado crackles in the moments when they are alone in the oasis of Mado’s flat; closeups frame their adoring looks, filled with tenderness and desire, as they waltz around the living room to the soaring vocals of Betty Curtis’s Italian-language version of the very apt I Will Follow Him. Sukowa and Chevallier make a thoroughly believable couple, the frisson of passion between them supplemented by their easy physical intimacy. I won’t spoil anything but Two of Us doesn’t offer an unrealistic saving grace in its final act. There are no cars flying into the sunset, nor any medical miracles. Yet as Nina and Mado hold each other close and sway around the room, one thing is clear – love, it seems, really can conquer all.French fishers are set to take action within days, including blocking road and sea freight bound for the UK through Calais and other Channel ports, as a months-long dispute over licences to operate in British waters intensifies. French media reported on Tuesday that with talks between the two governments and the European Commission over post-Brexit fishing rights seemingly deadlocked, angry fishers in northern France would decide on Thursday what steps to take. France says the UK has unjustly denied permits to about 150 French boats, while Britain insists it is entitled to demand whatever evidence it chooses to show that French vessels have a track record of operating in the UK’s coastal waters. Olivier Leprêtre, the president of the organisation that represents fishers’ interests in northern France, said crews from boats operating along the Atlantic coast, in the Channel and the North Sea, from Brest to Dunkirk, would take part. There would be no wholesale blockade of French ports, Leprêtre told a meeting of fishers in Boulogne-sur-Mer. “We are aiming more to target exports, because we don’t want to harm the French economy,” he said. “We want to affect the UK’s economy. We will do this properly – and we will do it.” Leprêtre added: “The poor British are already lacking some products since Brexit, and unfortunately they’re about to be lacking a few more … Britain wants access to the European market? They should give us the licences. We’ve been waiting 11 months.” He said the aim of the actions would be to “insist that the European Commission takes its responsibilities seriously and ensures the Brexit deal is respected”, and also to “warn Boris Johnson that his fishers have access to the EU market, so we should have access to British waters”. Fishers in Boulogne-sur-Mer told La Voix du Nord newspaper that the final details of the action would be worked out on Thursday, with the campaign due to start on Friday or possibly Monday. “All cross-Channel traffic and all freight [to the UK] will be blocked,” one fisher said. French fishers have previously taken matters into their own hands in the dispute. They blocked trucks carrying fish from British waters to processing centres in France in April and subsequently blockaded St Helier harbour in Jersey in May. France’s maritime minister, Annick Girardin, and the president, Emmanuel Macron, reassured French fishers on Sunday that they would not be abandoned, with Macron personally talking for 15 minutes to Leprêtre by telephone. “He told me that under no circumstances would he let this matter of the missing permits drop, and that he would never give up on French fishers,” Leprêtre said on Sunday. “The fact that he called me personally I think shows how much importance he attaches to this.” Girardin also said she would “continue the battle” with London. “We are fighting every day for these permits and we will not yield an inch. The British interpretation of our applications is unacceptable and is not a fair response to French goodwill.” Girardin, who said roughly 80% of France’s permit applications had been resolved, had previously sparked concerns of a retreat by the government after announcing a budget of €40m-60m (£34m-51m) for eventual compensation claims and to help fishers who wanted to leave the sector set up new businesses. The French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, also said on Sunday the British were “engaging in exaggerated and exasperating nitpicking” over the permits, calling for “firm EU action” to ensure the Brexit accords were respected. The Europe minister, Clément Beaune, was in Brussels on Monday for meetings on the issue.If you had asked me pre-pandemic if I would ever touch psychedelics, I would have said absolutely not. The speed of my brain is literally my only skill. As a standup comedian and podcaster, I can walk out on stage with absolutely nothing in my head and riff with an audience for an hour if I need to – which I know seems like a superpower to others – while ordinary powers, such as the ability to do my laundry every week, elude me. I was recently diagnosed with ADHD – first in the green room by other comedians, then by a doctor. It seems that a lot of us comics have it. I guess it’s a job you can do if you are not neurotypical, because you see the world from an unusual angle and there is very little admin. I often see comics on Facebook posting: “I’ve just got Peckham in my diary for tonight; am I meant to be doing a gig for anyone there?” I am sure there are many people with ADHD who have trained themselves to be great in office environments, but I suspect it’s too late for me, so I really need to hold on to that talk-fast-and-mind-map skill. That is why at music festivals I always said no to anything that might change my brain chemistry. I had resigned myself to the fact that I would never see the face of God in a cloud, or myself as a baby cat on the ocean floor. So, on one level, I was genuinely surprised to find myself consuming a cup of magic truffles at an entirely legal therapeutic retreat in Amsterdam. (These are a lot like magic mushrooms, but grow beneath the ground, rather than above.) At the same time, somehow it felt inevitable. The safe, repetitive domesticity of lockdown had made me face my demons and seek therapy, but it had also made me hungry for sensation and risk. A friend had phoned me and told me that she had taken a trip to the desert and done ayahuasca. She said it had healed so many of her traumatised wounds with visionary reconciliations and not slowed down her speedy, creative brain at all. She said I should do it – but I had to wait till I “got the call”. I said: “Babe, you are literally calling me now – this is the call.” Her thinking was that it couldn’t be a phone call – it had to be more spiritual than that. I started looking for signs. They are there if you Google “retreats in Amsterdam”. You can get the Eurostar there now, you know. But ayahuasca wasn’t on the cards for me. Lars, the shaman at the retreat that I settled for, said it was probably better to do truffles if you’ve have never done any psychedelics at all. He handed me a little bowl of truffles and told me to eat them all, then to lie down in the next room as soon as I needed to. I assumed I would be in a field staring at trees, but this is a therapeutic dose under supervision. You can’t walk or talk. Soon I was in a room alone under a duvet cover covered in dancing flowers. The wardrobe in the corner was animated like something out of Beauty and the Beast. I thought I would close my eyes to get away from it for a minute, but that made the visions much more intense. I saw the whole of the 60s in an hour. I understood every album cover I had ever seen. Not long after, I was in the womb and then the afterlife. It didn’t feel scary at all – it was like I had gone back to the ground and become part of the energy of the world. Still alive, but rested, without the constant demands of email. I saw people in my life in new and revelatory ways, as well as the first act of feminism in the rebellion of the Garden of Eden. When Lars checked on me, I said: “I don’t know if you’re real or not, but this is how religions are started, isn’t it?” He said: “Yes.” I came out of it after four hours. My brain was as fast as ever, but at some kind of new and unusual peace. My therapist in New York reassures me that much research is going on around the world into the benefits of these natural substances for trauma sufferers. Now, I have a gig in Peckham tonight. Does anyone know where it is? • Deborah Frances-White is a comedian, writer and the host of the podcast The Guilty Feminist. Arwa Mahdawi is awayName: Fit fiftysomethings. Age: 50-59. Appearance: Male, attractive. Are you trying to illustrate some sort of paradox? Not at all. Fiftysomething men are the sex symbols of the moment. Have you met my dad? No, I haven’t. I didn’t think so. Why, what’s wrong with your dad? Nothing in particular. He’s just middle-aged, tired, boring and very much not of the moment. That’s the whole point. According to a recent Telegraph article, in these uncertain times, women are attracted to men who represent “all things dependable, life-enhancing and trouble-free”. And old? I don’t set the trends, I just amplify them. Can you name me a single example of a fiftysomething man who embodies this ideal? Paul Rudd. He’s 52, you know. Paul Rudd is not an everyman. Paul Rudd is an exceptionally good-looking and eerily well-preserved actor with superhero abs. And he was just voted sexiest man alive by People magazine. If anything, that disqualifies him further. He doesn’t count. Name another. How about Barack Obama? Wait, didn’t he turn 60 in August? Yes, all right. How about Will Smith, David Morrissey and Gareth Southgate? So you’re talking about the sort of man who would never leave his wife. Exactly! And then dreaming he leaves his wife for you. Not necessarily. She could leave him! Actually, I’m beginning to see where you’re heading with this particular template. You’ve got it: kind, grown up, a little goofy – but still with a certain innate dignity – and sexy in a not-too-sexy way. You’re trying to perpetuate the outdated Hollywood myth that men retain their attractiveness well into middle age, while women don’t. Honestly, this isn’t about Cary Grant and George Clooney. It’s about the ordinary, middle-aged family guy and his powerful, newfound allure. I have a picture of my dad in cycling shorts that will change your mind about all this stuff. This is supposed to be an encouraging trend – it’s about prizing steadiness and affability over fleeting, temperamental passion. It’s about celebrating adulthood. What about model railways? Are model railways involved? The trains are optional, but very much on the table. Do say: “When I suggested we retire early, I was actually talking about taking early retirement, but if I can find my pills we can do the other thing, too.” Don’t say: “But enough about my routine colonoscopy. How was your day, darling?”The financier and sex trafficker Jeffrey Epstein told a psychologist he was too much of “a coward” to ever kill himself, two weeks before he was found dead in his jail cell in a death that was ruled a suicide. The claim was contained in a detailed analysis of Epstein’s final days compiled from more than 2,000 pages of never-before-seen documents and jail records obtained under freedom of information laws and published by the New York Times on Tuesday. Epstein hanged himself at the Metropolitan correctional center in Manhattan in August 2019, while awaiting trial on new charges of trafficking teenage girls. According to the Times, he attempted suicide one month earlier. But the records reveal that Epstein told a jail psychologist “I have no interest in killing myself”, claimed he was living “a wonderful life” despite his incarceration, and said he was “a coward” who could not stand pain. “I would never do that to myself,” Epstein said. Conspiracy theories that Epstein was killed have swirled in the more than two years since his death. FBI and justice department investigations have not concluded. The Times investigation, however, paints a picture of a master manipulator creating “illusions until the very end, deceiving correctional officers, counselors and specially trained inmates assigned to monitor him around the clock”. The wealthy one-time associate of powerful people including Bill Clinton and Donald Trump repeatedly assured those around him he had plenty to live for while also hinting at despair, according to the documents, which cover the last 36 days of his life. The act was so convincing to jail and federal officials, the newspaper reported, that complacency set in and mistakes were made, allowing Epstein to kill himself despite being considered a suicide risk. On the night he died, the Times reported, Epstein told warders he wanted to call his mother. In fact she was long dead and he instead called his girlfriend. Staff allowed him to remain alone in his cell that night, despite an explicit order to assign a cellmate. The documents reveal more details of Epstein’s final weeks, including day-to-day routines that involved lengthy meetings in the jail’s conference center with his lawyers, and complaints about living conditions. The meetings, the Times said, allowed Epstein to avoid his “dank and dirty” cell, which he complained had a noisy toilet. He did not like wearing his orange jumpsuit, which he said led to him to being treated as “a bad guy”. He had trouble sleeping and suffered from numbness in his right arm. Despite those issues, the report says, Epstein talked openly with psychologists and inmates and “spoke of his interest in physics and mathematics and offered tidbits of investment advice”. Epstein also “reminisced about socialising with celebrities”, the Times said. It also said prison notes do not name any such famous associates. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgIt was encouraging to read that housework is a positive activity for the elderly (Report, 22 November). As I approach 78, I tackle all the ironing and share the cleaning with my 77-year-old wife. Next, your reporter should examine the value of crown green bowls. I took this up in my 60s and regretted not doing so earlier. This excellent activity, which costs very little, provides so much exercise and valuable social interaction, but clubs are losing members, possibly due to the absence of media coverage. David Erving Huddersfield, West Yorkshire • When I was a medical examiner for the Department for Work and Pensions, I wrote: “This woman is capable of light housework.” The spellchecker then altered it to “… is capable of lighthouse work”. Giles Youngs Drinkstone, Suffolk • Re your article (‘Woke’ sneers could sap young people’s drive for change, says top headteacher, 22 November), woke is just modern slang for awareness of oppression and wanting to put it right. As an 80-year-old, I am proud that for most of my life I have been “woke”, and I regard the un-woke as wantonly unaware. Michael McLoughlin Wallington, London • Re people who use the audio description service so they can enjoy TV while running or cycling (Letters, 21 November), should someone tell them about radio? Simon Beavington-Penney Corsham, Wiltshire • If all new buildings must have electric vehicle charge points (Report, 21 November), why don’t they have to have solar panels too? Alice Renton Lewes, East Sussex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In his article (Neoliberalism wrecked our chance to fix the climate crisis – and leftwing statements of faith have changed nothing, 17 November), Jeff Sparrow repeats Naomi Klein’s simplistic claim that, in Losing Earth, I “attribute” the missed opportunity on climate change during the critical decade between 1979 and 1989 to “human nature”. Anyone who reads Losing Earth will see that I do no such thing. The failure can be attributed to various causes. Among them are: the fecklessness of bureaucrats tasked with developing legislative solutions to a global problem; a generation of influential US scientists’ blind faith in American exceptionalism; the anti-environmental blitzkrieg launched by the Reagan administration on taking office; the failure of journalists, scientists and policymakers to explain the severity of the threat to a disinterested public; the refusal by the major environmental organisations to embrace climate change as a cause worthy of their attention; the machinations of George HW Bush’s chief of staff, John Sununu; and ultimately the mobilisation of the oil and gas industry around a massive disinformation campaign, the origin story of which I reported for the first time. Humanity’s general reluctance to take urgent, dramatic action to counteract long-term threats offers a serious challenge to the passage of major climate policy, but not a decisive one. The story is far more complex, fascinating and tragic than that. It doesn’t serve anybody to condense history into talking points for the purpose of hollow sloganeering. When “neoliberalism” is the answer to everything, it’s the answer to nothing. Nathaniel Rich New Orleans, Louisiana, United StatesConsidering that the width of the Channel does not change, it is surprising how often British politicians seem surprised by the proximity of France. Currently, Priti Patel is enraged by the volume of people making the crossing in small boats. Boris Johnson is frustrated by Patel’s inability to stop the traffic. Tory MPs who told constituents that Brexit had secured the nation’s perimeter are alarmed to find that their boast was premature. Britain alone cannot deal with migrations that are launched from Calais. The home secretary and the prime minister tried blaming French authorities for slack policing, but then realised the folly of antagonising a government whose help they badly need. The problem is that borders have two sides and there are limits to what can be achieved by “taking back control” of just one of them. Also, Brexit ideologues were confused about water. They saw the ocean west of Britain as a maritime motorway for shipping goods and the much smaller sea on its south-eastern flank as a moat to keep out people. In 2018, Dominic Raab stunned a conference auditorium with the admission that he “hadn’t quite understood the full extent” of UK economic reliance on Dover-Calais trade. Managing EU frontiers post-Brexit was always bound to be tricky. It is harder when relations with Paris are tetchy. Migration is just one point of tension. Fisheries access is another. Emmanuel Macron was affronted by his country’s exclusion from the recent UK-Australian-US (Aukus) security partnership deal. Downing Street sees the French president as an enemy of Brexit who preaches Anglophobia in Brussels. It is true that Macron takes a hard line against anything that might undermine the single market or chip away at EU solidarity. That is because he recognises the European project as an amplifier of French power. Also, there is a presidential election next year in which the incumbent will face Eurosceptic challengers. He could do without a nuisance neighbour furnishing his rivals with positive anti-Brussels case studies. Ministers talk about Macron’s posturing for a domestic audience with patronising indulgence, as if it is a uniquely foreign practice unknown in straight-talking Britain. Downing Street is reported to be planning a grand rapprochement once next year’s Elysée poll is out of the way. There is talk of a deep strategic partnership, building on the Lancaster House agreement that David Cameron and Nicolas Sarkozy signed in 2010. That is a plausible ambition to the extent that western Europe’s two biggest military powers share long-term security interests that transcend any bickering over cod. Also, defence issues are primarily a nation-state concern, even for the most integrationist EU leaders. The Lancaster House treaties were signed between two EU members. Brexit does not undo the logic of that partnership, but Johnson’s government makes life harder for itself by pretending that its foreign policy with continental capitals and its trading relationship, as mediated through Brussels, are separate things and scarcely related. Lord Frost, Johnson’s Brexit minister, has been explicit on this point, describing a future relationship with the bloc as a patchwork of bilateral deals with member states. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, does not appear to consider European relations part of her job at all (perhaps because Frost has bitten off that portion of the portfolio). Denigration of EU relevance is a requirement of belief in Brexit. To accept that Macron’s pro-EU stance reflects a rational appraisal of his nation’s interests risks admitting that an equivalent dynamic once applied on this side of the Channel. After all, the two countries have so much in common. But that was the remainer argument (albeit one that was poorly articulated in the campaign). So other reasons must be confected as to why relations with France have become so prickly. The leader of the House of Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, suggested that dialogue was uniquely tricky last month because “the French are always grumpy in October, the anniversaries of Trafalgar and Agincourt upset them”. Even if he was not being serious, it says something about the degradation of British political culture that seriousness is not a requirement when cabinet ministers intervene in delicate matters of foreign relations. No one on the French side has felt compelled to raise the Battle of Castillon. The childish compulsion to reference medieval wars, Napoleon and the Third Reich is a way for Brexiters to deny contemporary economic and strategic reality of the European project. There is no need to build an analysis from modern facts or even recent history if the EU’s immutable character and secret agenda are encrypted in events that pre-date the Treaty of Rome. The parochialism that masquerades as historical erudition is a chronic syndrome in Tory Euroscepticism. It is Johnson’s preferred idiom as a propagandist, not least because it excuses him from a duty to engage with detail. But it does not translate into practical government. It nurtures the fiction that Britain can have a foreign policy for old continental powers that avoids engaging with their modern interests as members of the EU. That is the core of the misunderstanding with France, and the relationship will not be fixed until it is resolved. The reality of 21st century Europe cannot be wished away any more than the Channel can be made wider. • Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnistLike Suhaiymah Manzoor-Khan’s grandfather, my parents and grandparents migrated from rural Punjab to work in Bradford’s textile mills (It’s not just cricket. Racism against Yorkshire’s south Asian Muslims has a long history, 21 November). EP Thompson’s classic The Making of the English Working Class charts how those mills were key to the forging of English working-class identity. Feminists have rightly pointed out how Thompson underplays the role of women in his landmark text. And Manzoor-Khan points to how Asian workers make that history more complex. But the point can be pushed further. Manzoor-Khan only mentions Muslims, but Hindus worked alongside Muslims and Sikhs in those selfsame night shifts. And it is good to be reminded of the ties that bind. Those concerned about the white working class often seem more interested in the racial rather than class part of that identity. But in those same mills, people of different colours and creeds worked together and had the same interests in tackling poverty and inequality. Dr Rajiv Prabhakar The Open University • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Thank you, Bruce Ross-Smith, for confirming our view that Royal Mail is not fit for purpose, and for putting our problems into perspective (Letters, 21 November). In the 83 days since 1 September we have received mail on only 10 days. There has not been a delivery of mail to any of the 200-plus people in our apartment building, nor to a neighbouring building on the same road, since 3 November. The types of mail that have been sent to us but not delivered include credit card and other bills, information from the Department for Work and Pensions, activation codes to provide access to financial accounts online, a bowel cancer testing kit sent by the NHS and a publishing contract. We fear that other vital information has failed to reach us. Thanks to Royal Mail’s mistake in wrongly transcribing our address, all redirected mail from a previous address (costing us £78) has been returned to sender. David Needle Canary Wharf, London • It’s not just Oxford that has seen a collapse in Royal Mail’s service. Here in Buckinghamshire, I received a birthday card two weeks after blowing out my candles. And I’m still waiting for my copy of the New Statesman from a fortnight ago. Are shareholders the only ones getting a good service? Rob Skinner Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire • The Royal Mail service around Aylesbury is just as bad as in Oxford. My recent Private Eyes have been delayed by up to eight days. I presume it’s revenge for the Eye’s numerous articles about the Post Office Horizon computer scandal. Geoffrey Terrill Aston Clinton, Buckinghamshire • I’ve been a postman for 43 years, and I’m very sorry to hear of the readers from Oxford who have endured such poor service. Please don’t blame us hard-working posties, who kept going right through the pandemic. Years of not employing anyone and not engaging with the union have come home to roost. Also, the shrinking employment market has not helped. We are doing our best to deliver everything, but there is only so much we can physically do. Stephen Blaney Ashtead, Surrey • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.People in the north of England have every right to feel angry about the railways (Labour attacks ‘Whitehall power grab over Northern rail policy’, 19 November). Here in Oxford there has been a welcome but embarrassing level of investment in the railways, and more is planned. In 2015, the brand new Oxford Parkway station was opened just outside the city, on a new route to central London using mainly existing lines. The track infrastructure around Oxford railway station itself has seen significant investment recently, and last week I attended a briefing on a planned expansion to make the station “fit for a world-class city”. According to Network Rail, the station is almost at full capacity and needs to be increased in size to accommodate planned new services. Yet the through platforms at Manchester Piccadilly were at capacity for years, with dangerous overcrowding. Here we have world-class manufacturing, but then so does the north of England. And we have excellent academic and research facilities, but so do the cities in the northern powerhouse corridor. So what’s the difference? Snobbery. Down here, we are seen as posh. But however prosperous cities such as Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool become, it seems that, for some policymakers at least, it’s grim up north. Tim Treuherz Oxford • Binning plans for the Northern Powerhouse Rail line between Leeds and Manchester and, in the process, sidelining transport for the north, highlights yet again the contempt that Boris Johnson, Rishi Sunak and their colleagues have for the people of the north of England and their political leaders. They are able to treat the north in this way because the region has little real political or financial power. In this sense, current forms of devolution to the north’s sub-regions – in the shape of elected mayors, for instance – simply don’t cut it. Had the north (the north-east, Yorkshire and the Humber, and the north-west) had its own regional government – as part of a Britain reformed as a modern federal state – then other options could have come into play. With the high levels of financial autonomy and control typically associated with regional states, the north could have waved the proverbial two fingers to the Westminster government and opted to fund the rail line itself. Until the north has the autonomy and control that a federal state would provide, the idea of “levelling up” will remain a joke. Prof Jeffrey Henderson Hannah Mitchell Foundation • Your report on the cancellation of the eastern leg of HS2 and the new line between Leeds and Manchester (‘A betrayal of the north’: Tory MPs frustrated at downgraded rail plan, 18 November) makes reference to a Treasury source expressing “surprise at how badly the announcement had been received”. In that one metropolitan utterance lies the most compelling case yet for moving the Treasury to Sheffield, Leeds or Bradford. Were that to happen, the north would suddenly find itself with more cash than it knew what to do with. Glyn Turton Emeritus professor, University of Chester • For some months I have tried to work out the meaning of “northern powerhouse”. I think I now understand – it’s a typical Guardian misprint. It should be “northern poorhouse”. Lyn Summers Lancaster • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.European airlines face a slump in Christmas and early summer travel as the spectre of another wave of lockdowns puts people off booking holidays, Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary has warned. Austria’s decision to impose a third national lockdown from Monday, which could last until 12 December, to curb a surge in coronavirus cases and fatalities, has stoked fears of a wave of tighter travel restrictions being imposed across Europe. “I think we’re in for a fraught period between now and Christmas where it looks like Europe is going to get very nervous again at the worst time of the year when people are making their Christmas travel plans,” he said. “I think it’s inevitable we will undermine confidence between now and Christmas, and that will disrupt Christmas and New Year when they would normally start booking their summer holidays.” There had been a renewed sense of optimism in the aviation industry when the UK government moved to drastically reduce, and then finally scrap, the “red list” of countries, those requiring passengers to quarantine in a hotel for 11 nights, last month. A further boost came with the reopening of transatlantic travel earlier this month, which Luis Gallego, the chief executive of British Airways’ owner IAG described as a “pivotal moment for our industry”. “Up until last weekend, things were going great,” said O’Leary, speaking at an online event. “Volumes were back running at about 100% of our pre-Covid price volumes. It has been disrupted by the Austrian lockdown and there is a renewed concern across Europe about a fourth or fifth wave of Covid.” Austria’s announcement on Friday of the impending national lockdown wiped almost £2bn off the market value of UK airlines and travel-related companies, as investors fearful of further clampdowns in countries such as Germany dumped shares in listed businesses. O’Leary reiterated that it was inevitable that air fares will increase next summer as the European low-cost carrier unveiled its schedule for 2022. Ryanair said it would open 24 new routes next summer, taking its total to more than 500, backed by a seat sale to “make up for the lost summers of 2020 and 2021”. “The opening of these 24 new routes reinforces the airline’s commitment to the UK and the rebuilding of the country’s tourism industry, playing a key role in the recovery of local jobs and the economy,” Ryanair said.The insurer LV= will be taken over by a company based offshore in Jersey if members agree to deal orchestrated by US private equity firm Bain Capital that would see it lose its historic mutual status. Bain has established a Jersey-based company called BCC Blake Bidco Ltd to carry out the takeover, according to correspondence between an independent expert and Gareth Thomas, a Labour MP and shadow minister of international trade. Companies in Jersey and other tax havens are regularly used by private equity firms to take advantage of their 0% corporate tax rate and lower disclosure requirements. It is understood that the new owner of LV= will file UK tax returns and be subject to UK tax. Thomas on Tuesday wrote to the Bain managing director overseeing the deal, Matt Popoli, to raise a series of concerns about the opaque structure. In the letter, seen by the Guardian, he asked if unidentified investors would fund the takeover and who would serve on the board of the new company. LV=, formerly known as Liverpool Victoria, was founded in 1843 to fund burial costs for Liverpool’s poor. In the following 178 years it grew to become one of the UK’s largest insurers, offering life insurance and pensions. It is also one of the last remaining large, open mutuals. LV= announced it was up for sale in June 2020, and in October 2020 it revealed exclusive talks with Bain. LV= argues that it needs external capital to invest in technology upgrades or face being squeezed out by bigger insurers. The proposed takeover – which must be backed by 75% of members – has proven controversial, with criticism from Thomas and some of LV=’s member-customers over what they see as relatively meagre compensation for the loss of mutual status. Bain has committed to keep LV=’s operations at Bournemouth, Exeter and Hitchin. Thomas said: “With all the justified frustration of members about the lack of openness of LV= bosses, it beggars belief that Bain are not explaining who is really behind their plans, where their money is coming from and crucially who will sit on the board of the new private company. “And their decision to base the new firm in Jersey calls into question whether they really intend to retain current levels of staff and all three offices. With half the voting period over why won’t Bain simply spell out who is funding their bid and who will really control it if the demutualisation goes ahead.” Bain’s takeover vehicle was incorporated in December 2020, according to Jersey company records. It is registered at Sir Walter Raleigh House in St Helier, Jersey, an address of Maples Group, a company specialising in offshore fund formation. The address appeared in the Paradise Papers, a trove of leaked documents from Appleby, another offshore law firm. A spokeswoman for Bain Capital said the company would consider the letter and respond in due course. She added that the letter contained unspecified “wrong and misleading assumptions”. LV= declined to comment.The “Glastonbury of birdwatching”, Birdfair, has been scrapped, to the dismay of conservationists across Britain. The annual event, held since 1989, took place at Rutland Water nature reserve and featured talks and fundraising events. Celebrities such as Chris Packham, Bill Oddie and Deborah Meaden were among those the festival attracted. The Leicester and Rutland Wildlife Trust (LRWT), which ran the event, said that the “difficult decision” was made partly because of climate crisis concerns, as Birdfair attracted attendees from around the world. It said: “The current format of Birdfair is heavily influenced by travel and tourism, with exhibitors travelling from 80 different countries to attend. The carbon footprint generated both by the event itself and the activities it promotes does not now fit well with our own strategy towards tackling the climate crisis. The event would need considerable redesign to resolve this.” Various wildlife tourism companies took stands at the event that brought in vital revenue, but some critics have expressed concern about their environmental impact. Other reasons cited include financial risk exacerbated by the pandemic, trampling of the nature reserve and an overall business risk to the wildlife trust. Anthony Biddle, the LRWT chair, said: “We have thought long and hard about all these concerns, and the decision has been an extremely difficult and sad one for all our staff and trustees. But we knew that it was now time to make the future clear, in the interests of the event, and of everyone who is involved in it or supports it. “Although we are bringing our involvement with Birdfair to a close, we are pleased to be able to announce a donation of £15,005 to Birdlife International. This amount is made up of direct donations and auction proceeds in aid of their helmeted hornbill conservation project supported by our virtual Birdfair in 2020. “We hope the legacy of Birdfair may live on in similar events, run by organisations with greater resources than our own.” The event came to mainstream attention in 2019 when it was attended by Carrie Johnson, the wife of the prime minister. She spoke at a panel about her experience seeing puffins, and her opposition to trophy hunting. it was her first speech as the partner of Boris Johnson. At the time, she described her experience birding at RSPB’s Bempton Cliffs. She said: “If [Birdfair] is birdwatching’s Glastonbury then Bempton is like its cathedral – gannets, razorbills, guillemots, all soaring and screeching and diving with the majestic backdrop of those sheer chalk walls.” The cancellation has caused confusion among conservationists, as it was a highlight of their annual calendar. The founder, Tim Appleton, started the event in 1989 and claims he was left in the dark about the decision to scrap it. “They didn’t even have the courtesy to tell me in advance,” he said. “Thankfully RSPB contacted me to warn me of the announcement. “I started and ran Birdfair for 30+ years raising in total £40m+ for global conservation. It’s a very sad day.” Birdfair is not completely dead, however, as the RSPB has decided to take up the mantle and run a series of similar festivals. Rebecca Munro, director of fundraising and communications, said: “We are immensely proud of our involvement in Birdfair, which over the past 32 years has delighted thousands of people who love birds and raised more than £5m for overseas projects run via Birdlife International. “At this point in time, we feel it is very unlikely that Birdfair will take place in 2022 because of the lack of lead time for the organisation of a successful event … Over the coming months we will be speaking to others who love the Birdfair just as much as we do, in order to understand their views on the future of the event.”My friend Rod Caird, who has died aged 73, was a man of many talents – a producer of documentary television; a mentor to many in an industry not renowned for kindness and generosity; a bagpipe player of some distinction; and an active citizen in his community in rural Suffolk. Rod was born in Broughty Ferry, Dundee, to Wilhelmina (nee Kaune) and William Caird, a draper. From Glenalmond college in Perth he went to Queens’ College, Cambridge, where he studied modern and classical Arabic. Just before graduating in 1970 Rod was one of a dozen students, seemingly picked at random, who were arrested following minor disturbances at an anti-fascist demonstration in Cambridge. At the subsequently infamous Garden House trial he was sentenced to 18 months in prison under an arcane piece of 18th-century legislation and in response to hysteria about student radicals in the tabloids. His experience in prison led him to write a book, A Good and Useful Life (1974) – a thoughtful and provocative comment on the prison service’s officially declared purpose to reform and rehabilitate. Trying to get his life back on track after this shock interruption, he became a features editor for the Communist party’s Morning Star newspaper before being talent-spotted by executives at Granada TV in Manchester. Recruited as a sports reporter, despite his candid and entirely accurate admission that he knew nothing about sport, he quickly discovered a talent as a documentary producer at a time when Granada’s output led the field. He proved himself adept at pulling together complicated international co-productions on an extraordinary breadth of issues, including on emerging undercurrents in the Middle East, for which his Sword of Islam documentary (1987) won an International Emmy. When the apparently secure world of regional ITV franchises was dismantled in the 1990s and Granada ceased to exist, he strove to continue as an independent producer, devoting a great deal of his time to Pact, the TV trade body, where he commanded respect as a mentor, guide and industry ambassador. Pride in his Scottish heritage shone through in his passion for the bagpipes. One of his proudest moments was to be invited to play at a D-day commemoration on Pegasus Bridge in Normandy as a tribute to his father, a paratroop captain who survived D-day and the battle of Arnhem. He shared his love of piping with a considerable part of the population of rural Suffolk and served that community in a more practical if less colourful way by heroically clerking no fewer than 10 local parish councils, perhaps the closest he got to being the lawyer or academic he sometimes thought he might have been. Rod’s first marriage to Bren Simson ended in divorce in 1993. He married Sue Hayes in 1995; she died earlier this year. He is survived by three sons, Jack from his first marriage and Charlie and Luke from his second.Time to wrap up - here are today’s main stories. Goodnight. GW Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary has warned that European airlines face a slump in Christmas and early summer travel as the spectre of another wave of lockdowns puts people off booking holidays. “I think we’re in for a fraught period between now and Christmas where it looks like Europe is going to get very nervous again at the worst time of the year when people are making their Christmas travel plans,” he said. “I think it’s inevitable we will undermine confidence between now and Christmas, and that will disrupt Christmas and New Year when they would normally start booking their summer holidays.” More here: European stock markets have closed solidly in the red, as fears of further lockdowns this winter worry investors. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index fell 1.3%, its fourth day of falls in a row from last week’s record highs. The Netherlands’ AEX index shed 1.6%, with Germany’s DAX down 1.1%, as traders wondered whether new curbs could be introduced following Austria’s new lockdown this week. The UK’s FTSE 100 bucked the trend, though, nudging up up 0.15%. Catering firm Compass led the risers, up 5.6% after reporting strong results. Energy companies BP and Royal Dutch Shell also gained, as crude prices rose* after the US announced its release of oil stocks (* - which won’t please the White House) Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, sums up the session: “It’s on a day like today that the FTSE 100’s global outlook really makes a difference to investor sentiment. Whilst concerns about rising COVID cases has wreaked havoc across European markets and with the UK’s more domestically focussed FTSE 250, London’s blue-chip index has remained stubbornly in positive territory. Miners helped keep things buoyant and there was a late surge from oil giants BP and Shell as markets digested President Biden’s moves and concluded they were perhaps more modest than had been anticipated; the price of a barrel of the black stuff rose slightly in reaction. “Food service giant Compass was the day’s stand out performer as it dangled the carrot that dividends could be back on the menu. It was pummelled during the pandemic but has recovered remarkably well as restrictions relaxed and though revenues are still down the outlook has given investors something to chew over. At the other end of the scale the day hasn’t improved for AO World which warned profits would take a hit this Christmas because of the shortage of games consoles and iPhones. “That plight is something that US retail giant Better Buy shares and its stock has tumbled after warnings about supply issues. The earnings update also delivered news that the rush to grab Christmas trade by starting Black Friday sales early had, unsurprisingly, hurt profits. What did surprise, and not in a good way, was an update from the CEO that a surge in organised crime had led the company to recruit more security guards. And it’s an issue that many retailers in the US and their staff are having to contend with, and one which could potentially get worse if prices keep going up and supply can’t keep up with demand. “Generally, US markets struggled but it’s the tech heavy Nasdaq that’s taken the biggest hit today as bond yields rose and markets concluded that a rate rise might be closer today than it had been yesterday. Pandemic darling Zoom’s after hours update only confirmed expectation that a return to some kind of normal for many employees would hit growth. After months of virtual meetings people have been putting their trousers back on and chatting in person. And even though video conferencing will continue to have a major part to play in business and pleasure there are many more competitors nibbling away.” British supermarket group Asda has appointed Stuart Rose, the former CEO of Marks &amp; Spencer, as its new chairman. Rose will take up the role on December 1st, said Asda, which is owned by the billionaire brothers Mohsin and Zuber Issa and their private equity partner TDR Capital. Dame Alison Carnwath, the former Land Securities chair, is also joining as a non-executive director. Lord Rose says appointing a new CEO for Asda is a priority, after chief executive Roger Burnley stepped down early in the summer following the Issa brothers’ £6.8bn takeover. I am pleased to be joined on the Board by Dame Alison, who brings rigour and focus to everything she does – and look forward to confirming further non-executive appointments to our Board in the near future. We are both excited at the prospect of working with Mohsin and Zuber and the wider Asda team as they look to build on Asda’s strong heritage of delivering affordable quality across food, fashion and general merchandise – and of championing customers at every turn. The process to appoint a new Chief Executive Officer for Asda, who has the vision to take this great business forward over the coming years, is a priority for the Board and we will be supporting the shareholders in this process.” Sky’s Mark Kleinman has an interesting take: The move will be significant because the duo - who also served on the board of Land Securities together - are both directors of EG Group, the petrol stations giant. EG’s founders, Mohsin Issa and his brother Zuber, jointly own both that business and Asda with TDR Capital, a London-based private equity firm. The board appointments could spark speculation that a full merger of EG and Asda is a possibility, although that is not thought to be a short-term option for the shareholders. Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey has said he did not believe that stablecoins were likely to evolve into a form of safe, regulated money, leaving central bank digital currencies as a more likely future for electronic payments. Bailey told lawmakers in the upper house of Britain’s parliament that “we have two choices” surrounding electronic payments: “Is it going to evolve to some world of (asset-) backed stablecoins which has money-like features which could be regulated? I must say ... I am sceptical about that. “Or ... is the better contribution, particularly to financial stability, to say the better alternative to that may be a central bank currency of digital form?” Bailey is testifying to the House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee, as part of its inquiry into the future of digital payments (thanks to Reuters for the quotes). Earlier this month, the BoE and the Treasury said they would hold a formal consultation next year on whether to move forward on a possible central bank digital currency (CBDC), although it wouldn’t be launched until the second half of this decade at the earliest. Here are more highlights: Deputy governor Sir John Cunliffe also spoke about the move towards digital money: In the energy world, Bulb customers been reacting to the collapse of their energy supplier yesterday. Some are dismayed, but a significant number also described how the quality of the firm’s customer service had fallen away in recent months. Emma, a 32-year-old marketing executive from London, was unhappy at the news administrators had been appointed. “I’ve been a Bulb customer for nearly four years and have always been incredibly impressed by their customer service and ease of use of their website and app … I dread being taken on by another provider now, as I know the customer experience won’t be as good.” Rob, a 31-year-old researcher from Yorkshire, who had switched to the firm in part because it offered green electricity, was equally disappointed. “I’ve always found Bulb to be very good. On the rare occasion I’ve needed to speak to them, customer services has been very good and issues have been resolved quickly.” However, other readers reported doing battle with the company in recent months after it tried to up their direct debits, seemingly in an attempt to improve its cash position. Clare, who described herself as an author, wrote: “Ten days ago they contacted us to say our account was £17 in debit so they were doubling our monthly electricity payment to £230. There was no explanation, justification or right to appeal. I have so many friends whose payments were doubled in the past few weeks that it’s clear that Bulb was using customers as a cash-cow to make up for not being able to secure finance to stay afloat.” More here: Tax expert Richard Murphy, meanwhile, has been looking into Bulb’s accounts, which show how it made losses in 2019 and 2020, as its turnover and customer numbers grew. He concludes that a company with such “a weak balance sheet”, even before recent wholesale energy price rises, shouldn’t have been allowed to grow so large (to become the UK’s 7th-largest supplier, with 1.7m customers.). Murphy writes: In itself this appeared to be a crisis that was always in the making. And, yet again, it has to be said that accounting, accounting standards, accounting regulators, auditors and audit regulation have failed with the tab being picked up by society at large. Murphy concludes that a persistent belief that markets can deliver better outcomes than any other supply mechanism runs though recent audit failures. It is abundantly clear that this assumption is wrong, and not just with regard to energy, where Bulb is just the latest of many companies to fail, albeit that it is by some way the largest. That assumption also applies to the supplier of audit services. Whether the market can now be relied upon to really deliver audit services of the quality that society needs is a question that has to be asked however uncomfortable that might make my own profession and this government feel. It would appear that the time for radical reform has arrived. Here’s a full explanation of Bulb’s failure, from our energy correspondent Jillian Ambrose: Back to Turkey, and the lira is still suffering a very severe tumble, down around 10% today at around 12.6 lira to the US dollar. Brad Bechtel of investment bank Jefferies says the currency is in freefall, and thus likely to fall further: The spark for the move seems to be Erdoğan’s speech in which he declared an ‘economic war of independence’ and praised recent interest rate cuts. The central bank is a puppet of the government at the moment, inflation is running at 20% year-on-year and you have Erdoğan at the controls, which means that even at 12.75 we are likely not even close to done with this move yet. The day that’s been coming for months has finally arrived, says Craig Erlam of trading firm OANDA: Three large rate cuts, the prospect of another next month, a complete disregard for inflation and a spineless Governor that’s happy to be the President’s puppet on an issue in which he clearly has no experience. The lira has “spiralled out of control”, and the time for desperate measures has finally arrived, Erlam adds: Unfortunately for Governor Şahap Kavcıoğlu - although entirely deservedly - that will likely mean, either today or some point in the near future, being thrown under the bus. This is the reality of Erdoğanomics and the results are there for all to see. Sky high inflation and a currency that’s fallen more than 30% against the dollar since the start of September. Another disastrous experiment at blurring the divide between poor politics and weak monetary policy. US retailer Best Buy has reported that organised theft is hitting its profits. The American consumer electronics retailer posted a drop in gross profit margins for the last quarter, despite beating analyst estimates for third-quarter sales and profits. Profit margins were hit, it says, by worsening organised retail crime, alongside a jump in promotional activity and costs associated with its new TotalTech membership program. CNBC has more details: Best Buy CEO Corie Barry said Tuesday that rising theft is hitting the company’s profits and could hurt employee retention at a time when the labor market is tight, especially in the retail industry. She said the retailer has seen a noticeable jump in organized crime, with people coming to stores to steal consumer electronics — and in some cases, bringing a weapon like a gun or a crowbar. She said the company will prioritize the safety of customers and employees, even if that means criminals are running out of the door with thousands of dollars of merchandise. “These are traumatic experiences and they are happening more and more across the country,” she said on CNBC’s “Squawk on the Street.” Shares in Best Buy have tumbled by 17% in morning trading. Over in New York, shares in videoconferencing company Zoom have tumbled by around 15% in early trading after it reported slowing sales growth last night. After stunning growth early in the pandemic, Zoom may find it harder to maintain the pace as more people return to the office. Mark Crouch, analyst at investment platform eToro, says: “The pandemic transformed Zoom from a relatively obscure company in a niche area of the market into one that has become synonymous with business communications. Such was its breakneck growth that ‘to Zoom’ someone has become a widely accepted verb to describe video calling someone. “However, the problem with runaway successes such as Zoom is that they eventually run out of steam. While the San Jose-based firm beat consensus earnings and revenue growth estimates for its fiscal third quarter, the firm has predicted a dramatic slowdown in growth. “While revenue grew an impressive 35% year-on-year in Q4, that is significantly slower than the 54% growth reported in the previous quarter – and the firm predicts further slowing now that many companies have adopted its software and bought subscriptions. Zoom’s shares are now down almost 40% so far this year, but still around three times higher than in January 2020, before the first lockdowns. The lira has recovered a little of its heavy losses, as Bloomberg reports that president Erdoğan has met with Turkey’s central bank chief. They say: Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has met central bank Governor Sahap Kavcioglu as the lira suffered a massive selloff and plunged to a new record low on Tuesday, according to an official with direct knowledge of the matter. The official, who didn’t elaborate on what was discussed in the meeting, was speaking on condition of anonymity as it wasn’t officially announced. The bank and the presidency both declined to comment. The latest collapse in the lira came after Erdogan defended his demands for lower borrowing costs that have driven up prices and frustrated investors. They complain monetary policy is becoming increasingly irrational and unpredictable in a country where the president’s influence runs deep. While most central banks are talking of tightening policy as the global recovery fuels inflation, Turkey has slashed 4 percentage points off borrowing rates since September. The lira is now trading at 12.5 to the US dollar, still down 9% today, on track for a record daily low. Here’s CNBC’s take: Turkey’s lira crashed to a record low of 13.44 to the dollar on Tuesday, a level once unfathomable and well past what was just last week deemed the “psychological” barrier of 11 to the dollar. “Insane where the lira is, but it’s a reflection of the insane monetary policy settings Turkey is currently operating under,” Tim Ash, senior emerging markets strategist at Bluebay Asset Management, said in a note in response to the news. The Financial Times says the Turkish lira has “suffered a historic retreat” after President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan praised last week’s interest rate cut and declared that his country was fighting an “economic war of independence”. The currency, which is down 45% against the dollar this year, plunged as much as 15% on Tuesday — a drop that eclipsed even Turkey’s currency crisis of 2018 — and broke through the symbolic threshold of 13 to the dollar after Erdogan used a combative speech to expound his vision for the country’s economy. “It’s like a horror film,” said Enver Erkan, an analyst at the Istanbul-based Terra Investment, adding that it was hard to say how much further the currency would plunge given that policymakers appeared willing to simply let it fall. “This is the inevitable consequence of Erdogan’s war on rates,” said Uday Patnaik, head of emerging market debt at Legal &amp; General Investment Management. “The thing that would stop the freefall is some sign of an independent central bank in Turkey. But there’s not much prospect of that. Erdogan’s the type of guy who likes to keep doubling down.” More here. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, says the lira’s tumble shows the importance of an independent central bank, and echoes Turkey’s currency crisis three years ago: The nonsensical dynamics between the lira, inflation and interest rates highlights the importance of an independence central bank with a mandate to keep price rises at bay. With a president who is heavily against higher interest rates, Turkey is suffering from 20% inflation, making goods and services considerably more expensive for its citizens adding to an already challenging economic backdrop. The lira continues to suffer, slumping by more than 30% against the greenback since the start of the month, setting the stage for its biggest one-day drop since March. In a speech President Erdogan said Turkey was fighting an ‘economic war of independence’, pressuring the lira, which was already at an all-time low. Last Thursday Turkey cut its one-week repo rate by one percentage point to 15%, the third cut in a row from 19% at the start of September. The puzzling shift towards looser monetary policy is exacerbating an already troublesome picture for inflation and echoes Turkey’s currency crisis from 2018.” The Turkish lira was “in freefall” today, says Jason Tuvey, senior emerging markets economist at Capital Economics. Tuvey warned that the lira faces further losses as policymakers remain ‘defiant’ about the currency’s weakness, following recent interest rate cuts. The Turkish lira has plunged this morning after President Erdogan signalled yesterday that policymakers have no appetite to respond to the currency’s recent falls by hiking interest rates. Further falls in the lira are likely to lie in store and we think that it will probably take the emergence of severe strains in the banking sector before policymakers respond with aggressive policy tightening. We aren’t there yet. The Turkish lira has plunged to a fresh record low today after President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan defended recent interest rate cuts. The lira has tumbled by over 10% today, hitting 13 lira to the US dollar for the first time, after Erdoğan vowed to win an “economic war of independence”. That’s down from 9.5 lira/dollar at the start of the month, and around 7 in January. The lira went into freefall after Erdoğan last night rejected calls for Turkey to change course. Erdoğan, a firm critic of high interest rates, insisted the country’s economic policies would focus on investment, production, employment and exports. “I reject policies that will contract our country, weaken it, condemn our people to unemployment, hunger and poverty. Last week, Turkey’s central bank cut interest rates from 16% to 15%, under pressure from Erdoğan for lower borrowing costs, even though inflation is now almost 20%. In October, Erdoğan dismissed three Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey policymakers, two of whom had opposed an earlier rate cut. He also fired central bank chief Naci Agbal back in March, after the CBRT raised rates. The slump in the lira will make imports more expensive, adding to inflationary pressures. Ima Sammani, FX market analyst at Monex Europe, says Erdoğan has given a clear signal that recent cuts in interest rates won’t be reversed. Sammani explains: For the first time ever, the Turkish lira weakened past the 12.00 level against the dollar after Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdogan defended the CBRT’s policy of lower rates as he prioritises strengthening economic growth and job creation as opposed to slowing down inflation. This is a stark contrast in tone from the CBRT’s policy statement last week, which outlined that the easing cycle would be reassessed at December’s meeting. For investors, Erdogan’s comments mean one thing: there will be no one there for them when inflation continues to take a toll on their assets. Given the amount of political pressure that resulted in the CBRT’s decision to cut rates again in November, Erdogan’s comments can largely be seen as abandonment of caution and a sign to markets that the easing cycle is unlikely to end anytime soon. Since last night, the lira weakened by another 8% as Erdogan hammered home the idea that the low rate policy is here to stay. The impact on the lira highlights the little confidence markets have in Governor Kavcioglu’s ability to push back on the political pressure to lower rates, which has been the demise of his predecessors over the past 4 years. The United States is releasing 50 million barrels of oil from its strategic reserves, in a coordinated attempt to lower the energy costs that have hit the global economy. The move follows the sharp rise in fuel costs for motorists as crude prices hit multi-year highs last month, with Opec+ resisting pressure to unwind its pandemic production cuts faster. Associated Press has the details: The White House on Tuesday said it had ordered 50 million barrels of oil released from the strategic reserve to bring down energy costs, in coordination with other countries including China. The move is an effort to bring down rising gas prices. Gasoline prices nationwide are averaging about $3.40 a gallon, more than double their price a year ago, according to the American Automobile Association. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve is an emergency stockpile to preserve access to oil in case of natural disasters, national security issues and other events. Maintained by the Energy Department, the reserves are stored in caverns created in salt domes along the Texas and Louisiana Gulf Coasts. There are roughly 605 million barrels of sweet and sour petroleum in the reserve. The Biden administration has argued that the supply of oil has not kept pace with demand as the global economy emerged from the pandemic, and the reserve is the right tool to help ease the problem. The decision comes after weeks of diplomatic negotiations and the release will be taken in parallel other nations including, India, Japan, the Republic of Korea and the United Kingdom, major energy consumers. The U.S. Department of Energy will make the oil available from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve in two ways; 32 million barrels will be released in the next few months and will return to the reserve in the years ahead, the White House said. Another 18 barrels will be part of a sale of oil that Congress had previously authorized. White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki said Monday evening that the the White House would also keep tabs on the oil companies, too. “We will continue to press oil companies who have made record profits and are overseeing what we consider to be price gouging out there when there’s a supply of oil or the price of oil is coming down and the price of gas is not coming down,” Psaki said. “It does not take an economic expert to know that’s a problem.” A Bank of England policymaker has said that UK interest rates will need to rise if the jobs market remains tight, but insisted this would be a ‘feature’ of the recovery, not a bug. In a speech to the Adam Smith Business School, at the University of Glasgow, Haskel argues a gradual increase in interest rates from their record low of 0.1% would be a return to normal, and would show the UK economy is stronger. Haskel pointed out that financial markets now expect rates to rise faster than earlier in the pandemic. Back in October 2020, just before the first successful vaccine trial results from Pfizer, Moderna and AstraZeneca, the market expected negative rates. Now, investors expect Bank Rate to rise over the coming months, which Haskel says is largely due to the recovery: In my view, the prospective rise in Bank Rate from its emergency level – whenever that comes - is not a bug, but a feature. It reflects the success of fiscal, health and science policy in dealing with the worst economic shock in 100 years. The rise in interest rate expectations also follows the surge in inflation to its highest in 13 years, and comments from BoE governor Andrew Bailey that the Bank “will have to act” to curb inflationary pressures. Today, Haskel points out that much of the rise in inflation is due to outside forces such as energy prices. But he also points to wage pressures, saying: In my view, if the labour market stays tight, Bank Rate will have to rise. This tightness is also putting upward pressure on wages, he adds, as firms struggle to hire workers. From a living standards point of view, this is of course excellent news, but from an inflation point of view this has to be matched by increased productivity and so we have to be vigilant. The BoE’s monetary policy committee meets again next month, having left interest rates at record lows in November. UK house sales halved in October after the stamp duty tax cut introduced early in the pandemic ended. New figures from HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) show there were an estimated 85,090 housing transactions in October, 48.4% lower than in September 2021 and 30% less than a year ago. HMRC says there was “significant forestalling activity by taxpayers” in September, as homebuyers raced to complete transactions, leading to a cooling in October. The “impacts from forestalling are particularly evident in England”, it added, where there were 54% fewer house purchases in October than September. The tax cut on the first £250,000 of a house purchase ended in England and Northern Ireland on 30th September. It had originally covered the first £500,000, before being halved at the end of June (which sparked a record rise in purchases). The tax break ended in Wales and Scotland earlier this year. Despite the recent sales dip, around 842,250 residential transactions have taken place across the UK during this financial year so far - the highest total in the past decade. Jeremy Leaf, north London estate agent and a former RICS residential chairman, says: ‘Although these numbers are inevitably a little dated as they reflect buying decisions being made several months ago, transactions are always a better indicator of market strength than more volatile house prices. ’They demonstrate clearly the determination of buyers to move, as well as the impact of the stamp duty holiday, and explain why the numbers have reduced so significantly. ‘Looking forward, we are still seeing on the ground plenty of demand and enthusiasm to take advantage of low interest rates while they last but there is some softening in prices, even though the stock shortage remains. Analysis by property agent Savills today shows that the stamp duty holiday, introduced by chancellor Rishi Sunak, has worked out as £6.4bn tax break for homebuyers in England. Roughly half the savings went to those who bought properties worth more than £500,000, they say. More here. Getir’s deal to acquire high-speed grocery delivery rival Weezy is “a clear symbol of the disruption which has taken place within convenience goods retailing” in the pandemic. So says Sarah Riding, retail and supply chain partner at the law firm Gowling WLG: While cost margins are higher for customers using these services, their flexibility around availability and range are something the bigger players should be competing with more readily – it will be interesting to see how this transpires as the sector scrabbles to meet new types of demand.” Deal news: The high-speed grocery delivery firm Getir has signed a deal to acquire UK rival Weezy. A swathe of these ‘ultrafast’ delivery firms have hit the streets in some cities since the first pandemic lockdowns, letting people order a range of groceries such as wine, milk and snacks to their doors in minutes. Back in June, Getir was valued at more than $7.5bn after raising $550m to fund expansion moves, and recently moved into the US. It says that today’s deal follows a “rapid expansion plan” which began in London in January 2021. Now operating in 15 cities and towns including Manchester, Birmingham and Liverpool, the acquisition of Weezy further solidifies Getir’s long-term commitment to the UK market. George Nott of The Grocer tweets: UK firms have been hit by the sharpest surge in costs in at least two decades. Rising wages, and more expensive fuel, energy and raw materials, all pushed up input costs at the fastest rate since data firm IHS Markit started tracking this in January 1998. Around 63% of UK private sector companies said their average cost burdens had increased this month, while only 1% reported a drop in costs. Factories passed this onto consumers, with the prices charged by manufacturers increasing at the steepest rate since the index began 20 years ago, the latest PMI survey shows. But service providers reported a slight slowdown in this ‘output charge inflation’, with some finding their clients were pushing back against price rises. Markit’s survey of UK purchasing managers also found that customer demand continued to rise sharply in November, with new order growth accelerating to a five-month high. Although manufacturing growth picked up this month, the sector is still growing slower than the services sector, as factories face severe shortages of materials and staff. Duncan Brock, group director at CIPS, explains: “Growth in private sector business continued in November, with a reversal of fortunes between the sectors still evident as services stormed ahead fuelled by consumer spending on hospitality but manufacturing progress was held back by supply chain snags. Another survey record of rising costs for fuel and wage demands led to the highest inflationary pressures since January 1998 as 63% of supply chain managers paid more for their materials. Shortages of staff and production stoppages due to a lack of supplies added to frustrations in the manufacturing sector as some machines fell silent. Europe’s Covid-19 surge has pushed confidence among European businesses down to its lowest level since January. The latest survey of purchasing managers from across the eurozone shows that expectations have fallen this month, to a ten-month low. Ongoing concerns over supply chain issues were exacerbated by growing worries about the impact of further COVID-19 waves, which darkened the outlook for services in particular, says data firm IHS Markit, which compiles the report. Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, warned that the rise in virus cases look set to cause renewed disruptions to the economy in December too, adding: “Not surprisingly, given the mix of supply delays, soaring costs and renewed COVID-19 worries, business optimism has sunk to the lowest since January, adding to near-term downside risks for the eurozone economy.” More encouragingly, business activity growth accelerated in November having slipped to a six-month low in October, the survey shows. This lifted the eurozone flash PMI to 55.8, up from 54.2, showing faster growth. But firms input costs and their average selling prices both rising at record rates. That suggests inflationary pressures are also picking up, squeezing households and firms this winter. The chief executive of AstraZeneca has said it was possible that the current spike in coronavirus in Europe was linked to governments’ decision not to use the company’s Covid-19 vaccine in older people. After a German newspaper report that turned out to be false, there was doubt over the effectiveness of AstraZeneca’s vaccine in older people, and several European governments initially chose not to use it in those over 60 or over 65. Germany, for example, then overturned its earlier verdict and approved the vaccine for the over 65s in March after further studies showed it was safe and effective. Public confidence in the jab was also eroded when a rare link with blood clots emerged. Public confidence in the jab was eroded, also when a rare link with blood clots emerged. Pascal Soriot, the AstraZeneca CEO, insisted he had no regrets on the vaccine as the company unveils a £1bn research and development (R&amp;D) centre in Cambridge, the biggest science lab in the UK and the largest investment AstraZeneca has ever made. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Soriot explained that Covid-19 vaccines did two things: stimulate an antibody response, and a T-cell response. “The T-cell response takes a little longer to come in, but it’s actually more durable, it last longer, and the body remembers that longer,” he said. “Antibodies decline over time....What remains, and is very important, is this T-cell response. You may be infected but then they come to the rescue and you don’t get hospitalised.” Soriot added that this might explain why the UK has seen relatively fewer hospitalisations in the current wave of Covid-19: “In the UK, there was a big pickup in infections but not so many hospitalisations relative to Europe. In the UK, this vaccine was used to vaccinate older people, whereas in Europe initially people thought the vaccine doesn’t work in older people. [Explainer: AstraZeneca’s vaccine, developed at Oxford University, used a modified adenovirus with the Covid-19 spike protein to induce an immune response. Other vaccines, such as Pfizer’s, use mRNA technology with the genetic instructions for the vaccinated person’s own cells to produce the vaccine antigens]. Q: So could there be a link between the rise in cases and hospitalisations in Europe, and the fact that AstraZeneca’s vaccine wasn’t used in older people there? Soriot replies: “T-cells do matter and in particular it relates to the durability of the response especially in older people and this vaccine has been shown to stimulate T-cells to a higher degree in older people. We haven’t seen many hospitalisations in the UK, a lot of infections, for sure. But what matters is: are you severely ill or not? Are you hospitalised or not? Q: And that could be because the AstraZeneca vaccine was used among older people in the UK? Soriot says more data is needed to know the answer: “It could be, but there’s no proof of anything. We need more data to analyse this and get the answer.” Prince Charles will formally open AstraZeneca’s R&amp;D facility on Tuesday, as the company aims to speed up its development of new pharmaceutical products. It will house more than 2,200 research scientists, and is one of AZ’s three major R&amp;D centres along with one in the US and one in Gothenburg, Sweden. The Anglo-Swedish drugmaker, Britain’s biggest pharmaceutical firm, invests more than $7bn in R&amp;D globally each year, a large part of which takes place in the UK. AstraZeneca was one of the few vaccine makers to sell its jab at cost price, but is now signing commercial contracts for next year, in a shift away from its not-for-profit pricing. Oxford professors Sir Andrew Pollard and Brian Angus have today called on governments with vaccine doses to spare to make every effort to ensure they urgently reach people who are undecided and unvaccinated: Stock markets across Europe have dropped to their lowest level in three weeks, as fears over pandemic lockdowns increase following the jump in infections. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index has tumbled 1.5% this morning, on track for its worst day in almost two months. After Austria’s full lockdown, which began on Monday, there are concerns that other European countries such as Germany and the Netherlands could also be forced to implement new restrictions. Jim Reid, strategist at Deutsche Bank, says the surge in Covid-19 cases in Europe is being watched closely by investors: The move by Austria back into lockdown has raised questions as to where might be next, and Bloomberg reported that Chancellor Merkel told CDU officials yesterday that the recent surge was worse than anything seen so far, and that additional restrictions would be required. So the direction of travel all appears to be one way for the time being in terms of European restrictions, and even a number of less-affected countries are still seeing cases move in an upward direction, including France, Italy and the UK. So a key one to watch that’ll have big implications for economies and markets too. Richard Hunter, Head of Markets at interactive investor, warns that AO World is in “a parlous position” after downgrading its revenue and earnings projections today. The well-publicised supply chain disruptions have had a severe impact, with a shortage of delivery drivers a particular issue. At the same time, the group’s foray into the German market is not only in the early stages of establishing the brand, but is also being faced by significantly increased competition. This in turn has necessitated an investment in systems and people (especially drivers) and increased marketing costs in Germany which have driven a bus through previous projections. Adjusted earnings have declined by 84% over the last year, with the figure of £5 million comparing to an estimate from the company itself of between £35 million to £50 million just weeks ago. Net debt has also seen the effects of the investment, now standing at £102 million compared to £21 million a year previous. The resultant loss before tax of £10 million compares to a profit of £18 million in the corresponding period last year. Nor does the current situation appear to be easing. The company is anticipating poor availability in some categories for the second half as well, alongside ongoing supply issues, an increase in raw material prices and general inflationary pressures. As such, the company is expecting a much softer peak trading period than previously expected, with full-year revenue likely to be flat to minus 5%. Shares in AO World have tumbled around 27% at the start of trading, after it cut its profit forecasts. They’ve fallen to their lowest since May 2020, at around 90p, having traded over £4 at the start of this year. Products such as gaming consoles and mobile phones - which are newer territory for AO than its traditional staples such as washing machines and fridge-freezers - were more likely to be affected by shortages, explains Sky News. Some early City reaction.... AO World’s chief executive, John Roberts, says the company has tackled some of its supply chain problems, including hiring 500 new drivers to transport goods. “Our results over this period have inevitably been affected by the constraints and uncertainty seen across our industry. We’ve materially cemented the progress of last year, with a step change in scale and consumer behaviour - and the fundamentals of the business are in place for sustained growth. “We’re seeing more customers making repeat purchases more frequently across categories. Once they experience the AO Way, they keep coming back. Our outstanding operational capabilities are also being recognised by more and more companies who are now outsourcing their delivery services to us. “We’re working hard to solve some of the current challenges that our industry is facing. We’ve recruited c.500 new drivers and are working closely with our manufacturer partners so that customers can get what they need. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Britain’s supply chain crisis continues to hit UK retailers as the crucial Christmas shopping period approaches. AO World, which sells electrical goods online, has cut its profit forecast for the second time this autumn, blaming the disruption in the global supply chain, rising costs, and problems obtaining some products. With Black Friday just days away, AO World’s problems highlight the ongoing impact of product shortages, rising prices and problems shipping goods around the world and into the UK’s congested ports. The company had been a lockdown winner as people shopped from home in the pandemic, boosting AO’s sales of items such as laptops, mobile phones, washing machines and printers. But today, it tells shareholders that it still faces ‘meaningful’ supply chain challenges. At the start of our financial year in April, we planned for continued revenue growth and built up our cost base accordingly. However, since then, growth in the UK has been impacted by the nationwide shortage of delivery drivers and the ongoing disruption in the global supply chain, and the German online market has seen significantly increased competition. As we now look to the second half, we continue to see meaningful supply chain challenges with poor availability in certain categories, particularly in our newer products where we have less scale, experience and leverage. In addition, shipping costs, material input prices and consumer price inflation remain challenging uncertainties. As a result of these factors, the all-important current peak trading period is significantly softer than we anticipated only eight weeks ago. AO World now expects to make adjusted profits of between £10m to £20m this year, down from the £35m-£50m forecast eight weeks ago. Group revenues could fall by up to 5% this year, it says. This is the second warning from AO World in less than two months. At the start of October, the firm slashed its forecasts as supply chain problems hit the company. AO World also reports that revenues in the first half of the financial year, to 30th September, were 6% higher than the previous year -- and 67% above pre-pandemic levels. But the firm has made a pre-tax loss of £10m in H1, down from an £18m profit a year before, with adjusted profits shrinking to £5m from £28m a year ago. Also coming up today We find out how much damage the supply chain crisis is causing to other companies later today, when the latest ‘flash PMI’ surveys of purchasing managers are released. They are likely to show that eurozone companies slowed as Covid-19 infections have risen this autumn. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets explains: The risk of a slide back into economic contraction is rising with each passing day, and that in itself is feeding into a weaker euro, and while today’s flash PMIs from Germany and France are likely to point to still fairly decent levels of economic activity, they have been heading in the wrong direction for several months now. In manufacturing both France and German economic activity is expected to slow to 53.1, and 56.9 respectively, while in services we can also expect to see a similar softening to 55.5 for France and 51.5 in Germany. The UK PMIs are likely to be stronger though, Hewson adds: The UK, on the other hand by opening up earlier, and seeing infections stay constant at a higher level through the summer, may well have played a blinder in building up a more resilient wall of immunity, along with the booster program, as the weather gets colder. That’s not to say that the strategy might not still go pear-shaped, but in terms of economic activity we haven’t seen the type of drop off being seeing in Europe. Today’s November flash PMI numbers are expected to see manufacturing slow modestly to 57.3, from 57.8, while services, which saw a decent jump in October to 59.1, from 55.4, is set to fall back to 58.5. Elsewhere, UK energy supplier Bulb Energy is being placed into an untested bailout process that will rely on public money to manage the biggest collapse yet in the energy crisis. The company will be handed to a “special administrator” that will have access to government funds to keep it running to supply gas and electricity to its 1.7 million household customers. The agenda 9am GMT: Eurozone flash PMI survey of manufacturing and services for November 9.30am GMT: UK flash PMI survey of manufacturing and services for November 11am GMT: BoE policymaker Jonathan Haskel gives a talk at the Adam Smith Business School “High inflation now and then” 2.45pm GMT: US flash PMI survey of manufacturing and services for November 3pm: House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee takes evidence on central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) from the Governor of the Bank of England, Andrew Bailey.Seven anti-vaccine doctors fell sick after gathering earlier this month for a Florida “summit” at which alternative treatments for Covid-19 were discussed. “I have been on ivermectin for 16 months, my wife and I,” Dr Bruce Boros told the audience at the event held at the World Equestrian Center in Ocala, adding: “I have never felt healthier in my life.” The 71-year-old cardiologist and staunch anti-vaccine advocate contracted Covid-19 two days later, according to the head event organizer, Dr John Littell. Littell, an Ocala family physician, also told the Daily Beast six other doctors among 800 to 900 participants at the event also tested positive or developed Covid-19 symptoms “within days of the conference”. Littell raised the suggestion the conference was therefore a super-spreader event but rejected it, vehemently saying: “No. “I think they had gotten it from New York or Michigan or wherever they were from,” he told the Beast. “It was really the people who flew in from other places.” He also said: “Everybody so far has responded to treatment with ivermectin … Bruce is doing well.” The Beast said sources close to Boros said he was gravely ill at his Key West home. Ivermectin is an antiparasitic which has uses in humans but is predominantly used in livestock such as cows and horses. Authorities say it has no proven use against Covid-19 and can be dangerous if taken in large quantities. The US Food and Drug Administration has not authorized or approved ivermectin as a Covid treatment and has said clinical trials are continuing. Boros has claimed ivermectin is “working where it’s being used around the world” as a Covid treatment. In the same Facebook post, he condemned Dr Anthony Fauci, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, as “a fraud” and said “big pharma is playing us for suckers”. In a July interview with Florida Keys Weekly, Boros responded to criticisms of his post, saying: “It breaks my heart that a town like this has made something so political and hateful. What’s wrong with people? I just want to help patients and keep them from dying.” He also claimed that he gave a seriously ill Covid-19 patient ivermectin and “within six hours he was talking without coughing”. At the summit in Ocala, Boros criticized his 97-year-old father for getting a Covid vaccine, saying: “He had been brainwashed … He got it. He didn’t tell me. I was very upset. I wanted to give him a spanking. He got both jabs.” Earlier this year, a significant study supporting ivermectin as a Covid-19 treatment was withdrawn after data was found to have been falsified and patients nonexistent. The FDA says people should “never use medications intended for animals on yourself or other people. Animal ivermectin products are very different from those approved for humans. Use of animal ivermectin for the prevention or treatment of Covid-19 in humans is dangerous.”Turkey’s currency slumped on Tuesday to a fresh low against the dollar after Recep Tayyip Erdoğan signalled that he would not be deterred by rising inflation from cutting interest rates further. The Turkish president, who had declared himself an “enemy” of high borrowing costs, said the four percentage point cut in interest rates this year to 15% would spur investment, increase job prospects and boost economic growth. Erdoğan, portraying his economic policies as “an economic war of independence”, stated that his government would not step back from its policy of lowering borrowing rates to boost growth. However, amid concerns that his unorthodox management of the economy was likely to deter investment and increase inflation above the 20% level recorded in October, investors took flight, pushing the Turkish lira down to 12.6 against the dollar. Some banks across the country stopped currency transactions, fearing that the steep fall in the lira’s value could spark a run on reserves, according to local newspaper reports. There was also speculation that the government had laid plans to impose strict capital controls to prevent further withdrawals should the economic situation worsen. The currency has fallen 40% this year, largely in response to a series of interest rates cuts by the central bank governor, Şahap Kavcıoğlu. In October Erdoğan fired two central bank deputy governors, Semih Tümen and Uğur Namık Küçük, along with a member of the bank’s monetary policy committee, for resisting further cuts in interest rates. The central bank saw three governors come and go in the two years before Kavcıoğlu was appointed in March, all of them dismissed by Erdoğan. “We were either going to give up on investments, manufacturing, growth and jobs, or take on a historic challenge to meet our own priorities,” Erdoğan said in comments that sparked the fresh run on the currency. His comments followed a speech last week when he spelled out his long-held view that high interest rates cause rather than reduce inflation. He pledged to free Turkey from the “scourge” of high interest rates. “I’m sorry to our friends [from the ruling party] who defend [high] interest but I cannot and will not walk the same path as them,” he said. Brad Bechtel of investment bank Jefferies said the currency was in freefall and would probably fall further over the coming weeks. “The spark for the move seems to be Erdogan’s speech in which he declared an ‘economic war of independence’ and praised recent interest rate cuts,” he said. “The central bank is a puppet of the government at the moment, inflation is running at 20% year-on-year and you have Erdogan at the controls, which means that even at 12.75 we are likely not even close to done with this move yet.” Craig Erlam, an analyst at currency trader Oanda, said: “This is the reality of Erdoğanomics and the results are there for all to see. Sky-high inflation and a currency that’s fallen more than 30% against the dollar since the start of September. Another disastrous experiment at blurring the divide between poor politics and weak monetary policy.”MPs have said the government is “still in peril” over its plans for social care funding, with several expecting a government climbdown as peers warned they would force the issue back to the Commons. The government suffered a significant rebellion on Monday night but carried the change to the social care cap with a slimmed-down majority. The number of abstentions from discontented MPs is likely to worry whips if peers in the House of Lords return an amended bill to the Commons. On Tuesday the chair of the Treasury select committee, Mel Stride, rebuked ministers for delaying an impact assessment into the change and sending only a short letter half an hour before the vote. If the government does not change course, which No 10 denied it would do, Boris Johnson faces a showdown with peers in the new year over the changes, with several high-profile Conservatives saying they will seek to amend the bill. In the Commons on Monday night, the government narrowly won the vote to change a key aspect of its social care plan that means council contributions to care fees would not go towards the new £86,000 cap. Eighteen Tory MPs voted against the government and 68 were absent. Labour sources told the Guardian that just 13 were paired – meaning they were given official permission to be absent – suggesting dozens of MPs intentionally abstained. A number of abstaining MPs told the Guardian there was widespread discontent at the lack of information over the change to funding, which would hit poorer households in areas with lower house prices, and said dozens more could rebel if the government does not provide more information on how to mitigate the impact. “We didn’t need to rush this through,” a former minister said. “A lot of colleagues are saying now: we’ll look at the full picture and then have a go at amending it again when it comes back from the Lords. “Many of us withheld support because frankly we are sick of being marched up the hill and left behind when the government changes its mind. So we are waiting for that rather than being made to look foolish. The government may well compromise.” Jeremy Hunt, the chair of the Commons health select committee, abstained in the vote and predicted a government U-turn. “I was conflicted, I actually ended up abstaining because it is a big disappointment that they changed the way the cap is calculated,” he told the BBC. He said he expected the government to look again at the plans. The change means homeowners in the poorest areas of England face losing a three times greater share of their housing wealth to pay for social care than people in the most affluent areas, according to Guardian analysis. Johnson sought to reassure ministers at cabinet on Tuesday that “no one will be forced to sell a home they or their spouse is living in as it will not be counted as an asset”. Later on Tuesday Stride said he was alarmed the government was further delaying its impact assessment on the change. In a letter to Stride on Monday night, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said he could not provide regional or individual assessments on the impact of the change, as the funding at a local authority level has not yet been agreed. “The letter, which was sent half an hour before parliament was set to vote on the changes last night, does not provide the full assessment requested,” Stride said. “I have real concerns about the way these changes have been introduced.” Several influential Conservative peers including Andrew Lansley, another former Tory health secretary, and Ros Altmann, the government’s former pensions adviser, have said they will attempt to amend the bill and send it back to the Commons – though this is not expected until March next year. Labour’s leader in the Lords, Angela Smith, said there could be a buildup of public anger by that time. “In this case, you had something that’s pretty much sneaked out, and then voted on very quickly. And I suspect you’re seeing now those discussions and debates particularly [among] those Conservative MPs who voted for it. Are people thinking – hang on, what does this mean for me?”Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, has denied threatening to cut the BBC’s funding because she thought the Today presenter Nick Robinson did not show Boris Johnson sufficient respect in an interview. (See 3.10pm.) During wide-ranging, and at times confrontational, exchanges with the committee, Dorries defended herself over past, offensive tweets about the LBC journalist James O’Brien (see 4.20pm and 4.42pm), retracted a comment she made at the Tory conference about how the BBC might not survive another 10 years (see 4.01pm) and criticised the Brit Awards for their decision to get rid of gendered categories. (See 3.39pm.) She also denied claims that her department had altered the Ofcom chairmanship job description to make it easier for Paul Dacre, the former Daily Mail editor, to get selected if he applied a second time. (Last week he announced he was withdrawing anyway.) Referring to the new job description, Dorries said: “It was actually not altered as such but it was made to be more diverse and broader so that we could attract a range of broader and more diverse candidates.” The hospitality sector in Scotland has welcomed the Scottish government’s decision not to extend the vaccine passport scheme. Instead the current scheme will be marginally relaxed, in that from 6 December people will be able to access nightclubs or large events not just by showing evidence of vaccination (as now), but by alternatively showing evidence of a recent negative lateral flow test. (See 2.42pm.) Paul Togneri of the Scottish Beer and Pub Association said his members were pleased the scheme was not being extended to cover all hospitality. He said: Scotland’s pubs and bars have breathed a great sigh of relief with the first minister’s statement today. We have been in close dialogue with ministers, officials and public health discussing the potential economic impact and the operational practicalities extending the scheme would have entailed. We are thankful to them for listening to us and in doing so, may have averted an economic disaster for many businesses this Christmas. The Northern Ireland executive has strenghtened its work from home guidance in response to rising Covid transmission rates. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has claimed that it is “highly unlikely” that poorer people could lose as much as £86,000 (the theoretical maximum) under the plans for a cap on social care costs approved by MPs last night. In a letter to the Commons Treasury committee, Javid said it was “highly unlikely that anybody within the means test would deplete their assets to anywhere near that maximum level”. He said that was because of the amount of time people normally need to spend in a care home. On average, 45% of people live for less than a year after moving into a care home, and more than 70% of people survive for less than three years, according to DHSC analysis. Boris Johnson is physically well and has a full grasp on the prime ministership, Downing Street has said following his rambling speech to business leaders on Monday in which he lost his place for about 20 seconds. French fishers are set to take action within days, including blocking road and sea freight bound for the UK through Calais and other Channel ports, as a months-long dispute over licences to operate in British waters intensifies. The LBC presenter James O’Brien has described Nadine Dorries’s claim that he tweeted aggressively and obsessively about her as “ludicrous”. In his letter to the Times (paywall) last week announcing that he had withdrawn from the contest to be the next Ofcom chair, Paul Dacre, the former Daily Mail editor, included a dig at the permanent secretary in the culture department, Sarah Healey. Referring to Healey admitting she likes working from home because it allows more time for exercising on her Peloton bike, he said: After my infelicitous dalliance with the Blob, I’m taking up an exciting new job in the private sector that, in a climate that is increasingly hostile to business, struggles to create the wealth to pay for all those senior civil servants working from home so they can spend more time exercising on their Peloton bikes and polishing their political correctness, safe in the knowledge that it is they, not elected politicians, who really run this country. Healey, who is giving evidence alongside Dorries, was asked to respond to this comment. She did not reply directly, but she said: The only thing that I would say in response to a question is that I’m really proud of what everybody in DCMS does to support ministers. I think they’re an incredibly professional department. I think they work exceptionally hard. They’re very, very committed to what they do. I know that that’s how the secretary of state feels and how the former secretary of state felt about the support that they received. Dorries said she had 100% support for Healey. She said Healey’s comment about her Peloton was the subject of many jokes in the department. She went on: There are many male permanent secretaries who went for their jog each morning, or for their cycle ride, or walked their dog. Nobody had anything to say about that. When Kevin Brennan (Lab) asked if Dorries was suggesting Dacre was misogynist, Julian Knight, the chair, told Brennan that his time for questions had run out. Dorries said “no comment”. Dorries says the tweet she addressed to the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg saying a comment she reported was ridiculous was not an attack on her. She says Kuenssberg is one of the best journalists in the business. Q: You called working for the Daily Mirror “bottom-feeding scum”. Dorries says that was many years ago. Nicolson asks about abusive things Dorries has tweeted about James O’Brien, the LBC presenter. Dorries says she will not answer these questions. Julian Knight (Con), the committee chair, says the online harms bill could give her huge power over journalists. He says he is allowing the questions on this basis. Dorries says the tweet about the Mirror was prompted by a journalist harassing her daughter. It was the mother sending those tweets, she says. Nicolson asks about some of the tweets Dorries has sent about O’Brien. Dorries says, like other female politicians, she has had to put up with with men tweeting about her obsessively. Nicolson quotes another tweet that Dorries retweeted about O’Brien, calling him a liar and a hate preacher. That’s actionable, he says. Dorries says she is not here to answer questions about tweets she sent in the past. But female politicians criticised on Twitter need to respond “assertively”, she says. John Nicolson (SNP) goes next. Q: You said you did not know if the BBC will be going in 10 years’ time? That’s extraordinary. Dorries says she was asked about the licence fee. Nicolson reads back the quote to her. She said she did not know if the BBC would still be there in 10 years’ time. Well, I don’t, says Dorries. And neither do you. Q: The Times reported that you said the Nick Robinson interview with the PM would cost the BBC a lot of money. Dorries says she did not hear the interview, and she did not say that. She says she is “very sure the BBC will be here in 10 years’ time”. The point she was making was that you cannot predict the future, she says. Q: You said BBC broadcasting was like what you would see in a Soviet country. Have you ever visited a Soviet country? Dorries says she will not comment on tweets she posted 12 years ago. Nicolson says it was not 12 years ago. It was in the Daily Mail last month. Dorries says only around 20% of people working at the BBC come from a working-class background. She says thinks it was easier for people from working-class backgrounds to get careers in the arts, and in journalism, in the 1960s than it is now. Dorries says she would like to see a revival of local journalism. She describes the days when local journalists used to cover council meeting regularly and she says those were “the good old days ... of honest reporting” when journalism wasn’t “overlaid with a filter of opinion”. Dorries tells the culture committee that she is concerned about the loss of local news. She claims that 30% of journalism posts have gone in the last 10 years. Journalism is important to democracy, she says. Q: What do you think of the decision of the Brit awards to avoid gendered categories? Dorries claims this is the first time she has heard about it. She says it sounds like a sad decision. But she says she would be concerned about women not being properly represented. I have to say it’s the first [time] I’m aware of it. I think it sounds quite a sad decision. I would like to see how they would work in terms of fair gender representation. Brine says the decision was taken so as not to exclude non-binary artists. Dorries repeats her claim not to have heard of this before. She goes on: If you look at who used to win awards for novels, and many things in the past, men always dominated, and my concern would be that women weren’t fairly represented moving forward. So I would just be concerned on the gender balance issue. Whereas we know we’re going to get best female artist, best female producer, best female whatever, I’d be concerned that in the future women weren’t fairly represented in those awards. Steve Brine (Con) is asking the question. Q: Do you think Channel 4 privatisation is more or less likely since you took over as culture secretary? Dorries says she cannot answer that question. She says she does not know what her predecessor thought. Brine says Channel 4 news is the equivalent of the Guardian on TV. He says that may have clouded the debate on privatisation. Q: When were you last on Channel 4 News? Dorries says she has been asked many times to appear on Channel 4 News, but she says no. That is her choice, she says. She says she avoids appearing on news programmes unless she has to. Dorries insists there would be no point having a consultation on privatising Channel 4 if she was not prepared to listen to what people say. She says she wants to look at all the evidence, read the culture committee’s report, see a commercial evaluation of Channel 4 and consider the future of public service broadcasting before deciding whether or not to go ahead with the proposed privatisation. Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, is giving evidence to the Commons culture committee. It is her first appearance before the committee in his post. There is a live feed here. As my colleague Jim Waterson reports, Dorries cited her own children as examples of snowflake lefties, or Islington lefties (types she has regularly criticised in the past on Twitter). Dorries also denied a report saying she had criticised Nick Robinson, the BBC Radio 4 Today programme presenter, for his interview with Boris Johnson at the Conservative party conference. After the interview, which saw Robinson telling Johnson to “stop talking” because Robinson thought he was playing for time and question-dodging, a Sunday Times report (paywall) claimed Dorries was furious with the presenter’s attitude. “Nick Robinson has cost the BBC a lot of money,” the paper quoted her as telling allies. Dorries told the committee: I’ve never criticised Nick Robinson. I didn’t hear the interview that I was supposed to have criticised, and I never made the comments ... It was attributed to me, but nobody can actually say that I said it. Hospitality venues in Scotland are likely to welcome the Scotttish government’s decision not to extend the scope of vaccine passports in Scotland. (See 2.42pm.) They feared the scheme could have been expanded to cover pubs and restaurants. Here are some quotes from the Sturgeon statement, from the SNP’s Twitter feed. Sturgeon is now giving an update on Scotland’s Covid certification scheme. The current scheme - which covers nightclubs and large events - will apply for at least the next three weeks, she says. From 6 December people will be able to access places or events covered by the scheme either by showing proof of vaccination, as now, or by showing proof of a recent negative lateral flow test (which is not accepted now). And she says the cabinet has decided not to extend the scope of the scheme. The decision was ”finely balanced”, she says. But she says they decided that at this stage extending the scheme would not be proportionate. Sturgeon says the government is asking people over the Christmas period to take a lateral flow test before any occasion when they are socialising with others. That could be going out for drinks, going to someone’s home, or even just going out shopping, she says. And if you test positive, you should not go, she says. Sturgeon stresses the importance of pregnant women getting vaccinated too. Sturgeon says delivering the booster programme is the top priority. She says 1.4m people have already had a booster. That is just over 30% of the population over the age of 12. She says people who are not as vaccinated as they could be could be putting the lives of their loved ones in danger. People who have not had a first or second dose now should get one. And she says getting the booster is “not just a small top up”. It is every bit as important as the first or second dose, she says. She says booster reduce the chance of symptomatic infection by more than 80%. Sturgeon says the situation is “more positive” than it might have been, but that it is still “precarious”. She says that is why the cabinet decided to retain all the protections already in place in Scotland. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, is making a statement to MSPs about Covid. She says the situation is “deteriorating” across Europe. And she says cases have also been rising in the UK, with Christmas approaching. Even though cases in Scotland have been relatively stable, she says it is important to take care. Cases are higher than the government would like, she says. A Conservative councillor has agreed to pay “substantial” damages and legal costs to Jeremy Corbyn for a tweet containing a fake photograph of the former Labour leader at the scene of the Liverpool terrorist attack. In a statement posted on Twitter, Paul Nickerson, a councillor on East Riding of Yorkshire council, has apologised and taken “full responsibility” for the doctored tweet, which showed Corbyn laying a poppy wreath at the burning taxi outside Liverpool Women’s Hospital, and was captioned with the word “unsurprisingly”, PA Media reports. In a statement on Facebook, Corbyn said that the bomb attack in Liverpool was a “horrific crime’ and that Nickerson’s tweet “failed to understand the seriousness of the threat and did a disservice to all those affected by the attack and their loved ones”. Corbyn said he would be using the damages payment “to support charities that are close to my heart: including one in Liverpool and one in my constituency”. Councils across England will be forced to care for unaccompanied children who have arrived on small boats under new rules put forward by the Home Office, my colleagues Rajeev Syal and Libby Brooks report. Israel’s president, Isaac Herzog, has thanked the UK government for proscribing Hamas as a terrorist organisation. At a meeting with Boris Johnson in Downing Street Herzog said: Thank you very much for your resolution on proscribing Hamas. It’s a very important message to tell organisations and those who are inclined to radical ... and undermine the situation in the Middle East. In response Johnson said: On Hamas, I think we took the right decision. It was a difficult and a controversial decision. And by the way I think it was a decision that was almost immediately vindicated by the appalling incident we saw in Israel. Absolutely, terrible thing. As PA Media reports, two days after the proscription was announced, a Hamas militant killed one Israeli and injured four others after opening fire in the Old City on Sunday. People are being urged to take a rapid Covid-19 test before mixing with others in “crowded indoor spaces”, PA Media reports. PA says: Previously the public was advised to use lateral flow tests twice-weekly. But government and NHS guidance on when to take a test has changed and it now urges people to take a test before mixing with people in crowded indoor places or before visiting a person who is at higher risk of getting seriously ill from Covid-19. A post-Brexit scheme to draw the world’s most celebrated academics and other leading figures to the UK has failed to attract a single applicant in the six months since it opened, it has been reported. My colleague Kevin Rawlinson has the story here. Liverpool councillor Anna Rothery, who was dropped from Labour’s all-female mayoral shortlist earlier this year, has resigned from the Labour party with a stinging attack on Keir Starmer’s leadership. In a letter sent to the party’s general secretary, David Evans, this morning, Rothery writes that, “as a socialist” who joined the party as a teenager, the Labour party “no longer represents my values” and its leadership is “failing in its duty to effectively oppose the government’s attacks on our people”. She goes on: The leadership is more interested [in] carrying out internal party vendettas than standing up for our people, our black community and our LGBTQIA community. Rothery, whose mayoral bid was endorsed by former leader Jeremy Corbyn and the Unite union, slams Starmer’s decision to write an opinion article for the Sun in October. She describes the decision “to actively engage and seek support from the Murdoch press despite the feelings of the whole of Merseyside” as “unforgivable”. The move was criticised by Merseyside Labour MPs and others who observe a boycott of the Sun over its role in smearing victims of the Hillsborough disaster. Referring to the chaotic mayoral shortlisting process in February prompted by the arrest of former city mayor Joe Anderson, after which the councillor unsuccessfully attempted to sue the Labour party, Rothery writes: I was treated with utter contempt, with my name dragged through the mud for having the temerity of offering myself as a candidate for Liverpool’s elected mayor. Petty personality politics wastes time and provokes demoralisation and I want to spend my time supporting the people of our great city. As an independent councillor I will continue to fight passionately for my residents and the city without being held back by a timid national leadership or distracted by the internal fights in the party. As reported in the Liverpool Echo, Rothery is the second Labour councillor to resign this week. Rothery and Sarah Morton will sit as independents, leaving 68 out of 90 seats on Liverpool city council held by Labour under mayor Joanne Anderson. And here is a full summary of the Downing Street lobby briefing. No 10 rejected claims that Boris Johnson’s performance at the CBI yesterday showed that the PM was losing his grip. Asked if Boris Johnson still had a grip on what was going on, the prime minister’s spokesman replied: “Of course.” The spokesman quoted from the CBI response to the speech, saying business would have been “heartened” by what he said. The spokesman also played down the significance of Johnson losing his place half way through. He said: The prime minister briefly lost his place in a speech. He has given hundreds of speeches. I don’t think it’s unusual for people on rare occasions to lose their place in a speech. Asked if the PM was feeling okay (there was speculation yesterday that he might be unwell), the spokesman replied: “The prime minister is very much focused on delivering for the public.” Johnson has conceded that some people may still have to sell their homes to pay for social care under his reform plans, despite the Conservative manifesto ruling this out, the spokesman revealed. (See 12.27pm.) Cabinet was told that supply-chain problems are likely to persist over the winter, the spokesman said. He said Stephen Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, gave a presentation at cabinet on the issue. Barclay assured colleagues that Britons would still be able to buy turkeys, but he suggested wider problems would persist. The spokesman said: [Barclay] said we face the dual challenge of managing the regular pressures the colder and wetter months can bring alongside the additional challenge of an ongoing global pandemic and the knock on effects this is having including on global supply chains and energy supply. He gave an overview of the ongoing work he is leading to ensure the government is best placed to meet the expected challenges, including on food supply, noting that government action had alleviated concerns over potential turkey shortages in the run up to Christmas. The spokesman indicated that Johnson agreed with what Lord Frost, the Brexit minister, said in a speech to a Centre for Policy Studies conference yesterday. The spokesman said Frost’s speech echoed what the PM, and the chancellor, have said about the importance of having lower taxation and less regulation. Frost did call for low taxes and “light touch and proportionate regulation”. But in the speech he went further, suggesting that Brexit would fail unless these were delivered. He said: We can’t carry on as we were before and if after Brexit all we do is import the European social model we will not succeed. We have not successfully rolled back the frontiers of the European Union from Britain with Brexit, only to import that European model after all this time. So we need to reform fast, and those reforms are going to involve doing things differently from the EU. If we stick to EU models, but behind our own tariff wall and with a smaller market, we obviously won’t succeed. That is why I talk so often about divergence - not for the sake of it, but because it is a national necessity. In fact, there has been little serious deregulation passed since Brexit, and the tax burden is now on course to reach its highest level since the 1950s. The spokesman rejected a suggestion from William Hague, the former Conservative leader, that Johnson needs an inner cabinet of senior ministers to advise him. In his Times column (paywall) today Hague says: The first step towards that is avoiding trouble, and the best way to do that is to make cabinet government operate effectively. The prime minister could benefit from having a group of senior colleagues whom he meets every day. They ought to be discussing their whole strategy together frankly. David Cameron had such a group: I was part of it. Margaret Thatcher loved arguing with her ministers, which was frightening for them but led to well-informed decisions. Asked about this proposal, the spokesman said Johnson had an entire cabinet to provide him with advice. “The cabinet is used for that purpose,” the spokesman said. The spokesman also refused to comment directly on what he referred to as an “anonymous source” quote reported by the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg yesterday quoting a Downing Street figure saying the cabinet should be demanding serious changes to the way Johnson operates. The spokesman said Johnson wanted his ministers to speak freely and to give their views, and he implied this was already happening. “That’s what cabinet meetings are for and that’s part of the function of government,” he said. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just ended, and the readout from the prime minister’s spokesman about what was said at cabinet this morning included an important concession from Boris Johnson. The PM has admitted that, under his plans to reform social care, some pensioners could still be forced to sell their homes to pay for their care needs. Summarising what Johnson told cabinet, the spokesman said Johnson opened the meeting by welcoming last night’s Commons vote. [Johnson] reiterated the changes the government were introducing would finally address the long-standing problem that leaves one in seven people facing catastrophic care costs, changes backed by a significant funding increase support for the social care sector. He said the amendment meant more people would benefit with the charge for daily living costs set lower than in previous proposals and a £100,000 floor under which the government provides support, which applies both to residential and domiciliary care, recognising that half of people who receive care do something in their own homes. He added that no one be forced to sell a home they or their spouse is living in as it will not be counted as an asset. The qualifier about people not having to sell a home they are living in is important because it was not included in the promise Johnson originally made on social care. This is what the Conservative party said in its 2019 manifesto (pdf). We will build a cross-party consensus to bring forward an answer that solves the problem, commands the widest possible support, and stands the test of time. That consensus will consider a range of options but one condition we do make is that nobody needing care should be forced to sell their home to pay for it. There is nothing factually new about what Downing Street is saying. As soon as the social care plan was announced in September, critics pointed out that it would not offer as much protection as the Tory manifesto implied. But at that point Johnson refused to acknowledge that. When Keir Starmer challenged him on exactly this point at PMQs the day after the announcement was made, Johnson simply ignored the question. This BBC graphic, being retweeted by some opposition MPs, explains clearly why some people are likely to have to sell their houses if they move into a care home under the current plans. I will post more from the briefing shortly. A total of 1,020 deaths registered in England and Wales in the week ending 12 November mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). This is up 3% on the previous week and is the highest number since the week to 12 March, as PA Media reports. Around one in 12 (8.5%) of all deaths registered in England and Wales in the week to 12 November mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate. Stormont ministers have agreed a series of new measures aimed at bolstering adherence to Covid rules in Northern Ireland, PA Media reports. PA says: Ministers met on Tuesday morning to resume discussions on a range of proposals recommended by health minister Robin Swann. Some revisions to Swann’s original recommendations have been made. People will be urged to work from home where possible and the Executive has tasked its Covid taskforce to examine issues around enforcement of mask wearing and also look at the potential of setting up a scores-on-the-doors type system to rate businesses on their compliance with rules and mitigations. And this is from Paul Givan, Northern Ireland’s first minister. As we report in our splash today, what made Boris Johnson’s rambling, glib and poorly delivered CBI speech such a disaster yesterday was the fact that it appeared to confirm growing fears in the Conservative party that the PM is losing his grip. Most other papers are reporting similar concerns in the Conservative party. This is from the Times’s story (paywall). One government source said there was nervousness in Downing Street after what appeared to be “stumble after stumble”, adding: “People are sharpening their knives. The operation should be spotting those things and heading them off” ... One minister said: “He looked dreadful today. I think it’s indicative of the chaotic way the government is drifting. It’s not fatal, but he needs to get a grip.” One Conservative MP told the Times: “The prime minister desperately needs a big moment where everyone says, ‘boom, he’s back’. Today wasn’t that moment but he needs to find it soon.” This is from the Financial Times’ story (paywall). A long-term supporter of Johnson pinned the blame for recent problems on the prime minister’s advisers. “Bojo has lost his mojo,” said the Tory MP. “There’s a mixture of anger and despair but the real frustration is with the [Number 10] operation, it’s amateurish.” Another close ally of Johnson said fears over his standing in the Conservative party were growing. “I’m starting to get concerned,” added the Tory MP. “Supporters who were hitherto reliable are getting jittery.” However, it is always important to keep things in perspective. In The Prime Ministers We Never Had, his new and very insightful book about politicians who never quite made it to No 10, Steve Richards considers why it is that they all failed and one of his main conclusions relates to prime ministerial job security. He says: The most striking lesson is that prime ministers are much safer than they appear to be ... Most of the time, there is considerable speculation within governing parties and the media that a prime minister is about to fall and be replaced by a mightier figure. The opposite tends to happen; the tottering prime ministers continue for much longer than assumed or anticipated. The Conservative party held its annual fundraising winter ball last night, and as usual that saw donors paying vast sums for leisure events with cabinet ministers. The Sun’s Harry Cole has some of the details. A warning that Iraqi forces had entered Kuwait was not passed on to British Airways even though it had a flight heading to the Gulf state, the Foreign Office has disclosed. PA Media reports: Flight BA149 with 367 passengers on board landed in Kuwait in the early hours of August 2 1990, and the passengers and crew were detained by the invading Iraqi forces and held hostage for up to five months. In a Commons written ministerial statement, Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, said files being released to the National Archives show that British ambassador Sir Michael Weston warned the Foreign Office around midnight that an Iraqi incursion was under way as the flight was en route. “The information was passed by the resident clerk to the head of the FCO’s Middle East department and also to No 10, the Ministry of Defence, Cabinet Office and the Secret Intelligence Service [MI6], but not to British Airways,” Truss said. “The call made by HMA Kuwait has never been publicly disclosed or acknowledged until today. These files show that the existence of the call was not revealed to parliament and the public. “This failure was unacceptable. As the current secretary of state, I apologise to the house for this, and I express my deepest sympathy to those who were detained and mistreated.” There has long been speculation that the flight was allowed to continue to Kuwait, even though other flights were being diverted, because it was being used to carry a group of Special Forces into the country. But, in her statement, Truss said the files were consistent with a statement by ministers in 2007 that “the government at the time did not attempt in any way to exploit the flight by any means whatever”. But Ruth Davidson, the former Scottish Conservative leader, has a very different take from Jeremy Hunt on the PM’s CBI speech. She posted this on Twitter last night. Davidson was once seen as a future Conservative party leader herself in the David Cameron years, but as a remainer who has now joined the House of Lords, she is definitely now out of the running. In his Today programme interview Jeremy Hunt, the Conservative chair of the Commons health committee, and Boris Johnson’s main rival for the Tory leadership in 2019, sought to play down the seriousness of the PM’s CBI speech debacle yesterday. He told the programme: What I would say is the last month has not been a good month for the government. But in the end the thing that will count when we next face the electorate is whether the things that we have promised to help ordinary people are actually happening. Nick Robinson, the Today presenter, suggests Hunt was being tactful because he has not ruled out being a leadership candidate again. Good morning. Last night Boris Johnson won the vote on how the cap on social care will be implemented. But despite currently having a working majority of 77, his majority was cut to 26. There were 19 Tories who voted against the government. Just as significantly, for the third time in less than three weeks, dozens of Conservatives effectively went on strike, refusing to vote with the government. There were 68 Tories who did not vote in the division last night; last week 74 Tories did not vote in the divison on Labour’s plan to reform the code of conduct for MPs, and earlier in the month 97 of them did not vote in the division on the motion to shelve the Owen Paterson report. According to my colleague Jessica Elgot, only 13 Tories were paired with Labour last night, meaning most of the no-shows were probably deliberate abstentions, rather than authorised absences. The row over the cap on social care costs is unlikely to go away. The health and social care bill has to go to the House of Lords, and peers are very likely to seek to amend this aspect of the bill. This morning Lady Finlay of Llandaff, a crossbench peer, told the Today programme: I think when this comes to the House of Lords, we will need to scrutinise this very, very carefully ... It may be that we will say to the Commons, ‘can you think again?’, it may be that we come up with constructive amendments to improve what is on the table at the moment because, clearly, there’s a lot of disquiet. And, on the same programme, Jeremy Hunt, the Conservative chair of the Commons health committee, said that he thought eventually the government would have to back down on the mechanism used to calculate the cap on social care costs (which has been criticised because it gives poorer people less protection than was expected). Hunt said it was “unlikely” that the government would order a U-turn soon. But eventually there would be a rethink, he claimed. He told the programme: Certainly, in time, people will successfully make the case for the way the cap is calculated to be more generous .... We will be helping less people protect the assets in their houses than people like me were hoping for, than in fact the legislation I took through parliament in 2014 [provided for]. I think it makes it a harder package to sell to the whole country, which is why I hope very much this is something that government will look at again before the next election. Here is the agenda for the day. Morning: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. 10.30am: Johnson and Keir Starmer are among the attendees at a requiem mass for Sir David Amess at Westminster Cathedral. 11.30am: Sajid Javid, the health secretary, takes questions in the Commons. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. After 1.30pm: MPs resume their debate on the health and care bill. 2.20pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, makes a statement on Covid in the Scottish parliament. 2.30pm: Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, gives evidence to the Commons culture committee, first on the work of her department generally and then, from 4pm, on the online safety bill. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comCentral bankers have been caught unawares by rising prices that have exposed their “King Canute” theory of inflation, the former governor of the Bank of England Mervyn King has said. In a strong attack on how policymakers around the world have reacted to the Covid-19 crisis, Lord King accused them of relying too heavily on models that showed inflation always coming back to its target whatever the level of interest rates. “This is the King Canute theory of inflation. A thousand years ago, King Canute of England set his throne by the seashore and commanded the incoming tide to halt. The tide continued to rise and dashed over his feet and legs, driven by the laws of nature,” the former governor said in a lecture to the Institute of International Monetary Research. “A satisfactory theory of inflation cannot take the form ‘inflation will remain low because we say it will’; it has to explain how changes in money – whether directly via quantitative easing or indirectly via changes in interest rates – affect the economy.” This month, the Bank of England left interest rates at a record low of 0.1% while forecasting that the annual rate of inflation would continue to rise, peaking at 5% next spring. Threadneedle Street said it then expected inflation to fall back, returning to the government’s 2% target over the coming years. King, who was in charge of the Bank from 2003 to 2013, said he was not criticising individual decisions made in recent years, but was concerned about the intellectual foundation of central bank policy. “When King Canute sat in front of the incoming tide, his purpose was to show his courtiers that he was not omnipotent and could not by words alone undo the forces of nature. Central banks would do well to show the same humility.” Under King’s stewardship during the global financial crisis of the late 2000s, the Bank slashed interest rates and pumped money into the economy through quantitative easing, a bond-buying programme. The former governor cited a House of Lords report suggesting QE had since become the first resort of central banks to bad news of almost any kind. The failure to withdraw QE in response to good news, or even the absence of bad news, had led to a ratcheting up of central bank balance sheets, something King said was “unsustainable”. King’s successor as Bank governor, Mark Carney, introduced a system of forward guidance under which Threadneedle Street gave businesses, households and the financial markets a strong steer that official borrowing costs would remain low. “The danger now is that although financial markets may have lost faith in the forward guidance given to them, central banks themselves continue to believe in it and to cling to a narrative about the future path of interest rates that is no longer credible with inevitable problems for the clear communication of policy decisions,” King said. Forward guidance, the former governor added, could come to be seen as complacency. “A central bank should not be ashamed to acknowledge that it does not know where interest rates will be in the future because it cannot know where the economy will go in the months and years ahead. “The only forward guidance markets and economic agents need is an unswerving commitment to price stability.” King said there had been a decade of sluggish economic growth despite the largest monetary stimulus the world had ever seen and it was “surely time to recognise that many if not most economic problems are not amenable to monetary policy solutions”.Every summer, with Christmas and New Year stacked in the middle of the hot season, city-dwelling New Zealanders pack their car boots and make for the beaches, festivals and campgrounds dotting the country’s coastlines and remote forests. As the country prepares to lift its last lockdowns, prime minister Jacinda Ardern has promised that the “classic kiwi summer” will roll on. But this year, there are fears that packed among their chilly bins and camping chairs, holidaymakers will bring other baggage – infectious particles of Covid-19, carried to communities ill-prepared to greet it. In the face of that prospect, leaders of some of New Zealand’s small towns and settlements have returned to prospective holidaymakers with a blunt message: please stay away. “At Christmas I will sit out here on my veranda, and I will watch literally hundreds and hundreds vehicles, just heading north,” says Hone Harawira, former parliamentary representative for Te Tai Tokerau, a region at the far northern tip of New Zealand. “If the doors are open, quite literally tens of thousands of Aucklanders will be coming – there’s nothing to stop anyone.” ‘You may as well send up body bags’ Auckland, the centre of New Zealand’s thousands-strong Covid outbreak, has been in a strict lockdown for nearly 100 days. As the region approaches 90% of eligible adults vaccinated, Ardern announced those restrictions would soon be lifted – and alongside them, the strict border that has prevented all non-essential travel in or out of the city. While that reprieve was greeted with relief and celebration by many Aucklanders, experts and community leaders say it could also send a huge influx of Covid-carrying Aucklanders around the country, seeding the virus in communities with far lower vaccination rates and fewer health resources. “You may as well send up body bags,” northern iwi [tribal] leaders said when the news was first announced. The area’s isolation and dramatic terrain – some of the very attributes that make it so attractive to holidaymakers – also make its population vulnerable to Covid outbreaks. The region is served by just a handful of ICU hospital beds, and many towns are an hours-long drive from the nearest health facilities. On top of that, vaccination rates – particularly among Māori – are lagging up to 30 percentage points behind Auckland. “You’ve got to remember we don’t have the services or infrastructure to cope with a large outbreak,” says Antony Thompson, spokesperson for Te Kahu o Taonui, a collective of 12 iwi in the north. “Right now we’re just not ready, that’s all it is,” Harewira says. “Māori in Te Tai Tokerau [Northland] are currently 60% vaccinated. That’s a long, long way from the 90% that is the standard for Auckland.” Harawira has spent months during the latest outbreak running checkpoints, or pou korero [talking posts] to ensure people entering the region aren’t in breach of Covid rules. Soon, however, most of those restrictions will be formally lifted. Without any backing from central government, he’s concerned that visitors will simply breeze on through. “As far as they’re concerned, to hell with the local yokels,” he says. “[People will say] we’ve got the keys to the north, we’ve been given the go-ahead by the prime minister herself, so get out of the way.” “Unfortunately, I think the message being provided by government is go, go, go.” While the government has indicated people need to be fully vaccinated or produce a negative test to leave the city, there isn’t any comprehensive system in place, beyond possible spot checks, to ensure that carloads of tourists are compliant. “You’re going to see the virus seeded everywhere,” epidemiologist and public health prof Michael Baker said last week. Baker said the South Island may be better protected, given the requirements for vaccine passports on flights and ferries, but summer travel around the North Island was likely to lead to widespread transmission. Thompson says spot checks will not be sufficient. “Thirty thousand cars leave Auckland on a daily basis during summer. Can you really honestly hand on heart say that you can pick up which cars … don’t have vaccinated people in them?” Inland, in Te Urewera, the North Island ex-national park now governed by Tūhoe, the tribe has said it will be closed to visitors until the end of January. “Te Urewera is unique,” said board chair Tāmati Kruger. “Unlike New Zealand’s national parks, it is the home of Tūhoe communities, including some of the country’s most remote and vulnerable populations during the current pandemic.” But elsewhere, communities don’t have the option of simply closing private campgrounds or public roads. Instead, they’re relying on the goodwill of potential visitors: at the very least, be double vaccinated – and at best, consider delaying your summer road trip one more year. “I’d ask that [the rest of the country] join with me in a campaign to have Christmas moved to 25 January,” Harawira says. “If we hit 90% by then, we’ll open our arms to the nation. We’d welcome people here.” “I live in Auckland, I’ve been going to the exact same thing every other Auckland has been going through,” Thompson says. “I’d love to go north, I’m from the north as well. But my family, we’ve made the conscious decision to stay home.”A strange form hovers above a plinth. Suspended between the natural and the manufactured, like a suspiciously geometric meteor, unaided by wires, it wobbles in the air as I get up close. Hidden magnets power this unearthly levitation, one of several enigmatic works by Agnieszka Kurant in Our Silver City 2094 at Nottingham Contemporary. We could all do with a suspension of disbelief and a bit of magic, and that is what this complex hybrid of an exhibition offers: a possible way out of our terminal ecological, political and spiritual crisis. A different world to the one we have. On the way, though, things are going to get tough. Seventy-three years into the future, Our Silver City foresees this city in the English midlands as a site of dereliction and rebirth: the River Trent in flood, fires raging in Sherwood Forest, and civilisation and the ecology, what’s left of them, much changed. Little wonder that an ancient stone tablet bearing a hidden curse hangs on a wall. Many of the artworks and objects here look like remnants of unknowable past civilisations. Film footage of men in white lighting fires in a field. Simple drawings burnt into wood, made using sunlight and a magnifying glass by Roger Ackling. And a delightful, funny film by Asad Raza, in which Raza, abetted by an infant, does a home-cooking demonstration in his kitchen, in which he instructs us in how to make soil, that most foundational and complex substance without which the planet dies. We slew into space exploration and to a painting by On Karawa that bears nothing but a date. NOV8,1989, it reads, in white on a dark grey background. Commemorating nothing more than a day in the artist’s life, who knows what might turn up if we dig into it. Choose any date. There’s always something under the surface. Our Silver City is a place to get lost, deceived, entertained, baffled, astonished and bewildered. The whole thing is a fiction, a conceit; or rather, several fictions and many conceits. Nottingham Contemporary has also changed, according to this story, its galleries transformed into different time zones. Time of Change, Time to Understand, Time for Inner Knowledge. The last section of the show, Time to Transmit Wisdom, left me unchanged and none the wiser, but this is nevertheless a captivating, and at times deliciously confusing exhibition. Accompanied by a dystopian novella by Liz Jensen charting the coming disaster from the perspective of the future, Our Silver City is a kind of portmanteau, as so many exhibitions with grand themes and overarching schemes become; but it is none the worse for that. Beginning with maps of Nottingham from 1800 and 1904, and more recent charts produced by the local council, including subsidence and flooding reports, and a 1980s plan for the Broadmarsh shopping centre – currently being demolished to make way for a redevelopment of the site by Thomas Heatherwick – we slide from theme to theme, from artworks to objects, artists, film and video. There are radio broadcasts from the gallery roof, a 1980s US TV chat-show interview with Jorge Luis Borges (except it isn’t Borges, and I’ve been unable to ascertain if this is a reconstruction of a real interview or a spoof), and another film that documents the shooting of an advert for total sunblock makeup, in an abandoned quarry outside Madrid. “Saving Earth is now officially sexy!” says the advert’s star, brightly, again and again. These last two works are by Grace Ndiritu, who has also designed and curated the third gallery in Silver City. I spend a long time going back and forth, in what turns out to be a labyrinthine and frequently surprising agglomeration of themes, approaches, gambits and ruptures. The future and the past collide, turn in on themselves, and lead us down forking paths. I come to blisters of spreading colour – like beautiful petri-dish growths – by Céline Condorelli, and, much later, I am abstracted by a beautiful, endless meandering line in red by Anni Albers, and by a towering, imperturbable creature made from artificial hair, lurking in a corner of some kind of ceremonial space designed by Ndiritu. Ndiritu and Condorelli provide the show’s best two galleries. Each have created exhibitions in their own right and both have created mise en scènes that are part environments, part exercises in exhibition design and part artworks in themselves, however many things by other artists and makers, however many curious objects and loans from museums they subsume. There’s an overriding and infectious air of collaboration. Huge colour prints of bristling, curdling organic forms line the walls of Condorelli’s installation, and drape over a succession of freestanding barriers to form a table on which numerous objects are displayed: real fossils and post-industrial nuggets of epoxy, a head of the Egyptian god Horus and a lonely goldfish frozen in a hunk of resin, and a concrete block bearing an aerial, by German artist Isa Genzken. Sounds waft through the space, and a film plays on a monitor, its found footage showing us a future that never happened. When it ends, a gorgeous curtain slides across the room, and Ben Rivers’ 2016 film Urth starts running on the other side. Shot in an Arizona Bio-Sphere, it purports to show the last scientist on Earth turning off the AI that runs the dome, so that nature can do its own, unpredictable thing in the artificial rain forest. Ndiritu takes a different but related tack. She’s made a sort of meeting place, with bean bags on the floor, an overarching wooden roof, and structures supporting images and objects which range from prints and drawings by Albers to costume designs, memorabilia and ephemera of the slightly ridiculous utopian aspirations of the inter-war Kibbo Kift movement (there’s a probable link between the Kibbo Kift’s origins in the scouting movement and theosophy, and Albers’ origins in the Bauhaus, but that’s all for another day). There are weavings and embroidered banners, tapestries and all manner of peculiar sculptures and pots. An owl with a furry tail, loving cups and bear jugs, the odd crystal perched here and there. Daft things then, and wonderful things. I stayed for ages. The last space is a single, sprawling work by Femke Herregraven that uses a system of ancient-looking symbols to denote the phases of the moon, sky and land, meteorological anomalies, the behaviours of birds and bees and cattle. This language of signs and potents is written on the walls and across the floors. Speakers set on driftwood broadcast old countryside predictions about the weather recorded by local children. The gallery was busy, and I couldn’t decipher the words. What this work asks is that we attend to the things nature tells us. All I know is that when it is going to rain, my knee hurts. For all its eschatological intimations (one sort of end or another is always close), Our Silver City feels full of hope, vitality, energy and creative spark, and doesn’t take itself too seriously, however real the approaching calamity. Our Silver City 2094 is at Nottingham Contemporary until 18 April 2022 This article has been corrected; the works in the first paragraph are by Agnieszka Kurant.Asda has appointed Stuart Rose, the Conservative peer and former boss of Marks &amp; Spencer, as its first dedicated chairman in more than 20 years. Lord Rose, who helped fight off a 2004 bid from former BHS and Topshop owner Sir Philip Green in his time at M&amp;S, is a retail veteran who has had stints at the boss of Iceland, Argos and former Topshop and Miss Selfridge group Arcadia, which he sold to Green in 2002. He was chair of the online grocer Ocado until May this year. His appointment comes nine months after the completion of the £6.8bn acquisition of Asda by private equity firm TDR Capital and Blackburn-based billionaire brothers Mohsin and Zuber Issa who now co-own the UK’s third largest supermarket with US retail group Walmart. Rose will be Asda’s first dedicated chairman since the departure of Archie Norman who sold the supermarket to Walmart in 1999. Norman is now chair of Marks &amp; Spencer. Rose was knighted in 2008 for services to the retail industry and corporate social responsibility and was given a life peerage in 2014. He is already chair of EG Group, the petrol forecourts business which is also owned by TDR and the Issa brothers. The peer said: “I am joining the board at a hugely exciting time, as Asda builds on the incredible resilience it has demonstrated during the pandemic and embarks on the next chapter of its evolution and growth under new ownership.” He said the priority was to appoint a new chief executive for Asda, after the exit of Roger Burnley in the summer, and he was excited at the prospect of working with the Issa brothers to build on Asda’s heritage of food, fashion and general merchandise. Dame Alison Carnwath, the former chair of property group Land Securities and another EG board member has been made a non-executive director of Asda. She is a trained accountant who spent time in corporate finance for Lloyds and J Henry Schroder Wagg in New York. Mohsin and Zuber Issa said they planned to appoint further non-executive directors. “We are pleased to have Lord Rose and Dame Alison join the board of Asda. They have already provided invaluable support and wisdom to the board of EG Group, and we know their insight and experience will add huge value at Asda too. We are committed to ensuring this iconic business has the right governance and management framework in place to set it up for long-term success.”The photojournalist Tom Stoddart, who has died from cancer aged 67, covered conflicts, catastrophes and social issues around the world for 40 years and was regarded by his peers as an outstanding practitioner. I came to know Tom in the 1990s when we covered the civil war in the former Yugoslavia, often being in the same place at the same time. Although news photographers are commonly thought of as rivals, our camaraderie grew out of shared adversity and was cemented by our love for photography, especially the use of black and white reportage as a medium. Tom did not like colour photography and regularly quoted the Canadian photographer Ted Grant’s pithy remark: “If you photograph in colour, you see the colour of their clothes, but if you photograph in black and white, you see the colour of their soul.” Tom instinctively recognised stories with a moral imperative and was dedicated to bringing them to people’s attention. He was compassionate and wanted people to know about situations that needed to be corrected. In 1992 he photographed the siege of Sarajevo, producing pictures that showed the extremity of Sarajevans’ lives and their struggle for everyday survival without running water and electricity, and under constant threat from the snipers on the surrounding hillsides. The pictures were published around the world, highlighting the crisis and helping to raise it to the top of the political agenda in European capitals. Later that year he returned to the city and was injured during a bombardment near the parliament buildings. He was evacuated and spent a year recovering, but was so fascinated by the circumstances facing the Sarajevans that he went back in 1993 to document life during the bitter winter. After that he was to visit frequently until the Dayton peace accord of 1995 was announced. The end of hostilities meant that a final chapter remained to be photographed. Tom asked me if I would drive to Sarajevo with him as it would be a cost effective way for both of us to cover the story. He bought an old Lada Niva (nicknamed “Trigger”) and that December we left London for Dover, stopping on the way to pick up some snow chains for the car before catching the Sealink ferry to Calais. Three days later we arrived in snow-covered Sarajevo. It was a harsh winter; the roads were frozen sheets of ice and each morning we had to dig the car out of a snow drift. The weather was dreadful but the mood in the city was ecstatic. Peace had broken out and there was freedom to roam without fear. As the war ended, media interest in the story tailed off and on this occasion few of Tom’s pictures were immediately published, but he had completed a body of work that went on to be exhibited notably in 1997 at the Royal Festival Hall, London, in a show titled Edge of Madness – Sarajevo a City and Its People Under Siege. Looking back he was pleased too when his work at the French photo festival Les Rencontres d’Arles in 1994 was picked out by a photographer he admired. The pioneer of photoreportage Henri Cartier-Bresson wrote to the curator praising the exhibition, something Tom might not have imagined in 1970 when he started out on the local newspaper in his native north-east. Tom was born in Morpeth, Northumberland, the son of Thomas Stoddart, an agricultural worker, and Kathleen (nee Turnbull). On leaving Seahouses secondary modern school, and wanting to go into journalism, he approached the Berwick Advertiser but was told there were no vacancies other than apprentice photographer. He snapped up the chance. In 1978 he moved to London, where he freelanced for Time magazine and the Sunday Times. He made a name for himself in Beirut in 1987, shooting an exclusive on the inhumane conditions inside the Palestinian camp of Burj al-Barajneh, where the British doctor Pauline Cutting was working in a temporary hospital. Tom had the knack of spotting a good story long before other people and had the courage to undertake dangerous assignments with risks that others would balk at. He was professionally ambitious and canny, but also generous and charming, a trait he used in persuading people to help him achieve his objectives, whether talking his way through an obstinate checkpoint or persuading a hesitant editor to buy his work. By any standards Tom produced a prodigious amount of photojournalism, from the 1982 civil war in Lebanon to the collapse of the Berlin wall in 1989, the Romanian revolution, the Gulf war in 1991, Bosnia, the HIV/Aids epidemic in Africa, the invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the exodus of refugees from Syria in 2015. Internationally recognised for his news coverage, he was less well known for his work with charities and NGOs such as Doctors Without Borders, Christian Aid and Sightsavers, with whom he collaborated, using his powerful image-making skills to promote their causes. He received many accolades, including several World Press awards and the Larry Burrows award for exceptional war photography, for his documentation of British Royal Marines during the invasion of Iraq. He worked tirelessly, seamlessly moving from one project to the promotion of the next. Unlike many photographers who become known for one piece of work, Tom had many to choose from. His last project, Extraordinary Women (2020), is a collection of images reflecting on the strength of women in times of adversity. The cover is graced by one of his favourite pictures, Meliha Varesanovic walking defiantly to work during the siege of Sarajevo, an image that exemplifies Tom’s photography. He is survived by his wife Ailsa, whom he married in 2015, and his sister, Alicia. • Tom Stoddart, photographer, born 28 November 1953; died 17 November 2021Thiago Alcântara has distanced himself from a return to Barcelona and said he remains committed to a Liverpool team that can “achieve everything” under Jürgen Klopp. The 30-year-old has had a frustrating 14 months at Liverpool, with injuries and Covid restricting him to 26 starts. The midfielder was recently linked with a return to Barcelona, and a reunion with his former teammate turned head coach Xavi Hernández. “I am not concerned about the rumours; I’m focused on the duty I have with my team and the years I have in my contract with my team,” said Thiago, who signed a four-year deal when arriving from Bayern Munich for an initial £20m. “I just want to know about this new adventure that I have here in the Premier League and try to win all the trophies I can. My commitment is much more with this team.” Thiago is set to make his fourth start of the season on Wednesday, against Porto in the Champions League, having recently recovered from a calf problem. He missed two months of last season with a serious knee injury and despite the interruptions has no regrets about joining Liverpool. “One hundred per cent I made the right choice and the right move,” he said. “I hate that me and my teammates got injured but it’s part of our job and part of life. I came [to Liverpool] because I wanted to win and go away from my comfort area and try new things – great, different football; Jürgen’s football. “With my experience and knowledge in football, I can be better learning new things, so why not? At the end, I want to win. That’s the biggest thing I have in my mind. Why not here with Jürgen and these teammates?” Liverpool have made light work of winning what appeared a problematic group with two games to spare and Thiago, who won the Champions League with Bayern and Barcelona, believes the 2019 champions have the pedigree to triumph again. “I learned it is very tough to win a Champions League,” he said. “In more than 10 years of my career I had an opportunity to be in two finals. You can see that I won twice but I lost more than eight. It’s very tough to go through every stage because we are playing against the best teams and players in the world but if we are in our best mood then we can achieve everything.” Takumi Minamino and the 19-year-old midfielder Tyler Morton could also feature as Klopp rotates. “We always respect the competition but we have to think about ourselves and our schedule and the situation of our players first,” the Liverpool manager said.Hundreds of British passengers might have avoided being taken hostage by Saddam Hussein in 1990 if a call by a British ambassador regarding Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait had been relayed to British Airways, the Foreign Office has disclosed. The revelation of the phone call and the decades long cover-up was made on Tuesday under the 20-year disclosure rule, but was known to ministers and diplomats since 1990. The current foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has apologised for the omission. The files show officials discussed a variety of ways to suppress the existence of the ambassador’s phone call, including holding internal meetings with ministers to discuss whether the UK government would be vulnerable to compensation claims by passengers if its “system failure” was made public. One note written by the Foreign Office’s Middle East department in August 1991 admits: “We have never mentioned HMA [Her Majesty’s ambassador] Kuwait’s telephone call at c 00.00 on 2 August in public for obvious reasons.” It adds the Foreign Office minister “Douglas Hogg had spoken to the [foreign secretary] Douglas Hurd about this”. Another written to Hurd’s private secretary, Sir Stephen Wall, said: “We have never made public the sensitive fact that the ambassador rang the duty clerk to say Iraqi troops had crossed the border.” The suppression of the phone call, made by the ambassador Sir Michael Weston, highlighted in memos distributed across Whitehall, was repeated in parliamentary written and oral statements, as well as in a letter to the shadow transport secretary John Prescott from the prime minister John Major in October 1992. The extensive files, covering all aspects of Saddam’s invasion of Kuwait, contain no definitive information on claims made by BA cabin crew, and passengers, that a group of MoD-hired special forces were also on the flight as part of a reconnaissance mission. It has been alleged that the flight from London to Kuala Lumpur, with a stopover in Kuwait, on the night of 1 August was delayed in London for two hours to allow a small group of military figures to board the plane. The men, allegedly hired by the Ministry of Defence, were being sent to Kuwait to act as spotters ahead of an Iraqi invasion. In a written statement, Truss referred to special forces by repeating a complex formula given to the then defence minister Geoff Hoon in 2007 that: “The government at the time did not seek to exploit the flight in any way by any means whatsoever.” In the key disclosure, the files reveal the UK ambassador to Kuwait rang the Foreign Office duty clerk around midnight on 1 August 1990 to warn that some kind of Iraqi invasion of Kuwait was under way. The full scale of the invasion was unclear at that point, but his warning was then relayed across Whitehall including to Downing Street, the Foreign Office and the intelligence services. But this message was not passed on to British Airways. At the time the BA flight was in the air on the way for a stopover in Kuwait city airport. The flight landed just 73 minutes after the envoy’s warning call to Whitehall and hundreds of British passengers were soon after captured by Iraqi forces and held hostage for up to five months. In one letter sent by Foreign Office minister Mark Lennox Boyd, dated July 1991, he wrote that at the time the flight landed “the Foreign Office, our ambassador in Kuwait and British Airways were unaware that Iraq was invading Kuwait”. The Foreign Office civil servants admit the letter was inaccurate. In her written answer Truss extends her deepest sympathy to those that were captured and held hostage. But in a move to head off any fresh compensation claims, she says “responsibility for the passengers being taken hostage lies solely with the Iraqi government at the time”. Barry Manners, a passenger on the flight, said he was disappointed the government had not used the opportunity to acknowledge the “irrefutable” evidence that the flight was used for an intelligence mission. “This was a deliberate act by the British government to use a civilian airliner as a military transport into what turned out to be a live-fire war zone,” he said.As a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections threatens to overwhelm intensive care units in hospitals from Brussels to Berlin, European governments have begun to sound exasperated as well as anxious. On Monday, the German health minister, Jens Spahn, starkly laid out the stakes of the coming winter, in terms designed to function as a wake-up call. By the spring, Mr Spahn warned, the vast majority of Germans would be “vaccinated, cured or dead”. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, dismissed violent protesters against restrictions on the unjabbed as “idiots”, while his Belgian counterpart, Alexander De Croo, said that similar scenes in Brussels were “absolutely unacceptable”. The comments of Mr Rutte and Mr De Croo were explicitly directed at the violent fringe that hijacked demonstrations in the Belgian capital and Rotterdam. But there is a more general sense of frustration among political leaders in western Europe: as an expected autumn surge duly comes to pass, a significant minority of citizens are deepening the crisis by refusing to be vaccinated. Dealing with this section of the population, which is far more likely to need hospital treatment after infection, has become a major policy dilemma for governments seeking to juggle civil liberties with the need to protect the interests of society as a whole. This is treacherous terrain for any liberal democracy. The developing policy response has been to exert a gradual squeeze on the activities of the unvaccinated, in the form of Covid passes and restrictions. These are now being toughened up. In Belgium, proof of vaccination or a negative test will be required to enter cafes, restaurants and nightclubs, and vaccination for care workers has become compulsory. In Germany, similar restrictions are being introduced in states that have a high rate of Covid-related hospitalisation. The head of the Robert Koch institute – the country’s disease control agency – has said that vaccination rates urgently need to be raised from 68% to well above 75% if a full-blown crisis is to be avoided. These are understandable and justifiable measures, given exponential rises in infection rates and increasing death rates. Nevertheless, governments will need to tread with exceptional care as they are imposed. They should avoid following the example of Austria, which last week announced that vaccination would be mandatory from February. As the World Health Organization emphasised on Tuesday, a “vaccine plus” approach, emphasising the importance of social distancing and mask-wearing for all citizens, is necessary. And while libertarian arguments cannot be allowed to trump the need for social solidarity in the context of a pandemic, formal discrimination against those who remain unvaccinated needs to be supplemented by more vigorous drives to inform, persuade and listen to the reluctant and sceptical. This is particularly true in sections of the population where trust in government is at historic lows and a sense of civic disenfranchisement is already widespread. A two-tier Covid society, if allowed to persist for any meaningful period, will become a gift to far-right parties seeking fertile ground. Austria’s Freedom party, recently damaged by a corruption scandal that saw its popularity plummet, is using anti-vaccination protests as a means to rehabilitation. In Germany, a fraught debate is now under way over whether a move to mandatory vaccination would violate the constitutional right to “bodily integrity”. In Berlin and elsewhere, it is vital that a more consensual route is found.A social media post that vanished within minutes is reverberating around the world, weeks later. The most personal of matters has become a diplomatic issue. The tennis player Peng Shuai’s allegation that a former senior Chinese leader, Zhang Gaoli, had sexually assaulted her was unprecedented. It inevitably prompted grave concerns for her – only increased by subsequent stage-managed appearances and a message that the initial claim was untrue and everything was fine, all relayed via state media outlets or employees (though only to readers outside the country). There is nothing new about people disappearing after angering China’s authorities. Nor is there anything new about “proof of life” videos emerging, or about forced letters and filmed testimonies. The tone and content of Peng’s purported email to the Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) and video call with the International Olympic Committee (IOC) seem remarkably familiar: nothing was ever wrong and she would like people to stop talking about her. As the WTA said, these do not address the questions about her wellbeing and ability to communicate without censorship or coercion. Still less do they touch upon her accusation, which Chinese authorities have not addressed beyond complaining of “malicious hyping” of the case. What is new is that a sporting organisation should prove so admirably blunt and committed, and that high-profile athletes including Novak Djokovic, Naomi Osaka and Serena Williams have spoken out. China is a vast and growing market for tennis and other sports; athletes and their organisations, like companies more broadly, have quickly fallen into line when their incomes were imperilled by displeasing Beijing. If that is now changing, it owes much to the principled stand of the WTA – but also, perhaps, to the broader global shift in attitudes to China, evident not only in the tougher stance taken by the US over recent years, but also in Angela Merkel’s statement last week that Germany may have been “naive” at first about cooperation with China. All this intensifies arguments over the Winter Olympics, only weeks away. Peng is a three-time Olympian. The IOC, which has always been conveniently committed to “quiet diplomacy” – or keeping quiet and taking the money – should be ashamed of treating the video call as reassurance. But the Biden administration was already discussing a diplomatic boycott of the Games over the treatment of the Uyghurs in Xinjiang; it is hard to see how it could comfortably send a high-level delegation while it is warning of ongoing genocide in the region. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, is said to be pressing for the UK to take a similar stand; others too are debating the issue. China does not want its people to know about Peng’s case. But it is already beginning to spin the broader questions over the Olympics as proof that the west is using human rights concerns as a pretext to do down the country: “anti-Chinese forces will converge to make trouble for China”, a state-run newspaper predicted on Monday. The clumsy performance of the last week shows that Beijing is unlikely to convince many outside the Great Firewall. The question is whether it will therefore be held to account for Peng’s treatment and the grotesque human rights abuses against the Uyghurs, by whatever means – or whether people will ultimately acquiesce for the sake of their bottom line again. As the WTA has observed, some things should be bigger than business.A husband and wife were stabbed to death at their Somerset home as their children slept upstairs, police have said. Paramedics tried to save Stephen Chapple, 36, a teacher, and Jennifer Chapple, 33, who worked in a coffee shop, but they died of their wounds in their house in the village of Norton Fitzwarren, near Taunton. When police arrived they found their children, aged five and six, still asleep. Officers ushered them away, not allowing them to see their parents’ bodies. Neighbours said there had been disputes about parking in the street and that police had visited on at least three previous occasions to speak to those involved. Avon and Somerset police has referred itself to the watchdog the Independent Office for Police Conduct because of the previous contacts. Two men, aged 34 and 67, were arrested on suspicion of murder after the attack at about 9.45pm Sunday. On Tuesday, magistrates granted an extension to the custody time limit in relation to a 34-year-old man, while a man aged 67 was released under investigation. Officers searched bushes, gardens and drains around the house in Dragon Rise. Tributes poured in for the couple. Rob Brooks, the manager of Otter garden centre in Taunton, where Jennifer Chapple worked, said: “Jenny joined us at the beginning of this year and worked in our coffee shop. She was a respected member of the team and was well liked by all her colleagues.” Gregg Mockridge, the headteacher of West Somerset college, where Stephen Chapple taught, said: “Steve was a fantastic colleague, a brilliant teacher that cared deeply about the students in his care. He led innovations in the use of technology across the school, as well as within his own teaching. Steve will be sadly missed by all staff and students and our thoughts and prayers go out to his children and wider family at this time.” A murder investigation is being led by the major crime investigation team. Police said the children were being looked after by family members. A postmortem confirmed Jennifer Chapple had died from multiple stabs wounds. The postmortem on Stephen Chapple was continuing on Tuesday but a police source said he, too, had suffered stab wounds. The senior investigating officer, Det Insp Neil Meade, said: “What happened to Stephen and Jennifer is utterly heartbreaking and I can’t begin to imagine the impact their deaths will have on their two children. This is a tragic incident which has shocked the community, and neighbourhood officers are patrolling the area to provide reassurance.” One neighbour, who asked to be named only as Melissa, said: “Everyone has an issue with parking around here … it has caused a lot of upset.” A resident who asked not to be named, whose children go to the same school as the couple’s, said: “Jennifer was always very chatty and she loved dogs – she’d run up to every dog she saw. Steve was also a lovely man. He seemed to be very devoted to his children.” Among notes left at the scene was one that read: “Jennifer you lit up the street with your smile. You and Steve have been such wonderful friends since you arrived in our lives. Such a kind and welcoming couple.”The US, France and Germany have called on their nationals to leave Ethiopia immediately as the prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, vowed to lead his country’s troops “from the battlefront”, the latest turn in a devastating year-long war with rebel groups. The Nobel Peace prize winner said in a statement posted to Twitter: “I will mobilise to the front to lead the defence forces. Those who want to be among the Ethiopian children who will be hailed by history, rise up for your country.” Tens of thousands of people have been killed in the war between Ethiopian and allied forces and fighters from the country’s northern Tigray region. A de facto blockade on Tigray has triggered a humanitarian crisis and prevented the delivery of essential medical supplies. In response to the worsening situation France, Germany and the US state department urged their citizens on Tuesday to leave on the first available commercial flight. The Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) rebel group have continued to press towards Addis Ababa, claiming control of the town of Shewa Robit, just 220km north-east of the capital by road. The US and others have warned that Africa’s second-most populous country could fracture and destabilise the whole Horn of Africa. Abiy was awarded the Nobel Peace prize in 2019 after he signed a deal to end a nearly 20-year military stalemate with Eritrea after their 1998-2000 border war. But last November he sent troops into Ethiopia’s northernmost Tigray region to topple the TPLF, saying the move came in response to TPLF attacks on army camps. Though he promised a swift victory, by late June the TPLF had regrouped and retaken most of Tigray including its capital, Mekelle, prompting the federal army to largely withdraw from the region. Since then the TPLF has pushed into the neighbouring Afar and Amhara regions. It has also formed an alliance with other insurgent groups including the Oromo Liberation Army (OLA), which is active in the Oromia region surrounding Addis Ababa. Fears of a rebel advance on the capital have prompted several countries including the US and the UK to pull out non-essential diplomatic staff. These countries are also urging their citizens to leave Ethiopia while commercial flights are still available. In a year’s time, Abiy’s government has gone from describing the conflict as a “law enforcement operation” to an “existential war”.“If you want to know me, look at my surface”, Andy Warhol once said, or something along those lines. It’s an invitation to the obvious that should apply in politics, and yet the public regard politicians with – at best – a good deal of suspicion and, at worst, contempt. And who can blame them? In New Zealand the workers’ party (Labour) was responsible for introducing and administering neoliberalism in the 1980s, a dramatic break with their social democratic history that the Australian Labor party was also undertaking in the 1980s, the US Democrats in the 1990s, and UK Labour shortly after. As the old joke goes, capturing the distrust most people feel for left and right, “it doesn’t matter who you vote for, a politician always gets in”. But what distinguishes prime minister Jacinda Ardern from the politicians who bite at her heels is that the Warholian doctrine is probably true. At least in her case. In New Zealand’s double disasters – the Christchurch massacre and the Whakaari eruption – Ardern met each tragedy with immediate action, crisp and clear communication, and an extraordinary human care almost entirely absent in modern politics. She met with victims, their families took her into their own homes and at every opportunity she made an invitation to act in solidarity – from the country’s successful gun reforms to the “Christchurch call”, an international bid to stamp out violent extremism online. When the prime minister met with families of the victims of the Christchurch massacre, publicly wearing a hijab out of respect for their grief, it was done so with a sincerity that struck true. Unlike, say, the phoney attempts that other politicians – for example, Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau in India – made on foreign trips and in diverse communities. This sincerity is what underpins the impressive trust many New Zealanders place in the prime minister. In the latest polls Ardern is still registering in the 40s as preferred prime minister with her party, Labour, polling equally well. That’s remarkable in itself. With almost a third of the country still in lockdown it’s surprising that Ardern and Labour aren’t polling lower. In the 1 News Colmar Brunton poll Labour fell two points to 41% and in the Newshub-Reid Research the party is down 0.3 points to 42.7%. That stubborn level of support, despite the sustained hardships of 2020 and 2021, is quite something. But the explanation behind it is deceptively simple: in a crisis, you want Jacinda Ardern. The National party’s Judith Collins can barely muster a couple of percentage points. Of course, you could read numbers in the low 40s as rather ordinary. The prime minister’s predecessor, the centrist John Key, would regularly poll over 50%, an astonishing figure under proportional representation because that’s precisely what the system is meant to prevent – outright majorities. Key had his own international cachet as well as a former Merrill Lynch trader – his nickname on the floor: the smiling assassin – and former head of the International Democratic Union, an association of leading conservative parties. Key was also the prime minister that his mate, Australia’s Malcolm Turnbull, always wanted to be. Key’s local and international support was always found in that he could oil the engine – centrism – and grease up its parts – the voters. His pitch in 2008 was that as an insider (a banker) he had the skills to navigate New Zealand through the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Illogically, it worked, and Key was enduringly popular because of it. But he and his National party governed in comparatively easy times. Even during the financial crisis New Zealand was largely protected against overexposure to international financial markets, most household and business debts were held locally or in Australia, a booming commodities market in Australia and China meant demand from export markets was high, and near zero levels of government debt inherited from the previous Labour government meant the hard spending decisions were never made. But what distinguishes Ardern and her Labour government’s time in power is that she has been forced to confront a series of rolling crises. The virus chief among them. Her successful handling of the outbreaks in 2020 saw her secure the first mixed-member proportional representation majority at the 2020 election. Her somewhat successful handling of the latest outbreak means her numbers remain relatively robust. This is an achievement in itself when the virus is slowly spreading across the country, the vaccine mandate begins to bite as a small number of people lose their jobs, and more people than at any other point in the last ten years are uncertain about the country’s future direction. Former president Donald Trump, British prime minister Boris Johnson, Italy’s Matteo Salvini, Hungary’s Viktor Orbán, Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro, and their contemporaries across the world are reactionaries and authoritarians even the most committed accelerationist would struggle to invent. But where their respective countries can offer nothing more than the exhausted rearguard of radical centrism – president Joe Biden, UK Labour leader Keir Starmer, and so on – New Zealand offers a straight up social democrat. Ardern is imperfect, and her government usually struggles to implement its agenda, whether housebuilding or climate change action. But one aspect where the prime minister and her government excel is dealing with an immediate crisis. For that, most New Zealanders are thankful. And for the time being, the polls will hold because of it. Morgan Godfery (Te Pahipoto, Sāmoa) is a senior lecturer at the University of Otago and a columnist at MetroThere is a seam of dark humour whenever the Slovenian artist Jasmina Cibic is preparing to show her work in certain European countries. “They’re firing so many museum directors,” she says, with a brittle smile, “so we had this joke, that my show was going to be the last one for that director’s career.” Cibic points to what has been happening in Hungary and Poland, where rightwing governments have attacked the arts, sacking museum and theatre directors, silencing writers and putting pressure on galleries. Even in Britain, which may be far less authoritarian but is prone to populist nationalism, Cibic has met obstacles. After Brexit, she says, “I lost [some exhibitions] in English museums, and I was told that they will reprogramme to suit local and national interests.” She smiles. “With the nature of my work, it couldn’t be more bizarre.” Cibic is inspired by the European identity crises of the 20th century, and how culture can be “hijacked by ideology”. She has focused her recent work on the idea of “cultural gifts” – such as a building, piece of music, or art – and what they mean to a regime’s power and ability to buttress cultural identity and nationalism. Her film The Gift is one of several works that helped her to win this year’s Jarman award, the annual prize for artists working with moving images. Beautifully filmed, featuring music and dance, and set in locations that were themselves political gifts – Oscar Niemeyer’s building for the French Communist party in Paris, the Palace of Nations building in Geneva, and the Palace of Culture and Science in Warsaw, “gifted” by Stalin – The Gift tells the story of a competition to create a singular piece of art to “hold our nation together”, or as one character says, to show “who we are and who we want to be”. An artist, engineer and diplomat each state their case to four judges, in a film that questions what art means to a country (“dynamism in art and culture creates dynamism in a nation”, as one judge puts it), what future generations will make of such a cultural gift, and what “obligations” come with it. In a previous work, the film trilogy Nada, Cibic explored iconic architecture and national identity, again looking at key moments in 20th-century European history. Cibic, who was born in Ljubljana in 1979 when it was part of the former Yugoslavia, has been looking at the notion of “soft power” and the way culture is used for political gain since at least 2013, when she represented Slovenia at the Venice Biennale. “It felt at that time we were already feeling the new nationalism in eastern Europe starting to bubble up. I looked only at local specifics of Slovenian icons, successful and failed ones.” She wallpapered her pavilion with illustrations of what she calls “local Hitler bugs” – beetles, native to Slovenia, named after Hitler in the 1930s – and still-life paintings that hang in her country’s government buildings. “Everything had to do with how Slovenia chose, through time, to represent itself through culture.” She became, she says, more drawn to “identity crises of Europe, because that’s usually when culture gets called, to kind of try to fix something”. The script for The Gift, as in some of her previous work, is made with fragments of political speeches and debates – the result of years of international archive research by Cibic and her team. We meet in her London studio. Cibic, dressed in black, is warm, funny and an energetic speaker. With The Gift, she also wanted to look at “our responsibility as artists in this whole situation. With commissions, it’s easy to say: ‘I was commissioned.’ But with this idea of these ‘gifts’, there’s more at stake. Where are we willing to go? Because there is no such thing as clean money, there is no such thing any more as non-political engagement. Whatever we do is political.” She comes, she says, from a politically engaged family. “My grandparents were all partisans, they all fought in anti-fascist struggles in the former Yugoslavia.” Her father was a teacher, who taught work by Marx and Engels “until the system collapsed”. His books were relegated to a lower shelf, and Cibic’s rabbit ate them. Both her parents would have liked to have worked in culture, she says, but her grandparents “were red bourgeoisie. They bought art as wedding gifts. You don’t do art, you buy it.” Cibic was 11 when the first of the Yugoslav wars broke out – Slovenia’s 10-day conflict with the Yugoslav army after its declaration of independence in 1991. She was relatively untouched by that conflict, but sees that among other artists of her generation from the former Yugoslavia, “loads of us are now living abroad, and really dealing with the legacy”. The former Yugoslavia fascinates her, partly because she thinks its failure should act as a lesson. “The collapse of Europe that’s happening in front of our eyes is what Yugoslavia was going through, along the lines of the uprise of nationalism, of ‘let’s not spend money abroad’,” particularly in international cultural projects, she says. “In the late 60s, nationalism started flaring up, so the Yugoslav diplomacy decides to start big building projects at home to [honour] the anti-fascist struggle – big monuments were built and so on. But the idea of being present abroad subsides.” Cibic has seen friends from mainland Europe leave the UK, post-Brexit. She has been here for 20 years, and has a 12-year-old daughter, but she says that, like many other artists from EU countries living in Britain, she felt “the ground shatter” when the result of the referendum was announced. Winning the Jarman award, she says, has given her a strong sense that she does, in fact, belong here. Besides, Cibic says, she is more concerned for younger artists. She says that, for the first time she has noticed students she teaches seeming depressed “in terms of what is possible. If you don’t have this internationalism, this cross-pollination, we’re treading back so much.” Cibic is an internationalist – she is getting ready to show in New Zealand – and in terms of her new work there is, she says, a feeling of urgency. She relies on being able to sift through archives and her films are so site-specific, working with architecture that “used to – or still does – represent national or transnational authorities. I see a worrying trend of closing off access to the questioning” of what those spaces mean. “I don’t have a project that I’m like, ‘Oh, I will do it in five years’ time.’ It needs to be done now.” • Watch the work of the shortlisted artists on the Film London website, free online until 25 November.The leader of the Proud Boys far-right group has been denied early release from jail in Washington DC. In a ruling released on Friday, superior court judge Jonathan H Pittman said poor living conditions were not sufficient reason for Henry “Enrique” Tarrio to be transferred to house arrest or to have his sentence reduced. The “appropriate remedy for unconstitutional conditions of confinement is correction of the unconstitutional conditions of confinement, which are experienced by all inmates, not just the defendant”, Pittman wrote. Tarrio is serving a five-month sentence for stealing and burning a Black Lives Matter banner from a historic Black church in the capital, after Donald Trump’s election defeat. Tarrio also requested to be freed under DC’s “compassionate release” statute, which Pittman also denied. Tarrio, he said, “fails to establish that his case presents ‘extraordinary and compelling reasons’ warranting a modification”. Tarrio claimed to have been harassed by correctional officers and said his cell regularly floods with water from a toilet in a neighboring cell. “I’ve been to jail before and what I’ve seen here, I’ve never seen anywhere else,” Tarrio said in a video testimony. Tarrio also described abusive guards, smoke-filled hallways and medical neglect, saying he witnessed a prisoner have a seizure and wait for half an hour before help arrived. Approximately three dozen Proud Boys members and associates have been charged in connection with the 6 January Capitol riot, in which Trump supporters sought to overturn his election defeat. Some have been charged with conspiring to carry out a coordinated attack to stop Congress certifying Joe Biden’s victory. Tarrio was not at the Capitol on 6 January and has not been charged in connection to the riot. He was arrested on 4 January, on his way to DC. Police pulled him over on a warrant for vandalizing the Black Lives Matter sign, which was stolen from the Asbury United Methodist church the previous month. Officers also found Tarrio to be carrying two unloaded ammunition magazines emblazoned with the Proud Boys logo, which he said he sells. Tarrio pleaded guilty in August to destruction of property and attempted possession of a large-capacity ammunition feeding device.Covid guidance is being toughened across the UK to try to prevent a surge in cases before Christmas, with a focus on more rapid tests and home working. But scientists said messaging must be reinforced with a significant government publicity blitz. In an update to official guidance, people in England are now advised to take a lateral flow test (LFT) if they expect to be in a “high risk situation” that day, such as spending time in “crowded and enclosed spaces” and where “there is limited fresh air”. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, called on Tuesday for people to take a test whenever they planned to socialise with others, whether at home or out, or if going shopping somewhere crowded. “The most precious gift we can give anyone this Christmas is to be fully vaccinated or tested before we meet, hug or spend time with them,” she told MSPs in her regular Covid update. Sturgeon also announced that, from 6 December, people in Scotland would be able to show proof of a recent negative LFT result as part of the country’s Covid passport system. People in Scotland have been required to show proof of vaccination to enter nightclubs and large events like music festivals and football matches since October. In what Sturgeon described as a “very finely balanced decision”, the Scottish cabinet decided not to extend the passport scheme to theatres, cinemas and hospitality venues, however. In Northern Ireland, existing messaging on trying to work from home where possible has been strengthened, with people also now advised to wear masks indoors and limit social contacts. The Welsh government has already said it could extend its existing Covid pass scheme to pubs and restaurants, with a decision due next month. In England, with ministers resistant to introducing the “plan B” for winter Covid mitigation, the change in testing advice is billed by officials as part of a wider focus on personal responsibility, with no compulsion to take a test before Christmas shopping. While the advice is being incorporated into an existing information campaign called “Stop Covid hanging around”, scientists called for more to be done. “We need really strong public messaging and for our leaders to lead by example,” said Alan McNally, professor in microbial evolutionary genomics at the University of Birmingham. “I don’t think anyone knows what’s going to happen in the next couple of months, but if we want to avoid another dreadful Christmas because cases get out of control, then we need some new public messaging on TV and radio and to have some [prime ministerial] briefings to the public.” McNally, who helped set up the Lighthouse Covid lab in Milton Keynes, said the new advice failed to make clear that while a positive LFT nearly always means the person is infected, a negative result does not mean they are virus-free, and that even people who tested negative should take precautions, including using masks. People who are vaccinated should also test before going into “high-risk situations” he said, adding that the virus was still spreading among those who had received their shots, even though the vaccine greatly reduced their chances of falling seriously ill. Iain Buchan, professor of public health and clinical informatics at Liverpool University, said “test before you go” should cut the spread of Covid unless it led to large numbers of people going to crowded places who would otherwise not have gone. “The communications around ‘test before you go’ should remind people that they first need to get vaccinated and take other precautions such as wearing face coverings in crowded enclosed spaces where possible,” he said. Miriam Deakin, director of policy and strategy at NHS Providers, which represents hospitals, welcomed the new official guidance but urged ministers to closely follow the latest Covid data and take all the “necessary steps” to prevent the NHS from being overwhelmed.Some Conservatives describe it as almost a revolution on the quiet, one for which there are, so far, few consequences: an outbreak of Tory MPs who are not voting against the government, but simply not voting at all. Monday evening’s vote on controversial changes to the way people will have to pay for social care costs passed by just 26, a third of the government’s working majority of 77. While 19 Tories rebelled, 67 recorded no vote. Many of these were absent for good reasons – the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, was in Dubai – but Conservative whips estimate that up to 30 did so without permission. Similarly, when the Commons approved the government’s plan to block punishment for Owen Paterson after he broke lobbying rules – a plan reversed the next day – 13 Tory MPs rebelled but 97 didn’t vote. A Labour opposition day motion on second jobs for MPs last week saw four Conservatives support it and 71 not vote. “You could say that absenteeism is my silent protest,” said one senior Tory backbencher. “Maybe I’m getting old and cynical, but you can see these unforced errors coming, and while I don’t want to vote with Labour, I also don’t want to have to be led up a hill and then down again when we U-turn.” Backbenchers say some Conservative MPs have effectively started to “self-slip”, a reference to the “slip” system where whips give MPs permission to miss a vote, whether as part of a pair with the opposition member or not. In recent weeks, some Tories have only informed whips at the very last minute, making calculations about what might happen in a vote hugely difficult. “It’s part of a whip’s job to sit down and count up the numbers, but you get the sense they’re doing it more often than normal,” one MP said. “Last night, if the cabinet hadn’t come back [to vote] they could have been in quite a difficult place.” The current crop of Tory MPs already have had a tendency to be unpredictable, whips say, particularly the 2019 intake who spent so many early months of lockdown away from parliament. But the catalyst for a mass outbreak of non-compliance was the Paterson vote on 3 November, when dozens of Tories declined to back a plan to rip up MPs’ disciplinary measures to save one backbencher, while those who did support the government saw the plan then reversed. One of the abstainers was Angela Richardson, a 2019-intake Tory who was sacked as parliamentary private secretary in the communities and levelling up department, only to be reinstated. Richardson’s case “has done so much more damage to party discipline than the whips probably know”, said another Tory MP, who also arrived in 2019. “People are thinking: if a PPS can do it and not face any consequences, and we’re probably going to U-turn anyway, what’s the point of us voting with the government? Why not let other people take the flak?” Discipline had descended to the point that in the social care vote one Tory had been seen going into the voting lobbies, talking to whips, and then walking out after failing to be convinced of the government’s case. “The concern is we do all these things and then U-turn, so you might as well not bother voting,” the MP said. “And I think we’ll see a lot more. As far as I’m aware, most of those who don’t vote aren’t being dragged in front of the chief whip.” In contrast, they added, amid a sudden panic about the social care vote, some supportive MPs who had been given permission to be somewhere else were then called back to Westminster: “If you’re good and stick with the government your slip gets cancelled, but if you abstain you can do what you like.”About 15 months ago John Roberts, the founder, 23%-owner and chief executive of the online electricals retailer AO World, did a fine thing. He created an all-staff incentive scheme that is very different from other companies’ executive-only affairs. It was, he said in his folksy way, one he’d be “proud to tell my mum about”. Senior executives at AO would still shoot for multimillion-pound rewards (capped at £20m) but lower-paid workers would chase meaningful sums rather than “a round of drinks”. There was talk of AO’s warehouse workers, on £18,000-£20,000 a year, being awarded £30,000 bonuses if maximum targets were reached. This admirable venture, however, always looked vulnerable to an overdose of optimism. The share price targets just seemed a little too dreamy. Back in August 2020, AO hadn’t seen its float price of 285p for half a decade, yet the five- to seven-year scheme imagined a transformation. No bonuses would be generated until 523p was achieved and sustained, and the serious money would start at 941p. For a brief period, lockdown seemed to have supplied the necessary online fuel by changing shopping habits among buyers of fridges, freezer, laptops and TVs. “I believe we’ve seen 10 years of change in 10 months,” declared Roberts in January 2021 as AO’s sales in the UK, and in the trickier market of Germany, boomed. The City agreed: the share price, which had been 100p pre-pandemic, hit 400p. And now? Sadly, after the second profits warning in two months, the shares, down 14% on Tuesday, are back more or less where they started: 107p. After enjoying the whoosh of lockdown demand, AO is suffering the comedown of driver shortages and supply chain logjams. Worse, the company seems to have set itself up for growth that is not materialising. Top-line earnings are expected to be only £10m-£20m this year, quite a fall from last year’s £64m that was prematurely hailed as “a step-change”. Roberts, ever bullish, says he remains “hugely optimistic about AO’s long-term prospects”. Viewed from the warehouse, however, the “value creation plan” may have lost some of its motivational force at the current share price. One hopes that’s not the case because Roberts was right about the basic unfairness of most share-based schemes. But he may have over-cooked his targets. ‘Central banks need to Pep up the market’ Mervyn King, during his time as governor of the Bank of England, introduced us to the Maradona theory of monetary policy. Just as the Argentinian genius skipped through England’s defence for his second goal in 1986 in a straight line (almost), so a central bank can achieve its desired outcome by keeping the markets guessing about which way it may swerve on interest rates. The market adjusts for an anticipated action that doesn’t arrive. Now comes King’s Pep Guardiola theory. “You do not give a fixed plan to the players because it will be negated by an intelligent opposition and unexpected changes in circumstances,” he said in a speech on Tuesday evening, referencing Manchester City’s lauded manager. The point this time is that central bankers have become unhelpfully hooked on forward guidance, and rely too heavily on models that show inflation always coming back to its target whatever the level of interest rates. Forward guidance, King argued, failed the Guardiola test. Stuff happens. Loading up on analogies, he compared today’s central bankers to King Canute ordering the tide not to come in. Canute, of course, was deliberately demonstrating his lack of powers. In the same way, King suggested, central bankers would do well to say they don’t know where interest rates will be in future. It is fair point. Forward guidance is vulnerable to being spectacularly wrong at times, which is a serious risk currently. Less forward guidance – and more focus on explaining movements in the economy – might serve us all well. It would also spare us the increasingly tedious game of trying to decode every syllable of the current governor’s remarks on the likely path of inflation. If nobody’s prepared to give a timeline, the word “transitory” has lost its usefulness. PM needed more CBI spice, not just Peppa A week before his excruciating Peppa Pig World offering to the CBI, Boris Johnson made a speech in the City that was quietly praised in business circles. The chairman of one large FTSE 100 company said the address to the Lord Mayor’s Banquet was “the first speech I have heard from the prime minister that I could describe as statesmanlike”. It attempted to define the role of “Global Britain” and was injected with a business-friendly vision for how the UK could pursue “technological superpower” status; “public billions” would leverage “private trillions”. The CBI audience would have lapped up more of the same. The goal was wide open.A Conservative councillor has agreed to pay “substantial” damages to Jeremy Corbyn after tweeting a false image purporting to show the former Labour leader mourning the terrorist who committed the Liverpool Women’s hospital attack last week. Paul Nickerson resigned from East Riding council’s Conservative group on Tuesday after admitting sending the defamatory tweet on 15 November. He posted an apology on his Twitter account, saying he would also pay Corbyn’s legal costs. Commenting on the swift settlement of his legal case, Corbyn said: “The bomb attack on Liverpool Women’s hospital on Remembrance Sunday was a horrific crime, which could have killed or maimed countless victims, including new mothers and their babies. “Councillor Paul Nickerson’s Photoshopped Twitter post about me failed to understand the seriousness of the threat and did a disservice to all those affected by the attack and their loved ones.” Corbyn said he would donate the “substantial settlement” to charities close to his heart, including one in Liverpool and one in his Islington North constituency. Nickerson at first denied responsibility and said he was hacked – something he says now was “a kneejerk reaction which further let people down and only made the problem worse”. In a Facebook statement, he said he had demonstrated a “terrible lack of judgment” and “let down my own wife, children and the people of Beverley that I am supposed to represent”. He said he would now sit as an independent councillor, having resigned from the Conservative group at East Riding council after his initial suspension. “As well as financial recompense to Mr Corbyn, I have also promised to spend the next year raising £10,000 for youth charities in Beverley including the boxing club so something more positive might eventually come out of this,” he added. Nickerson’s apology said: “On 15 November 2021 a defamatory tweet, for which I accept full responsibility, was published on my Twitter account. The tweet targeted Jeremy Corbyn and included a fake photograph of him laying a poppy wreath at the site of a burning taxi outside the Liverpool Women’s hospital where a terror attack had taken place on Remembrance Sunday killing a suicide bomber and injuring others. “The false photograph, captioned by the word ‘unsurprisingly’, gave the completely untrue impression that Jeremy Corbyn supports terrorist violence including suicide bombings, which without any hesitation I wholly accept he does not. Without reservation I fully withdraw any suggestion or inference that Jeremy Corbyn is a supporter of terrorist violence.”Jessie Greengrass’s vision of a near-future Britain drowned by an apocalyptic flood, part of the expanding genre of climate-change fiction, is among the books shortlisted for the 2021 Costa book awards. Greengrass’s The High House follows Caro and her little brother Pauly as they try to survive in a flooded Suffolk, in a refuge created by Caro’s climate scientist stepmother. “Crisis slid from distant threat to imminent probability and we tuned it out like static,” writes Greengrass, in a novel that judges described as a “powerful book that makes you consider the privilege of being saved and the reality of survival”. The High House was one of several books submitted for the novel prize to tackle environmental themes, said judge and author Jessie Burton, describing books that were “preoccupied with rising waters, the world heating up, the decimation of natural wildlife and the effects of humans on the land”. “There were a variety of books touching on this theme or examining this theme, but Jessie’s stood out, it transcended from an issue into a novel,” said Burton. “What we wanted was a novel that a reader would want to read and immerse themselves in, even if it was challenging material, like facing the reality of the world heating up. And I think Jessie’s book makes it all uneasily plausible, because she does it very subtly. She’s a brilliant writer, and that’s what elevated it out of just writerly concern for the planet.” Greengrass said she wanted to explore the “disconnect” between our knowledge of the impending disaster of the climate crisis, and our inability to act on it – “that kind of weird space where you can watch something happening that’s terrible, and know that it’s happening, and be afraid of it happening, but still just get on with all of the ordinary things of life”. She was picked for the novel prize list alongside Nadifa Mohamed’s Booker-shortlisted The Fortune Men, Claire Fuller’s Women’s prize-shortlisted Unsettled Ground, and Elif Shafak’s The Island of Missing Trees, which follows two teenagers in war-torn Cyprus and a 16-year-old searching decades later for a connection to the island where her parents were born. “All of these novels are compulsive reading – offering great stories and a clear lens on the past to help us look at the world with empathy and determination,” said the judging panel, which includes journalist Sarah Shaffi and bookseller Charlie Bush. The shortlist for the first novel award also features a postapocalyptic world. In Kate Sawyer’s The Stranding, a woman hides from a cataclysmic event inside a beached whale in New Zealand, in what judges called “an immersive end of the world story full of hope and imagination”. Burton said she felt fiction was a useful place to explore themes of climate anxiety. “I know I would say that because I’m a novelist. But I do think we make spaces when we write for readers to enter, where we explore ideas,” she said. “Storytelling, and that sort of communication, is as old as the hill. And I think it speaks to different parts of the brain than if you’re sitting in front of the news. It penetrates a different part of your mind and your heart, and that’s why it’s so effective.” The Stranding is joined on the debut shortlist by Caleb Azumah Nelson’s Open Water, which judges called a “nuanced portrayal of the realities of race today”, poet AK Blakemore’s The Manningtree Witches, set in Essex in 1643 as a puritanical fervour grips the nation, and Emily Itami’s Fault Lines, in which Mizuki, lonely in spite of her family, falls for Kiyoshi and begins an affair. The Costas , which were originally established in 1971, recognise the year’s “most enjoyable” books across five categories, with 934 entries this year overall. The biography shortlist pits Ed Caesar’s story of British mountaineering legend Maurice Wilson, who attempted to climb Everest alone, against Guardian theatre critic Arifa Akbar’s memoir about the death of her sister from tuberculosis, John Preston’s portrait of Robert Maxwell, and Lea Ypi’s account of coming of age in communist Albania. Hannah Lowe, Raymond Antrobus, Kayo Chingonyi and Victoria Kennefick are up for the poetry prize, while the children’s award sets Manjeet Mann’s verse novel The Crossing against Ross Montgomery’s London blitz-set adventure story The Midnight Guardians, and two debuts from Helen Rutter and Anna Goodall. “We are delighted to celebrate these 20 brilliant books as we mark a milestone 50th anniversary year,” said Jill McDonald, chief executive of prize sponsor Costa Coffee. “There’s so much here for readers to explore, enjoy, recommend and share.” The overall winner will be announced on 1 February 2022, and will receive £30,000, with the category winners each receiving £5,000. Last year, Monique Roffey won the book of the year for her novel The Mermaid of Black Conch. The 2021 shortlists in full First novel Open Water by Caleb Azumah Nelson (Viking) The Manningtree Witches by AK Blakemore (Granta) Fault Lines by Emily Itami (Phoenix) The Stranding by Kate Sawyer (Coronet) Novel Unsettled Ground by Claire Fuller (Fig Tree) The High House by Jessie Greengrass (Swift Press) The Fortune Men by Nadifa Mohamed (Viking) The Island of Missing Trees by Elif Shafak (Viking) Biography Consumed: A Sister’s Story by Arifa Akbar (Sceptre) The Moth and the Mountain: A True Story of Love, War and Everest by Ed Caesar (Viking) Fall: The Mystery of Robert Maxwell by John Preston (Viking) Free: Coming of Age at the End of History by Lea Ypi (Allen Lane) Poetry award All the Names Given by Raymond Antrobus (Picador) A Blood Condition by Kayo Chingonyi (Chatto &amp; Windus) Eat or We Both Starve by Victoria Kennefick (Carcanet Press) The Kids by Hannah Lowe (Bloodaxe Books) Children’s Maggie Blue and the Dark World by Anna Goodall (Guppy Books) The Crossing by Manjeet Mann (Penguin) The Midnight Guardians by Ross Montgomery (Walker Books) The Boy Who Made Everyone Laugh by Helen Rutter (Scholastic UK)Millie Bright has said she is “humbled and honoured” to have been asked to captain England for the World Cup qualifiers against Austria and Latvia. The manager, Sarina Wiegman, gave the armband to Arsenal’s centre-back Leah Williamson during her first camp in the absence of the longtime captain Steph Houghton, who is yet to return from an achilles injury, and the experienced full-back Lucy Bronze. With Williamson out with a hamstring injury, Bright has been chosen. The 28-year-old was informed before training that she would lead the team for the games in Sunderland on Saturday and Doncaster next Tuesday, in which the striker Ellen White could win the cap she needs to reach 100 and eat away at the two-goal gap to the England Women’s goalscoring record. “We’ve actually taught her [Wiegman] a new phrase, ‘little chit-chat’, and then she was like: ‘Can I take you for a chit-chat?’ and asked me if I was happy to be captain for this camp,” Bright said. “I was a little bit stunned at first. We’ve got a lot of leaders and experience in the team and I was just very humbled and honoured to be given that opportunity.” Bright has captained England and Chelsea when injuries have sidelined Houghton and Magda Eriksson respectively, and she praised their influence on her leadership style. “It’s the way they carry themselves on and off the pitch – both of them are the ultimate pros,” the defender said. “Whenever it gets tough on the pitch, they’re always the first ones to bring the team back to its core and get us back on track in that moment. “But every captain is different. Every captain will lead in different ways. So I think it’s important not to put everyone in the same category. With or without the armband I always remain myself, the same Millie.” England’s second game, against Latvia, sees Bright return to where her career started with Doncaster Rovers Belles. “I suffered many defeats at the Keepmoat, some heavy defeats,” she said. “Looking back at the Keepmoat, that was my first real experience of playing in a big stadium and that’s where the dream started really. “It’s been a rollercoaster of a journey and to be able to be going back there and leading the girls out in front of the people and my family that were there from day one is going to be a moment that will last for ever.”Good morning. Health experts claims Liberal MP Gerard Rennick’s Facebook posts about vaccines could be “dangerous”. Covid cases continue to rise across Europe. And petrol and rental prices are putting financial pressure on Australians. Senator Gerard Rennick’s use of Facebook to push unverified stories about vaccine side-effects is potentially dangerous, a top health expert has warned, as fresh doubt is cast on the legitimacy of a story he helped promote. Rennick conceded to Guardian Australia that he does not verify the accuracy of the dozens of third-party claims he has published about severe vaccine side-effects. Associate professor and head of the AusVaxSafety program, Nick Wood, said: “The fact that he has admitted he hasn’t checked them and he’s just posted them on, that’s a problem. I think that is a danger because it feeds into: ‘is there a cover-up here, we’re not being told things’. That can potentially impact public confidence.” Financial pressures are increasing for low-income Australians who are priced out of the rental market and facing increasing petrol prices. The annual Rental Affordability Index (RAI) for 2021 shows housing affordability is worse than pre-pandemic levels in some areas, and Hobart is now the least affordable city for renters. As the gap between income and rent prices increases, so too is the price of petrol, which is emerging as a political touchstone again with the prospect of $2 a litre in major cities. Here’s everything you need to know about what’s driving the price rise. Covid deaths in Europe are likely to exceed 2 million by March next year, the World Health Organization (WHO) has said, adding that the pandemic has become the number one cause of death in the region. Dr Hans Kluge, the WHO’s regional director for Europe, said it was essential that countries adopted a “vaccine plus” approach. “This means getting the standard doses of vaccine and taking a booster if offered … but also incorporating preventive measures into our normal routines.” As Europe grapples with the fourth wave and Australia reopens to the world, how can Australia avoid another outbreak? Vaccinations aren’t the only measure needed to stop the healthcare system becoming overwhelmed, health experts say. Australia Insurers are bracing for a flurry of claims with back-to-back La Nina events likely to increase the chances of flooding and tropical cyclones. A Labor government would appoint a new commissioner for family and sexual violence under a $153m women’s safety policy. Labor says it will also fund 500 new community sector workers, including case workers to help women leave violent relationships, financial counsellors for women in abusive relationships, and support workers for children. Northern bettongs are on the brink of extinction with populations in Queensland thought to number 1,000 found to be no more than 50, researchers say. The world A Downing Street spokesperson has said PM Boris Johnson is physically well and has a full grasp on the prime ministership after his rambling speech to business leaders on Monday in which he lost his place for about 20 seconds. Jeffrey Epstein told a psychologist he was too much of “a coward” to ever kill himself, two weeks before he was found dead in his jail cell in a death that was ruled a suicide, it has been revealed in never-before-seen records obtained by the New York Times. Police have arrested an alleged cryptocurrency fraudster who is suspected of swindling his victims out of more than $700,000 while living a life of luxury in Spain. Recommended reads Australian photographer Natalie Grono’s exhibition, Invisible Threads, examines the daily rites and symbolism of the everyday life of her two daughters. “In Childhood, somewhere between the creative world of fantasy and the sacred, are moments that give birth to love and fears. My daughter’s continuous dance between light and shadow creates an invisible thread with one another and the places and landscapes they inhabit,” Grono says. Sam Somers has a peculiar love for the humble Notes app, and has begun collecting and cataloguing the notes of friends. “Looking through someone else’s Notes feels voyeuristic, dirty, almost illegal. The app, when used often, holds our idiosyncrasies and disturbingly human qualities, so much so that they could be considered personality graffiti – marrying boredom with fleeting thoughts, like the words etched into cubicle stalls. They are also a time capsule, packed with outdated references, numbers and titles, revealing past personas, fears, plans and anxieties.” For his new book, HG Nelson wrote about fairytales: specifically, those of a sporting nature. He also discusses some of the sporting careers of our political leaders, including John Howard’s attempts at cricket. The ball disastrously bowled by the then PM during a 2005 trip to Pakistan is the item HG claims he most regrets losing. Of course, as with all things Roy and HG, the truth of how corporeal HG’s ownership of said ball ever was is up to the audience. HG (not Greig Pickhaver, the man behind the character) tells us about that legendary ball, in an in-character take on our Three Things column. Listen From next week, Australian borders will open to international students with valid visas. But after nearly two years of uncertainty, experts say some students won’t be returning, and the impact to broader Australian society will be felt for a long time. In this episode of Full Story, audio producer Karishma Luthria speaks to international students about their life during the pandemic and whether they will return. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport England’s preparations for the Ashes in Australia got under way on Tuesday with an inter-squad warm-up game against England Lions in Brisbane, finishing with both openers still at the crease. Media roundup Fully vaccinated people entering Queensland from 17 December will not have to pay for a Covid test in order to travel, the Courier-Mail reports. Landmark affirmative consent laws have been passed in NSW, which will require a person to show they took active steps to find out if a person consented to sex, says the Sydney Morning Herald. West Australian premier Mark McGowan has signalled his government could come to LNG producer Woodside’s aid if the supreme court finds a key environmental approval for its $16bn Scarborough project is invalid, reports WA Today. Coming up The “Everest of reproduction” events is taking place along the length of the Great Barrier Reef, with annual coral spawning under way four days after the November full moon. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.You may have heard this one before. It was not so late this time and maybe it lacked the drama of other days but it was still familiar. The manager changes, the story does not. Above all nor does Cristiano Ronaldo. Villarreal had felt in control, only to lose it with 12 minutes to go, allowing Michael Carrick to begin his time as interim coach to the interim coach with a win that put Manchester United through to the last 16 of the Champions League. The goal that opened the way was delivered by their No 7. A second was added in the last minute by Jadon Sancho, smashing a shot into the roof of the net, a moment of significance and perhaps a new start for him. The move had been executed superbly by Ronaldo, Marcus Rashford and Bruno Fernandes. On the edge of a tiny technical area, where he had stood calmly throughout, Carrick justly permitted himself a smile. His changes, Fernandes and Rashford introduced with 20 minutes to go, radically altered the way this game played out. Until then it had largely been played quite badly. “You’re foolish if you think you’re going to come here and it will be free-flowing football: they’re a very good team,” Carrick said. “The first half was tight, not as good as we would like [although] we grew as time went on. “I thought we would be better in the second half but it was tough again. OK, no problem: we had the players to change it. And I’m delighted it worked out, above all for the togetherness and support the players gave each other.” At the end United’s fans chanted the name of the manager who had departed, gratitude expressed and victory secured, another visit to Europe awaiting them. If the Carrick era is to be limited to this night in Spain, he can at least depart with a 100% record. That had not always looked likely until a dreadful pass from the goalkeeper Gero Rulli left Étienne Capoue under the kind of pressure Villarreal had often invited and United seldom applied. The ball fell to Ronaldo who lifted it over Rulli and into the net. Every game he has scored in this competition, six in five matches sending United through. Assisted, it should be said, by David de Gea’s saves and Villarreal’s error, as well as United’s improvement: Unai Emery’s team lost at the point at which they decided it was enough just not to lose. Carrick had watched relatively passively despite what was unfolding on the pitch. Scott McTominay had the game’s first attempt with a header but it was Villarreal who took control with a degree of ease that would have been odd to witness had it not been seen before. Donny van de Beek was a ghost and not the only one. When Moi Gómez ran towards the area after five minutes Aaron Wan-Bissaka did not just back off, he half-turned and ran away. De Gea made a sharp save, as he would do from Manu Trigueros when Yeremi Pino turned Alex Telles inside out. Pino had hit the side-netting and Pau Torres headed over. There were other little vignettes of the way this was going: a cheer and then laughter when Juan Foyth turned Ronaldo; Raúl Albiol stepping away from Antony Martial; McTominay sliding past Moi; Villarreal playing out from deep, Rulli, the central defenders and the midfielders standing, inviting United to press them. Which some of the time they did – reluctantly, uncertainly and badly, allowing the yellow shirts to step into the space beyond. Until the moment United won the game. It was tempting to conclude this is what a plan looks like – and to suggest United could do with a player like Dani Parejo or Capoue – but it did not bear fruit and United grew into the contest. A sharp Sancho cross after half an hour was an example to follow, the beginning of a good night for him. In the next minute Ronaldo leapt vertically to head goalwards. Then he struck a free-kick into the wall. Sancho was up and running, although Wan-Bissaka gifted a ball to Moi to walk through and find Danjuma who sliced wide. No one seemed to be in much of hurry when the second half started, although Villarreal made steady progress on the left. Another move that began with an incisive pass from deep ended with Moi’s deflected effort finding Trigueros. His shot was denied by a superb save from De Gea. Villarreal cut through again, Danjuma bending over. A sense of déja vu was forming that would soon be complete. Those opportunities lost, the game slowed until United accelerated it again. Villarreal showed little urgency, a policy whose risks United would reveal. With Fernandes and Rashford on, there was more intent and United should have taken the lead when a superb exchange left Sancho free. From six yards Rulli saved but this was United’s time now – his time, too, a tale already told.Brian Laundrie, whose disappearance sparked a nationwide manhunt in September after his fiancee, Gabby Petito, went missing and was later found murdered, killed himself, an autopsy report released on Tuesday revealed. Laundrie’s remains were found in a Florida nature preserve last month, one month after Petito, 22, was found strangled to death on the edge of Wyoming’s Grand Teton national park, where the couple had been travelling together in a van. The 23-year-old was named a person of interest in the case after he returned to his parents’ home in Florida alone in early September, then disappeared himself. Petito’s parents reported her missing on 11 September, three days before Laundrie’s family claimed he left their house in North Port with a backpack but left behind his wallet and cellphone. The initial coroner’s report on Laundrie, issued soon after his skeletal remains were discovered in the swampy Myakkahatchee Creek environmental park, was inconclusive. On Tuesday, Steven Bertolino, attorney for Laundrie’s parents, announced they had now received a more detailed report after the remains were sent to a forensic anthropologist. “Chris and Roberta are still mourning the loss of their son and are hopeful that these findings bring closure to both families,” Bertolino said. Laundrie was never charged in connection with Petito’s death, but a federal arrest warrant was issued by a court in Wyoming on 24 September after a grand jury indicted him for the unauthorized use of a debit card which Petito’s family say was hers. FBI investigators have been searching for clues in belongings found near Laundrie’s body, including a water-damaged notebook. The FBI has yet to release any statement on the progress of its investigation. The hunt for Petito, who was recording the couple’s cross-country adventures on social media, and then the search for Laundrie, captured the nation’s attention. Police in Moab City, Utah, released body-cam footage recorded on 12 August of officers speaking with the couple after receiving a domestic violence call. In the video, a tearful Petito is seen admitting the pair had fought, with officers eventually separating them for the night, Laundrie going to a hotel. Laundrie is seen telling the officers, who controversially concluded that Petito was the aggressor, that they had “a minor scuffle” and he did not want to pursue a domestic violence charge. “I’m not going to pursue anything because she is my fiancee and I love her,” he says. “It was just a squabble. Sorry it had to get so public.” It was the last known recording of Laundrie and Petito together. North Port police investigating Laundrie’s disappearance said the family refused to speak with detectives, which Bertolino later said was on his advice. Nobody has been charged in connection with the case. Laundrie and Petito were childhood sweethearts on Long Island in New York, then moved to Florida in 2019 to live with Laundrie’s parents in North Port, about 34 miles south of Sarasota. They set off on their “van life” trip in July, planning to reach Oregon by Halloween, according to their social media accounts. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgRight then, I’m off. Here’s Sid Lowe’s match report. Bye! You may have heard this one before. It wasn’t so late this time and maybe it lacked the drama of other days, including the last time these teams met, but it was still familiar. The manager changes, the story doesn’t. Above all, nor does Cristiano Ronaldo, still scoring at a relentless rate. Villarreal had felt in control, only to lose it with 12 minutes to go, allowing Michael Carrick to begin his time as interim coach to the interim coach with a win that put Manchester United through. The goal that pathed the way to the next round was delivered by No 7. A second was added in the last minute by Jadon Sancho, smashing a shot in off the bar. The move had been superbly executed by Ronaldo, Marcus Rashford and Bruno Fernandes. Down on the touchline, Carrick smiled and not without reason. Much more here: Michael Carrick has a chat: We came here to win the game. I believed we would. I believed we were ready for it tonight, and it proved to be the case. It wasn’t an easy game by the way, they’re a good team and make you work. I thought the boys had to dig in at times and show a little bit of everything, so I’m delighted with the way it ended up. Let’s be honest I don’t think we could have hoped to play pretty football from the word go. When you’ve suffered results-wise and you’re not in great form it’s not easy to come out and everything to click. I think it had a bit of everything, and that’s all I could hope for. I have enjoyed it. I’ve really enjoyed it, the whole thing. It’s not been an easy couple of days for everyone at the club. That result almost feels like it’s for Ole. I can’t get away from that. But we had a job to do, and thankfully it all went to plan in the end. Here’s a report on Bayern Munich’s win over Dynamo Kyiv: Harry Maguire is dead chuffed: It’s massive. it’s massive for our season. We knew the last couple of months have been nowhere near good enough, and we needed to come here and get a result, for our season, for our fans. We have to make sure that’s just a start, we need to push on. It wasn’t pretty, the first half especially was tough, tight, edgy. It was important to stay in the game, and I thought the lads who come off the bench really helped us push on and the second half performance was really good. We know how coming away from home in Europe you’ve got to set up solid, not give away goals. I thought we executed the plan really well and second half we did a lot better, and I thought we deserved the result because of the number of chances we created. As a team we want to be on the front foot, we want to be aggressive. It must be a start, we must keep improving and keep pushing. 90+3 mins: It’s all over! United started the game badly, ended it excellently, and will leave Spain with three excellent points in their pockets. 90+3 mins: Fernandes plays a lovely pass through to Rashford, but Foyth gets back to turn the ball behind. Before the corner is taken, Juan Mata replaces Sancho. 90+1 mins: United bring Nemanja Matic on for Ronaldo. 89 mins: It’s an excellent counter-attack, but it ends with the ball at the feet of Jadon Sancho, a yard inside the penalty area and not in a great deal of space as a defender comes across to cover. No matter, he takes a touch and then thunders a shot into the roof of the net at the near post! That’ll do! Jadon Sancho scores a screamer, and Manchester United qualify for the last 16! 88 mins: Another United corner. “Just imagine what I go through,” writes Andy Flintoff. “How do you think I feel?” writes Matt Stephens. “My real name is Matt Djemba-Djemba, but I had to change it for obvious reasons.” 86 mins: United have had an excellent final 20 minutes, and are still pushing. Fernandes’s 20-yard half-volley is deflected just wide. 85 mins: Villarreal bring Boulaye Dia on for Moi Gómez. 84 mins: Nearly another! Wan-Bissaka’s crossfield pass is headed weakly backwards by Foyth and Ronaldo runs onto it and touches it past Rulli, but also beyond the far post. 83 mins: Capoue powers a diving header over the bar, and we get another replay of the goal, really a very fine first-time finish from Ronaldo. 79 mins: That was a goal from nothing. I think there are referees who would have decided that Fred’s challenge on Capoue was a foul, and he didn’t appear to get the ball, but it all seemed fair dos to me. Villarreal bring Daniel Raba on for Estupinan. Manchester United take the lead! Fred puts pressure on Capoue as he prepares to receive Rulli’s short pass, the ball deflects to Ronaldo, and he lifts it over the keeper and into the net! 78 mins: Rashford crosses, but both Fernandes and Ronaldo are offside. 76 mins: Both teams seem to have decided they’d probably on balance prefer to win this. 73 mins: Villarreal bring Samu Chukwueze on for Pino, and Alberto Moreno for Trigueros. 71 mins: Great chance for United, but Rulli saves! Sancho cuts in from the right, exchanges passes with Fernandes and bursts past the defence, but Rulli is out really quickly to charge down the shot. 68 mins: The ball is played over the Villarreal defence for Rashford, who is making a run in behind. If he had noticed Ronaldo to his left he could have rolled the ball across and United would have had a goal disallowed for offside, but instead he tried to control it, failed, and the offside flag was more or less meaningless. 66 mins: United make a double substitution, taking off Van de Beek and Martial and bringing on Fernandes and Rashford. 63 mins: Chance! Villarreal work the ball nicely from right to left, but with Wan-Bissaka flinging himself in his direction Danjuma scoops his shot over the bar. 62 mins: Apparently Marcus Rashford is being shown things on a flip chart.. 59 mins: Super stop from De Gea! Villarreal break, Moi Gómez’s shot deflects to Trigueros, and his effort takes an awkward bounce but De Gea still gets a hand to it and turns it round the post! 56 mins: On the subject of names that sound like footballer names, an email arrives from, um, John Barnes. “Come on boys lets stop mucking around now. The big man’s here.” 52 mins: Sancho’s low cross deflects to Fred, whose shot is easily saved. I’m not sure that either of these teams looks that displeased at the prospect of a goalless draw, but they’re both having the occasional go at attacking. “I know what Ian ‘Foyth’ Forth means,” writes Matt Dony. “Dony is a fairly unusual surname, so I always used to enjoy listening to coverage of my homophonetic brother MS Dhoni, and living vicariously through him. It’s the little things, sometimes…” 48 mins: The game has restarted at rather gentle pace, but Villarreal have now won a corner so there’s that. “My surname is Keegan and I am 61 years old,” writes Phil Keegan. “Kevin signed for Liverpool when I was finishing primary school. I have been asked several million times if I am related to him (I am not). During the 1980s it got so bad that I started pretending that I didn’t know who Kevin Keegan was, though no one bought it, including the manager of a campsite near Venice. I had to see an ENT doctor in the late 90s, an elderly gentleman. This was in Austria. His waiting room was packed with patients but after calling me in we talked football and Kevin Keegan for about 25 minutes, and then he told me that I didn’t have tinnitus.” 46 mins: The players are back out, the ball is back rolling, and there have been no halftimely changes. You might consider using the half-time break to book tickets to Football Weekly Live! 45+1 mins: United improved after a pretty ropey start, and will be relieved to be still level as they limp, in some cases literally, to the break. Back in a bit. 44 mins: Fred goes down, Parejo goes down, Trigueros goes down - all over the place there are people running into each other off the ball - and after a nice turn Moi Gomes’s shot deflects wide. 42 mins: Parejo takes the free kick, and drops it onto the roof of the net. 41 mins: Van de Beek works his way into the book for a challenge on Estupinan. He seemed to mainly get ball, but there was no way he could execute that challenge without taking down the man as well. 38 mins: Another couple of minor injuries, and another dropped ball. “It’s mildly thrilling that someone with the same name as me is playing, albeit in garbled translation,” writes Ian Forth of Juan Foyth. So not the same name, then. Once, at the height of the Spice Girls’ fame, the woman on the checkout at Sainsbury’s saw the name on my credit card and asked, in all seriousness, if I was related to Emma Bunton. Naturally I bashfully admitted that I was. 37 mins: The game restarts with a dropped ball on the halfway line. Fred, who seemed to turn his ankle nastily before going over, seems to have recovered. 35 mins: It’s all happening now. Lindelof releases Ronaldo with an excellent long crossfield pass but the attack ends with Ronaldo trying to release Van de Beek with a backheel, missing, and then Fred going down under no contact and staying there. 34 mins: Ronaldo hammers his shot into the wall. 33 mins: Pino bars Alex Telles’s path with an outstretched arm, earns himself a booking, and gives United another decent free-kick chance. Ronaldo likes the look of this one. 31 mins: Capoue finds Danjuma in space inside the area, but by the time the former Bournemouth man brings the ball under control the space is no longer there. 30 mins: United have a shot! Telles crosses, and Ronaldo soars above the defence but heads too close to Rulli, who catches. 28 mins: Save! De Gea’s hands get another workout, as Trigueros runs onto a pull-back and hits a low shot towards the far post which the Spaniard pushes away. 26 mins: “Interesting that you use the phrase ‘palm warmer’ for David De Gea’s save,” says Gary Naylor. “Though hardly the biggest issue for the new coach, his reluctance to do exactly that (preferring his feet) is surely costing goals. Of course, we tend to notice the stops only.” He has always been an exceptional foot-based shot-stopper, and suddenly precisely the kind of thing that people once praised him for is bringing only criticism. 23 mins: United have a bit of a move, but it ends with Ronaldo rolling the ball into the path of Van de Beek’s run on the right, before realising that Van de Beek isn’t actually running. Goal kick. 20 mins: Juan Foyth barges into Ronaldo, sending him sprawling, and the Portuguese is further infuriated by the referee’s decision not even to give him a free kick. 18 mins: Now up to 73%, though in the last coupleof minutes they’ve spent quite a lot of time passing it to Geronimo Rulli in goal. 16 mins: According to Uefa’s stats Villarreal have had 68% of possession so far. 12 mins: Now Pau Torres heads Estupinan’s cross over the bar. Michael Carrick couldn’t really be expected to completely transform the team within a couple of days, which is just as well because from the looks of things he hasn’t. 10 mins: Now Villarreal work their way through! The ball is deflected across the edge of the United area to Yeremy Pino, who takes a touch and hammers a shot wide of the near post! 8 mins: Villarreal continue to dominate possession, but so far United are defending their area well. 5 mins: An early palm-warmer for David de Gea courtesy of Moi Gómez, whose low shot from just outside the area is pushed away. 3 mins: Alex Telles sends the ball into the area, and it flicks off a defender’s head and falls to McTominay, beyond the far post, who hits the side netting. 2 mins: Villarreal keep the ball for a while, and when eventually they give it away they immediately kick Anthony Martial, and United have a dangerous free-kick. 1 min: Before kick-off United took the knee, Villarreal did not join in, and there was significant whistling from the crowd. 1 min: He’s back! And we’re off! And that hasn’t worked, so now the German referee has left the pitch. Someone is now changing the batteries on the communication device attached to Felix Brych’s arm. Right, the teams are out and very nearly ready to roll. For now, though, the umpires are just standing around looking slightly puzzled about something. Much TV pundit chat between ex-Man Utd stalwarts Paul Scholes and Rio Ferdinand about the “absurdity” of United’s two best forwards being in their mid-30s. Here’s another former Man Utd old’un, Zlatan Ibrahiovic, chatting to Donald McRae: Pre-match reading Plenty to get stuck into here, starting with Jamie Jackson’s exclusive on Manchester United’s interest in the former Barcelona manager Ernesto Valverde. It is understood Valverde has discussed with John Murtough, United’s football director, taking over on a temporary basis, with the club conscious that having worked with Lionel Messi at Barcelona he would be at ease managing Cristiano Ronaldo. Valverde has started sounding out potential players he could add to strengthen the squad should he be appointed. And here’s Jamie on Carrick’s relish for the job at hand: While Sid Lowe has been chatting to Villarreal’s Pau Torres: However much the club grows, this is still a town of 50,000. It’s not normal that a club from such a small place does so well. I’m the only one in the team from Vila-real and there were lots of people in the stands I knew. I’m delighted to represent the town. I’ve always lived there – I’m comfortable there, feel myself there – and we all know each other. If it’s not a friend, it’s a friend of my cousins. I couldn’t let them down. Michael Carrick has made four changes to Saturday’s starting lineup for the drubbing at Watford: Telles in for Shaw, Fred in for Matic, Van de Beek in for Fernandes and Martial in for Rashford. Villarreal: Rulli, Foyth, Albiol, Torres, Estupinan, Capoue, Trigueros, Parejo, Moi Gomez, Pino, Danjuma. Subs: Sergio Asenjo, Mario, Alcacer, Iborra, Chukwueze, Dia, Raba, Moreno, Pena, Mandi, Pedraza, Iker. Man Utd: De Gea, Wan Bissaka, Lindelof, Maguire, Alex Telles, Fred, McTominay, Sancho, van de Beek, Martial, Ronaldo. Subs: Bailly, Mata, Rashford, Lingard, Diallo, Bruno Fernandes, Dalot, Heaton, Henderson, Matic. Referee: Felix Brych (Munich) Hello world! The latest test of Manchester United’s awfulness comes at Villarreal, currently an unimpressive 12th in the Spanish top flight table - they drew seven of their first eight games this season, six of those in La Liga, which didn’t really help - but with two wins and just one goal conceded in their last three matches seem to be coming back into form. United will hope they can do likewise after disposing of Ole Gunnar Solskjaer following Saturday’s abysmal defeat at Watford. His temporary-for-now replacement, Michael Carrick, certainly seems to have the right priorities: “What matters now is getting the right results,” he said. Though I suppose that is also what mattered before. Carrick also revealed how the players reacted to Solskjaer’s departure. “All things considered it went really well,” he said. “Everyone adapted in a really classy manner.” It seems pretty clear to me that he must have said that everyone adapted in a really classy manor, specifically the palatial abodes to which they retreated when they were released early from training because like usual they skipped the tactical work, though I suppose I could be mistaken. Anyway, this is Villarreal’s 12th Champions League game against an English club and they are yet to win one (they’ve had 12 draws, including four in five games against United). The curious thing about that is that they’ve played five Europa League games against English clubs and won three of them, so it seems they suffer from entirely competition-specific Anglophobia. Perhaps tonight is the night that all changes. Welcome, let’s find out together!Frustrations are growing in the Treasury at No 10’s handling of significant political decisions after a series of botched announcements, with sources calling for a shake-up of the Downing Street operation. After a tumultuous three weeks marred by repeated backbench revolts, Rishi Sunak’s department is understood to be concerned about the prime minister’s tendency to over-promise and the fumbled timing of decisions. The announcement of the integrated rail plan, originally scheduled for earlier in the autumn but delayed until last week, was among poorly executed announcements, Treasury sources believe. After a series of leaks, the final plan was greeted with fury, including by many Tory MPs, after it fell short of what had been promised by Boris Johnson. “In the end what happened was that we blew a £96bn announcement that really should have been a lot more positive,” a Treasury source told the Guardian. A No 10 source said: “I’m not really sure how moving a date on the calendar would have made a substantive difference.” With some MPs blaming Johnson’s inveterate boosterism for the dashed expectations that led to a string of northern newspaper front pages condemning the plans, the source added that there needed to be “more care taken” before pledges are made. Details of the social care cap were also delayed until last week, months after the broader package was announced, focusing anger on the disproportionate impact on lower-income households. Scores of Conservative backbenchers voted against the plans or stayed away on Monday, reducing Johnson’s majority to just 26. Some privately voiced growing concerns about Johnson’s competence before the vote and after a rambling speech to business leaders. On Tuesday Johnson’s official spokesman was forced to insist “the prime minister is well” after the speech to the CBI in which he lost his place and digressed to praise Peppa Pig World. But many Tory MPs blame Sunak, who is understood to have had dinner with the prime minister on Sunday, for forcing the government to pare back its investment plans to save money. On Tuesday some Conservative MPs urged Johnson to bring in a political heavy-hitter to help rectify the situation and bring an end to what are regarded as unforced errors by Downing Street. “He’s absolutely got to do something,” said a former minister. “All of us have weaknesses; it’s incumbent on us to put the right people in place to correct for those weaknesses.” One MP placing the blame on Johnson’s aides said part of the problem was the lack of seniority in the No 10 team. “There’s no one in there who is his age or older than him,” he said. Another said there would need to be “more big beasts than the cast of a Ben-Hur movie” to rein Johnson in. A suggestion being mooted on Whitehall – including in the Treasury – is that Ben Gascoigne, Johnson’s former political secretary who was recently brought back in as deputy chief of staff, could help take more of a strategic oversight role. Rumours have also resurfaced that Johnson’s chief of staff, Dan Rosenfield, could depart – though he was closely involved in many recent decisions, including the prime minister’s ruthless September reshuffle. Rosenfield regards his role as building a machine to allow Johnson to govern effectively, though some Johnson allies believe he lacks political nous. A senior Tory who knows Johnson well said: “It’s easy to blame the team – the fact is [Johnson] just isn’t up to it. His whole personality would have to change. He would need to trust someone and let them have real power to fix the operation – and him. He doesn’t trust anyone.” Another Tory observer said Johnson’s judgment was looking “irredeemably flawed” and this had led to MPs losing confidence in where the prime minister was choosing to spend political capital. “If we hadn’t just had a reshuffle, the case for changes would already be growing quite strong,” they noted. Despite tensions over how policy announcements are being presented, Treasury sources insisted no one at No 11 had been responsible for an incendiary briefing to the BBC on Monday, attributed to a “senior Downing Street source”, that pointed to “a lot of concern inside the building about the PM”. Johnson’s spokesman rejected the idea that ministers felt unable to tell the prime minister if they felt he was on the wrong course. “The prime minister has an entire cabinet to draw on, who provide advice, as you would expect, and the cabinet is used for that purpose,” he said. “Of course the prime minister wants people to be able to speak freely and give their views. That’s what cabinet meetings are for. That’s part of the function of government, to have open conversations.” Johnson’s recent woes began when he backed an ill-fated attempt to prevent Owen Paterson from being punished for repeatedly lobbying the government on behalf of two companies that were paying him more than £100,000 a year. In a rare apology, the prime minister admitted last week that he had “crashed the car into a ditch” by initially supporting Paterson and then changing his mind. He has since backed calls for MPs to be banned from carrying out paid political consultancy. Chris Bryant, chair of the cross-party standards committee, has said it will publish a review of the code of conduct for MPs next Monday. The committee was already examining whether the rules on MPs’ second jobs should be tightened, before the Paterson scandal brought a fresh spotlight to the issue. Asked about Johnson’s CBI speech, his spokesman said on Tuesday: “The prime minister briefly lost his place in the speech. He’s given hundreds of speeches. I don’t think it’s unusual for people, on rare occasions, to lose their place in space.” Asked about a potential shake-up in the No 10 team, a source insisted: “Downing Street is focused on delivering for the public and the team is united around that goal.”A murder investigation has been launched after a body was found in Devon by police who have been searching for a missing 18-year-old woman. Bobbi-Anne McLeod had been due to catch a bus into Plymouth city centre to meet friends on Saturday evening but did not arrive. The body was located near Bovisand in South Hams on the south coast of Devon, around six miles from Plymouth, after information was passed to the police. Devon and Cornwall police said on Tuesday night that formal identification has yet to be carried out, but added that McLeod’s family had been informed of the development and were being supported by officers. Two men, aged 24 and 26, from Plymouth have been arrested on suspicion of murder and are in police custody. McLeod left her home in Leigham in Plymouth at around 6pm on Saturday. Police have been conducting searches and inquiries across Plymouth, supported by a helicopter. A Facebook page set up to help find McLeod attracted more than 13,000 members. Friends and local residents joined searches of woods near her home on Monday and Tuesday. Ch Supt Matt Longman, police commander for Plymouth, said the body was found by officers. He asked the city to get behind the force and continued to appeal for information. Longman sent his condolences to McLeod’s family, adding: “We are doing our utmost to understand exactly what has happened.” He thanked the people of Plymouth for working “hand in hand” with police to try to find Ms McLeod and acknowledged that the murder investigation was “weighing heavy” on the city. The Labour MP for Plymouth Sutton and Devonport Luke Pollard tweeted: “It is devastating news for our city that a body has been discovered in the search for missing Bobbi-Anne. My thoughts and love are with the family.” The leader of Plymouth city council, Nick Kelly, said: “This is really tragic news. Bobbi-Anne McLeod was a young woman who had her whole life ahead of her. It is devastating that someone has chosen to take this away. “I am sure that the shock of this tragedy will not just be felt in Leigham but across the whole of our city and I know that everyone will stand with me when I say that all our thoughts are with her family and friends at this devastating time.” Smeaton’s Tower, a lighthouse on the waterfront will be lit purple on Wednesday evening, drawing attention to abuse aimed at women. Police described McLeod as 4ft 11ins tall, of slight build with brown, straight shoulder length hair, green eyes and ear piercings. Before the body was found a close family friend, Amanda Isaacs, 34, said McLeod had been on her way to meet a friend when she disappeared. She said: “Her headphones and baccy were found at the bus stop and there’s just no trace. It has been sealed off and forensics are there.” Isaacs described McLeod as very family-oriented, adding: “She is 18, but she is very tiny and very slim that she probably looks about 15 in reality.” Tributes to McLeod were posted on the Facebook page. One wrote: “Like most, I’ve followed this from the start of her going missing and I really hoped this wouldn’t be the outcome. Sleep tight you beautiful girl, I’m so sorry.”Opportunities to reassess the risks a special forces soldier who took his own life posed to himself were missed, a coroner has reported. Coroner Brendan Allan said Cpl Alexander Tostevin was not neglected by his superiors or military mental health staff. The 28-year-old special forces soldier was found dead in his property in March 2018 after he killed himself. Allan’s comments come after a two-week inquest into Tostevin’s death, where it was reported he had sought support from different services. Tostevin made frequent contact with mental health teams who did not follow up on him having suicidal thoughts. Tostevin was later advised to cancel his appointments with veterans’ mental health charity Rock2Recovery. “The fact Cpl Tostevin was seeking alternative options should have been a signal to those around him that his current treatment plan was not working,” said Allan. “There was no consideration as to why [Tostevin] felt the need to seek alternative treatment, which should have been considered. This represents a missed opportunity to seek to identify [his] views about his treatment, and improvements that could have been made to ensure he would have felt listened to. “When it became known that [Tostevin] had sought help from Rock2Recovery, the focus from the chain of command in medical was to close that option down.” The inquest heard Tostevin had “changed” after he returned from Afghanistan, and would take a cricket bat to bed for safety. Family friend Olivia Wynne-James told the hearing: “I had seen so many changes in him – he was moulded into a different person.” Tostevin’s family long believed he had developed PTSD after serving with the Royal Marines in Afghanistan in 2010. He had been providing cover fire to allow two comrades to get to safety when a bullet struck his helmet, and was mentioned in dispatches for his bravery. Jocelyn Cockburn, partner at Hodge Jones &amp; Allen, said: “This inquest has been a battle for the family to get to the truth.” Alison Tostevin, the deceased’s mother, said: “Alex was asking for help for a long time and as a family we feel he was failed,” adding that the care her son received was “inadequate” despite those involved in his care being told that he was “unwell and suffering”. Cockburn said she was relieved that the coroner had resisted the Ministry of Defence’s attempts to exercise “too much control over the proceedings” of public scrutiny of mental health care within the Special Boat Service. “Today’s recommendations should serve as a wake-up call for the MoD that the mental health of UK special forces must be protected,” Cockburn noted. Alison Tostevin expects more members of the military forces to begin speaking up about mental health to prevent anyone from experiencing the trauma that her son experienced. “We miss Alex so much,” she said. “We love Alex and will miss him until the day we die, and not until that day will we stop saying his name. “We hope that he is remembered as he was in life – a highly skilled, dedicated and respected soldier, a loyal friend, fun loving, generous, kind and larger than life in every way.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.• The heading of a graphic incorrectly stated: “The gap between first-time buyers’ wages and house prices has grown by 98% in England and Wales since 2015”. As the accompanying article made clear, the gap has grown in 98% of council areas (22 November, page 5). Also, it was just over a year ago, not a decade ago, that Boris Johnson said he wanted to give people “the fundamental life-affirming power of home ownership” and “spread that opportunity to every part of the country”. • Other recently amended articles include: It’s not just cricket. Racism against Yorkshire’s south Asian Muslims has a long history Austria is showing that vaccine mandates are no longer unthinkable Pacific north-west storm wreaks havoc, with one dead and Vancouver cut off ‘Sex workers, reggae girls, squatters, all the ones who didn’t fit in’: how Rebel Dykes reveals a secret lesbian history Improving migrant workers’ lives in Qatar The Guardian view on Frida Kahlo: forging her own identity Rio Tinto’s past casts a shadow over Serbia’s hopes of a lithium revolution Rose and Giovanni’s extraordinary duet shows Strictly is TV’s most revolutionary contest Wolfgang Fischer obituaryIt seems as if there may be two Nadine Dorries. The first is the one most people know. The MP who bunked off parliament to earn roughly £80k as a contestant on I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! and who could pick a fight with her reflection. And then there’s the newly appointed cabinet minister who chose to mark her first appearance before the culture select committee by saying as little as possible in order to avoid any controversy. Quite which one Boris Johnson thought he was getting as his new culture secretary is anyone’s guess. First to ask questions was John Nicolson. There’s no love lost between Nicolson and Dorries as the SNP MP has frequently attacked her for her anti-gay rhetoric and voting record, but Dorries was determined to keep things civil. At least initially. Asked to explain the fiasco over Paul Dacre’s withdrawal from the Ofcom job, despite the rules having been changed to allow him a second go at applying for the job, Dorries merely shrugged. She couldn’t possibly comment as the process was ongoing. All she would say was that the rules had been changed to allow for a more diverse range of applicants. There just hadn’t been enough 70-year-old white men with extreme right-wing views applying first time round. But when she had made up her mind on the new person for the job, the committee would be first to know. Though she would like to remind everyone that the committee had no power of veto so it could effectively just do one if it wasn’t happy. Or words to that effect. Dorries smiled politely. Classic passive aggression. The session continued in much the same vein. Dorries would have loved to inform the committee who was in line to become the next chair of the Charity Commission but again the process was ongoing and it wouldn’t be fair on those on the shortlist. If indeed there was a shortlist. She couldn’t even confirm that. Nor could she say that she was looking for someone with an anti-woke agenda. The very idea! She had no idea why it had been reported that she had a vested interest in someone anti-woke. All she wanted was someone who was going to take a common-sense approach. So who did she think qualified as woke, asked Labour’s Clive Efford. “My daughters,” she said. And who was an Islington lefty? “One of my daughters.” Efford was momentarily unsettled. He hadn’t expected Dorries to have a sense of humour. But he soon regained his train of thought and asked the minister about bias in the BBC. In particular Nick Robinson’s interview with Johnson at the Tory party conference, after which the Sunday Times had reported she was incandescent and had said it would cost the BBC a lot of money. Back to see-nothing, hear-nothing, say-nothing Dorries. While it was true the BBC had problems with impartiality, she said, she had nothing to say about this particular interview because she hadn’t heard it. After all, why would a culture secretary bother to listen to the prime minister’s showpiece interview on the day of his speech to the party conference? Or even listen to it on catch-up once she had heard there was a fuss going on about it? And she definitely had never said a bad word about the BBC, because that just wasn’t her style. She was just an everyday woman who didn’t like to make waves. A woman more sinned against than sinning. So the Sunday Times must have made it up. Nor did she have much to say about the Brits choosing not to have separate male and female categories for next year’s awards ceremony. This was absolutely the first she had ever heard of it, she said. Despite the news being in almost every paper. All she would say was that she hoped female artists didn’t get marginalised, in the same way that female writers do. It sounded very much as if she is still bitter that none of her bestselling books about honest but poor Liverpool families doing their best has yet to be longlisted for the Booker prize. Or even for the Women’s prize for fiction. Surely an oversight that the judges will soon rectify. Just over an hour in to the session, Dorries’s guard did slip rather to reveal her spikier side. And inevitably it was Nicolson who goaded her. First he caught her out over her suggestion that the BBC wouldn’t be still around in 10 years’ time, forcing her to contradict herself within minutes, and then he picked her up on offensive tweets she had made to Laura Kuenssberg. Was that the behaviour of a cabinet minister? Yeah but no but yeah but no. She really, really respected Laura but had just been trying to point out that the message she had tweeted was ridiculous. In any case she had deleted it. Hmm. Then it got even nastier. Nicolson moved on to tweets Dorries had written about the radio presenter, James O’Brien. Was it OK to have called him a “public school, posh boy eff-wit”? Well, said Nad, O’Brien’s tweets about her constituted harassment. Except there weren’t any of his tweets that immediately came to mind. Dorries and Nicolson then got into an argument about which of them had caused the most late-night Twitter pile-ons, before the committee chair, Julian Knight, declared the contest a draw. The session ended with Labour’s Kevin Brennan asking whether she thought that Dacre’s observations about her department’s permanent secretary amounted to misogyny. “No comment,” she said, though her earlier remarks suggested that she did. So we can now add sexist to the more diverse brief for the Ofcom chair. John Crace and Zoe Williams will be live on stage in London at a Guardian Live event on 13 December. Join the conversation in-person or online by booking tickets here A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyTwo former Netflix employees who criticized Dave Chappelle’s comments directed at the trans community in his TV special are dropping their labor complaints and one has resigned from the company, it was announced Monday. Terra Field, a Netflix software engineer who is trans, announced her voluntary resignation from the streaming company on Monday. Field had spoken out against Netflix for promoting the comedian’s special The Closer, saying Chapelle’s comments were harmful to transgender people and the LGBTQ+ community. She was suspended during the controversy for attending a workplace meeting for senior executives where she was not allowed and was later reinstated. “This isn’t how I thought things would end, but I’m relieved to have closure,” Field said about her resignation in a letter posted online. Field dropped a labor complaint against Netflix filed with the National Labor Relations Board. Field and B Pagels-Minor, a game launch operations program manager who also is trans, alleged Netflix retaliated against the workers to keep them from speaking up about working conditions. Pagels-Minor was fired by Netflix last month for allegedly disclosing confidential financial information about what it paid for The Closer to reporters at Bloomberg, which referenced the figures in an article. Pagels-Minor has denied the allegations. Field and Pagels-Minor said the company bars employees from speaking out about “Netflix’s products and the impact of its product choices on the LGBTQ+ community”. But Pagels-Minor and Field have since dropped the labor complaints. “We have resolved our differences in a way that acknowledges the erosion of trust on both sides and, we hope, enables everyone to move on,” Netflix said in a statement Monday. The Closer first aired on 1 October 2021 and gained millions of views. But Chapelle’s disparaging remarks about the transgender community raised protests within Netflix and from activists. About 30 Netflix workers staged a walkout on 20 October and joined a rally at Netflix offices in Los Angeles. Dozens of customers of the streaming giant also tweeted their decisions to suspend subscriptions in protest. Netflix ran into criticism not only with the special but in how internal memos responded to employees’ concerns, including co-CEO Ted Sarandos’ assertion that “content on screen doesn’t directly translate to real-world harm”. Sarandos also wrote that Netflix doesn’t allow titles that are “designed to incite hate or violence, and we don’t believe The Closer crosses that line.” Netflix continues to make the special available for streaming. Netflix last reported 209m paid memberships globally after adding only 1.5m in its most recent quarter. The Associated Press contributed to this report.