The UK has invited south-east Asian nations to attend a G7 foreign ministers meeting in Liverpool next month, in a move that risks highlighting concerns that the new alliance between Britain, the US and Australia will fuel a regional nuclear arms race. States from the Association of South-East Asian Nations are divided on the new Aukus partnership but some, notably Indonesia and Malaysia, have sharply criticised it, and many in the 10-member bloc are reluctant to take sides in the unfolding superpower rivalry between the US and China. The invitation to Merseyside on 10 December for three days came a week after the terror attack outside Liverpool Women’s hospital. The choice of Liverpool as the venue for the event, the second G7 foreign ministers’ meeting during the UK’s chairing of the G7, came before the incident. The Foreign Office said Liverpool had been chosen due to its history as a port city with a global outlook. As many as 21 foreign ministers could attend, as Australia, South Korea, India and South Africa have also been invited. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said: “I want us to build a worldwide network of liberty that advances freedom, democracy and enterprise and encourages like-minded countries to work together from a position of strength.” She added: “I was deeply saddened by the awful attack in Liverpool this month, but the resolve of the people of this great city will never waver in the face of such atrocities.” The only country in the Asean not invited is Myanmar, which has been asked to instead present a representative who is not part of the ruling junta to attend by video, the policy adopted by Asean at its own summit last month, and at a China-Asean summit due on Monday. China is likely to view this expansion of the G7, which represents the world’s most advanced economic powers, as an attempt to get the region to endorse Aukus, and a more hard-edged military approach to China. In September, Australia infuriated the French by cancelling a longstanding submarine contract with Paris and announcing it was forming a partnership with the US and the UK to build nuclear-powered submarines, and to work together on technologies such as artificial intelligence and quantum computing. Speaking at the weekend, the Indonesian defence minister, Prabowo Subianto, said of Aukus: “Our position is that of course south-east Asia should remain nuclear-free, and the fear is that this will spark an arms race, this will spark more countries seeking nuclear submarines, and we know now that the technology is there. I think many other countries can very soon have nuclear submarines – I would say Japan and India and many other countries, so that is the concern.” He added that he understood, however, that countries might seek to defend themselves when faced by what they consider an existential threat. The Malaysian defence minister, Hishammuddin Hussein, said: “The stakes are too high and the cost is not worth the risk, as no one wants or can afford a full-scale confrontation in these waters. We must set aside our egos, our pride and our anger in moving forward. Combative statements, whether from inside or outside the region, are not helpful and could only serve as a spark to a potential tragedy.” Hussein also spoke out against Aukus, saying: “My concern with the developments of Aukus – and sometimes it is rhetoric, sometimes it might be increased tensions, it might be reduced dialogue with regards to the two superpowers in our region – is it should not lead to unforeseen, unintended and accidental incidents in the South China Sea. If the South China Sea is full of military movement, [it increases] the chances of unintended accidents happening, which has happened in the past – and we all have to realise the first world war started by accident. Now, that is a real problem [that] requires courage, it requires a lot of patience, it requires diplomacy.” He also warned against the new alliance leading to a break up of the Asean bloc. “We do not want these 10 nations to be broken up for any reason, especially not because of the geopolitical reasoning of superpowers in our region.” Stephen Lovegrove, the UK’s national security adviser, said the planned Australian nuclear-propelled submarines “will carry probably very similar weaponry to the submarines that Australia was, in any case, going to buy from the French”, and added that “the Australian government is completely committed to making sure that the highest possible standards of stewardship and operation are maintained”. On Friday, Kurt Campbell, the US Indo-Pacific adviser at the national security council acknowledged the resentment the Aukus partnership had caused, and claimed that it might not be an exclusive organisation, but open to other European nations to join in the future. He gave no details. The Chinese embassy in Washington disputed Campbell’s characterisation. “Aukus is a closed and exclusive clique informed by the cold war zero-sum mentality with strong military security undertones,” Liu Pengyu, an embassy spokesperson, said.Hopes that Crossrail will open in central London in early 2022 – this time on schedule – have been boosted as the troubled £19bn scheme moved into its final phase of testing at the weekend. The start of months of trial operations, which will involve thousands of volunteer passengers to test how the system will function, including in emergencies, was described as a “significant milestone” by Transport for London and the mayor. TfL bosses have committed to open the line in full in the first half of next year, after the former Crossrail leadership downplayed problems that escalated into vast overspending and delay from its planned 2018 launch. Initially, passengers will need to change trains between the new central underground section and the services already running from Reading in the west and Shenfield in the east, but TfL hopes that some trains could run from suburbs across the city centre by next autumn, ahead of a May 2023 deadline. Testing of the railway started in May with up to 12 trains an hour running underground. The trial operations phase will involve more than 150 exercises over three to six months to ensure that the Elizabeth line, as Crossrail will be known, is ready for full passenger service. TfL said the tests would continue until the railway was “at the highest levels of safety and reliability”, before an exact opening date would be given. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said: “Reaching the start of trial operations is a significant milestone in the delivery of the Elizabeth line. The next few months are crucial to making sure the railway can open safely next year, and everyone is working incredibly hard to reach that goal.” Andy Byford, TfL’s commissioner, said there had been “huge progress … it is great to now enter this final stretch”. He said he believed the controversy and past problems would be forgotten once the line opened, as “a stunning addition, the jewel in the UK’s crown”. Costs will be minimised by an early opening date. Byford has pledged to deliver within the final budget specified by the outgoing board, although £275m of that money has yet to be made available from the government or Greater London Authority. Even before the pandemic, Crossrail’s opening was regarded as critical to ensure TfL’s finances could remain on budget. The line will increase total passenger capacity by 10% and expand the potential revenue for the capital, whose transport system has been heavily reliant on tube fares. The importance was underscored by fresh warnings over TfL’s precarious position before a key budget meeting on Wednesday, with London’s emergency funding deal from the government set to expire on 11 December. TfL has said it will need an extra £1.7bn until March 2023 to run services, with passenger numbers only at about 60% of pre-pandemic levels on the tube. Talks have yet to start on extending financial support from central government – and although previous deals during Covid have been agreed at the 11th hour, there are fears in London that the Treasury, which slashed planned rail spending on HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail last week, will withhold funds. TfL said the lack of confirmed funding would force it to prepare for “managed decline” of the transport network. London’s finances have been worsened, it revealed, by the success of the recently expanded ultra-low emission zone in encouraging drivers to sell polluting vehicles. Drivers of older petrol and most diesel vehicles are charged £12.50 or more daily under the clean air scheme. About 90% of vehicles are now exempt – up from 39% in February 2017 when plans for the expanded area were made public – improving air quality but reducing expected revenues by up to £600m over the next three years.Police and banks have warned consumers to be vigilant when shopping in this week’s Black Friday sales, with a rise in scams expected to cost shoppers milions. Police said crime over the Black Friday and Cyber Monday period last year defrauded online shoppers in Britain of £2.5m. Many never received goods they ordered from unfamiliar websites, and some were subsequently targeted by criminals using bank details given during transactions. More than £15m was lost through fraud in the run-up to Christmas in 2020, with more than 28,000 reports of scams costing an average of more than £500. The numbers rose significantly because many bargain hunters were still avoiding high street shops, with a second lockdown imposed in the days before Christmas. Action Fraud, the national reporting centre for fraud and cybercrime, said that the incidence went up by 61% from 2019. Action Fraud has advised consumers to take additional checks when shopping online, as Black Friday approaches on 26 November. Pauline Smith, the service’s director, said people should always shop with official retailers, adding: “If you think you have found a bargain that is too good to be true, it probably is. Stop and think before making a purchase, as it could protect you and your money.” Younger people were likely to be at risk, with just over a quarter of reports to the police coming from twentysomethings and more than half of scams involving electronic goods being purchases of games consoles such as Xbox or PlayStation. People often fell foul of fake websites that looked identical to official vendors’ sites but were advertising goods at a much cheaper price. The fraud service particularly advised wariness if there was any pressure from a retailer to buy quickly. Research from Barclays Bank found that many could be susceptible, with more than a third of Britons planning to shop online during the sales – and 14% of those happy to shop on unfamiliar websites for a bargain. During last year’s Black Friday season there was a 17% increase in reported shopping scams with victims losing an average of £538, Barclays estimated. Many would be open to common scams, with one in eight saying they would give their pin to a caller from a bank, and 25% saying they would help if asked to participate in an “internal bank investigation”. The bank said the online sales were a great opportunity for fraud, and scammers often targeted victims again using details gathered in the first scam.The CBI will today tell ministers that levelling up cannot be left to the free market, with regions suffering from decades of a “benign neglect” that has left the country with a “branch-line economy” where too many companies are centred on London and the south-east. Speaking in Port of Tyne at the start of the business group’s three-day annual conference, the CBI director general, Tony Danker, will argue the UK now has a “shot at redemption” if the high-quality jobs needed to move the economy towards net zero are created in former industrial heartlands. “Simply saying the market will fix this is not good enough,” Danker will say. “There are free-marketeers in the debate who say government should never play an active role like this. But I don’t know a country in the world – including, and indeed especially, the United States – where governments aren’t active in economic geography.” Boris Johnson’s administration has come under fire from business for a lack of clear direction after the UK’s exit from the EU, and in the transition to a greener economy. The chancellor has delayed a review of business rates, and national insurance taxes have been raised to pay for healthcare, increasing the cost of labour. One of the first decisions made by the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, was to scrap the Industrial Strategy Council, set up in 2018 as an in-house thinktank to advise on the regeneration of the regions. The CBI speaks for 190,000 businesses, which between them employ 7 million people, about a third of private-sector staff. Under the theme of levelling up, its conference will be held in several locations for the first time. The hybrid event will be livestreamed, with sessions held in front of audiences of business leaders in places including Birmingham, Yeovil and Swansea. Danker is calling for a partnership, saying neither the government nor business can solve levelling up alone. “Since the 1980s, we let old industries die – offering little more than benign neglect for what got left behind. It was an economic policy that was ambivalent about levelling down,” he will say. With the arrival of new industries such as biotech, space travel and cybersecurity, there is now a chance to create wealth across the regions, he will add. The CBI wants former industrial heartlands to have a role in transitioning to a less polluting economy, with clusters of activity in hydrogen – which could replace gas as a domestic fuel – offshore wind, and carbon capture. Danker will point to south Wales, which is emerging as a player in the manufacture of certain kinds of computer chips. He will caution that business investment is an “achilles heel”, underpowered since the 1990s and on track to come back lower still after the pandemic. “The truth is that in too many sectors, the UK now feels like a branch-line economy,” he will say, “with the most productive parts of a sector, such as HQs, too often based in London and the south-east, and the branch managers and the back office based everywhere else.” The CBI will today announce the creation of a new commission, the Centre for Thriving Regions, to act as a vehicle for the private sector to encourage the creation of hubs of industrial activity. The centre will launch two pilot demonstrations, and be staffed from all nations and regions of the UK by local, national and multinational businesses and universities or colleges. Danker called for businesses to be involved in strategy for the regions alongside mayors and central government, making decisions on new investments in universities, airports, or logistics centres.Older adults should not use terms like “woke” or “snowflakes” to mock the younger generation and their commitment to campaigning on issues like misogyny, Black Lives Matter, gender identity and climate action, a leading headteacher has said. Samantha Price, who is president of the Girls’ Schools Association (GSA), warned that using derogatory language to belittle young people’s demands for change risked undermining future progress on equality and sustainability. Price, who is headteacher of Benenden, an independent boarding school in Kent and will this week address the GSA’s annual conference in Manchester, said that there was a risk young people would give up their campaigning drives if they continue to be dismissed as “unrealistic do-gooders”. “As they go into their 20s and into further maturity, what was such a passion for them when they were younger will end up just going by the wayside,” Price told PA media ahead of the two-day conference which starts on Monday. “Therefore we probably won’t see the level of progress in society – from sustainability through to equality – that I think we have the opportunity to be able to see and sustain now if we, our generation, handle this effectively.” Price will tell the gathering of 100 private school headteachers that young people may not always approach their protests in the best way – pupils have been criticised for taking part in school strikes over the climate crisis – but it is up to schools to teach them how to conduct themselves so that they can effect lasting change. She will say: “In recent years there have been many references to this generation being ‘woke’ – meant in a derogatory sense – and adults commenting that they feel today’s teenagers are speaking a different language to them and that they can’t say anything without being corrected or ‘called out’ by these politically correct – or ‘woke’ – children. “To a certain extent, as parents and school leaders, we can probably all relate to this in some way or other, but I am getting a little weary of hearing the older generation say: ‘you can’t say anything any more’. The fact is that times have changed, and we simply need to keep up with them.” Meanwhile, members of another group of schools in the independent sector, the Girls’ Day School Trust (GDST), are taking part in an indicative ballot on strike action which opens on Monday over plans by the trust to withdraw from the Teachers’ Pension Scheme. It is the first ever national ballot on strike action in the GDST’s 149-year history. The National Education Union, which represents 65% of the teaching staff across the 23 GDST schools, said withdrawal from the scheme would result in a significant pay cut for teachers and undermine the schools’ ability to recruit and retain teachers. According to the GDST, 280 independent schools have already withdrawn from the TPS after employers’ contributions went up by 43% in 2019. The uplift has been covered by the government in the maintained sector, but not in independent schools. Cheryl Giovannoni, chief executive of the GST, said: “The GDST has been grappling with the increased cost of the TPS scheme since 2019, when the employer contribution increased from 16.48% to 23.68%, which represents a 43% increase.” The GDST’s alternative to the TPS offers a 20% employer contribution into a flexible, defined contribution pension plan. “We would not have proposed to leave the TPS unless we felt we had a viable alternative for our teachers, one which gives them a comfortable retirement and flexibility around their total remuneration package.”The curlew holds a cherished place in Welsh folklore and culture, its bubbling, haunting call traditionally regarded by many as a harbinger of spring. However, numbers of the wading bird have declined to such low levels that a major plan involving a string of conservation groups, the farming community and the Welsh government has been launched with the aim of saving the creature from extinction in what used to be a stronghold. There may be as few as 400 breeding pairs of curlew – gylfinir in Welsh – left in the country and the numbers are thought to be plunging at a rate of 6% a year because of a combination of loss of their habitat, the unfavourable management of what remains, and predation of chicks, possibly by foxes and crows. The 10-year programme includes a plan to identify the areas where curlews survive, and introduce targeted conservation measures, such as managing grass and heathland more effectively. It will be launched on Monday by an umbrella organisation called Gylfinir Cymru/Curlew Wales. Clare Pillman, the chief executive of Natural Resources Wales, said curlews were a regular presence on her family’s farm when she was a child. “They were something we simply took for granted, but this herald of spring is now in steep decline and it is Wales’s most pressing avian conservation priority,” she said. The curlew is on the UK red list – meaning urgent action is needed – and the decline in Wales has been disturbingly rapid, with numbers down by more than 90% in the last 20 years. With its long, down-curved bill, the curlew is a striking sight on winter estuaries or summer moors. The South Clwyd mountains in Denbighshire, north Wales, are one of the last enclaves, home to about 50 pairs. The curlew captured the imagination of the Welsh poet Dylan Thomas. In his poem In the White Giant’s Thigh, he wrote: “Through throats where many rivers meet, the curlews cry / Under the conceiving moon … ” In Under Milk Wood, one of the vessels bobbing in the harbour was called the Curlew. The Welsh minister for climate change, Julie James, said the curlew’s plight epitomised the nature emergency. “It is not just something for governments and nature experts to address in isolation,” she said. “It is for all of us in Wales to take ownership of, support and get involved in the remedies. I want future generations to be able to hear the beautiful cry of the curlew.” The programme, the Wales Action Plan for the Recovery of Curlew, will identify what it calls a network of ICAs (important curlew areas) with each zone given a lead organisation and community champion. Gylfinir Cymru will work for packages of support to be provided to farmers and land managers, enabling them to create the sort of landscapes in which curlews can thrive. Also planned is the recruitment of a Wales curlew programme manager and volunteers to help. The group does not intend, for the moment at least, to champion a programme of breeding birds in captivity to release them into the wild, considering this too complex and risky. Mark Isherwood, a member of the Welsh parliament representing the north Wales region, said: “The curlew’s distinct and ethereal song is a familiar sound that is deeply ingrained within our culture. We are at a critical time for breeding curlew, and perhaps have only 15 years left.”A “mortified” Australian TV reporter has tried to explain how he bungled an exclusive interview with the singer Adele about her new album. The host of Channel Seven’s Weekend Sunrise, Matt Doran, and a crew flew to London for the chat, which was reportedly part of a A$1m package including broadcast rights to Adele’s One Night Only television special. It would have been Adele’s only Australian interview. After Doran conceded during the interview that he had only heard one track from her latest work, 30, the interview was canned. Sony is refusing to release the footage. Doran said he simply missed the email that contained a preview of the album. In the fiercely competitive world of Australian breakfast television, the interview would have been a major coup for Channel Seven, which is locked in an eternal battle with Channel Nine’s Today in the ratings. Doran has now admitted he missed an e-card with a preview copy of her latest work. The oversight had many asking how he could have made such a mistake. The entertainment reporter Peter Ford tweeted it was “pretty shoddy” but also “totally out of character” for Doran. The writer Tarla Lambert described it as “privilege personified”. “There are thousands upon thousands of highly qualified, talented reporters waiting in the wings who would kill for Matt Doran’s position,” she wrote in Women’s Agenda. “The fact that he thought it was reasonable to rock up to an interview with one of the world’s most influential women, and fail to ask her about her work, is reason enough to give one of these other young hopefuls a chance.” Doran told the Australian he was “totally unaware” he was in possession of her album, which was only publicly released on Friday, a couple of weeks after Doran’s London trip. “It was an oversight but not a deliberate snub,” he said. “This is the most important email I have ever missed.” The Daily Telegraph reported that, after the exclusive interview, Adele asked him what he thought of her much-anticipated fourth studio album. “I haven’t listened to it,” Doran reportedly responded. Sony had veto rights on the interview as well as footage of Oprah Winfrey’s One Night Only special with Adele. Doran said he had “somehow” missed the email on landing in London but denies initial reports that Adele walked out on the interview. “Adele didn’t storm out,” he said. “In fact, it was the polar opposite. What was meant to be 20 minutes was extended to 29 minutes. “The majority of the chat was about the album. I told her: ‘I’ve only had the privilege of hearing Easy on Me, but not the other tracks.’ ” Doran also says he wasn’t formally suspended from Sunrise, after reports suggested he’d been spoken to and suspended for two weeks. When Doran posted to Instagram on 4 November that his imminent interview with Adele was “going to be pretty special”, he didn’t realise how much of a splash it would make. Meanwhile, the ABC political reporter Matt Doran was copping some heat after being mistaken for the Sunrise star with the same name. “Go easy on me … ,” he tweeted.Critics have urged Boris Johnson to restrict MPs using personal companies to skirt tax bills under the planned new rules on second jobs, as the Conservative sleaze row continues to dominate Westminster. Using a personal company to accept payments for consultancy work can provide benefits such as avoiding income tax of up to 45% at source on the earnings, with an investigation by the Times finding multiple MPs were paid in total about £1m via the arrangements. “This is completely outrageous,” Margaret Hodge, Labour MP and former head of the public accounts committee, told the newspaper. “We, as MPs, determine the tax everyone has to pay and for some in our midst to choose to use personal service companies in this way is particularly scandalous.” Calls to ban the deployment of personal companies for payments were echoed by Sir Alastair Graham, former chairman of the committee on standards in public life, who said they “should be stopped as soon as possible”. “MPs should not be avoiding paying the taxes they’ve decided that the rest of the population should pay,” Graham added. Instead of paying income tax at up to 45%, the personal company will pay corporation tax at 19%. Further tax is then due when owners draw money out of the company, either via income tax or a tax on dividends, the higher rate of which is 32.5%. The demands came after the deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, said on Thursday that MPs will face second-job caps on either hours or pay in new plans. MPs voted on Wednesday for the Commons standards committee to review the regulations that currently bind MPs – and make recommendations to MPs’ code of conduct – by the end of January. The revelations on personal companies arrive after dark clouds have circled the Conservative party for weeks over MPs’ outside financial interests. The sleaze scandal has engulfed Johnson’s agenda, with the prime minister admitting “on a clear road I crashed the car into a ditch” over the Owen Paterson case. Paterson resigned as an MP this month over what was found to be an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules. It also emerged the former attorney general Geoffrey Cox had collected nearly £6m from legal work, appearing to breach rules by using his Commons office to attend a virtual hearing, and voted by proxy from the British Virgin Islands.The Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai said she was safe and well in a video call on Sunday, the International Olympic Committee has said, amid growing international demands for assurances that she is free and not under threat. In a statement, the IOC said Peng had spoken to its president, Thomas Bach, for 30 minutes. “She explained that she is safe and well, living at her home in Beijing, but would like to have her privacy respected at this time,” it said in a statement. “That is why she prefers to spend her time with friends and family right now. Nevertheless, she will continue to be involved in tennis, the sport she loves so much.” Photos and videos of Peng at a tournament in Beijing earlier on Sunday had done little to dampen global concerns about her wellbeing, following a nearly three-week public absence after she alleged that a former senior Chinese official sexually assaulted her. The call – with Bach, the athletes’ commission chair, Emma Terho, and IOC member Li Lingwei, a former vice-president of the Chinese Tennis Association – appears to be Peng’s first direct contact with sports officials outside China since she disappeared from public view on 2 November. Pressure was growing on Boris Johnson, the UK prime minister, to toughen his stance towards China, with senior MPs calling for a boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics. The IOC has been criticised for being relatively silent in public as concern for Peng grew in the past week. It insists it has pursued a “quiet diplomacy” policy with the 2022 Olympics host nation. The Beijing Winter Games open in February. Bach invited Peng to join him at a dinner when he arrives in Beijing in January “which she gladly accepted”, the IOC said. Terho and Li were also invited. “I was relieved to see that Peng Shuai was doing fine, which was our main concern,” Terho said in the IOC statement. Terho, a retired ice hockey player from Finland, represents athletes on the IOC executive board. “She appeared to be relaxed,” Terho said. “I offered her our support and to stay in touch at any time of her convenience, which she obviously appreciated.” Peng, 35, had not been seen or heard from since she accused the country’s former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of sexually assaulting her. The allegations, which she made on the Chinese social media site Weibo, were quickly deleted from the platform. Her silence, as well as blanket censorship inside China of her accusations, had prompted calls across the world for information on her whereabouts and wellbeing, including threats by the Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) to pull all its tennis tournaments that are scheduled to be held in China. After the IOC video was released, a spokesperson for the WTA and chairman Steve Simon said, “It was good to see Peng Shuai in recent videos, but they don’t alleviate or address the WTA’s concern about her well-being and ability to communicate without censorship or coercion. This video does not change our call for a full, fair and transparent investigation, without censorship, into her allegation of sexual assault, which is the issue that gave rise to our initial concern.” On Sunday, Hu Xijin, the editor of the state tabloid the Global Times, posted video of Peng attending a junior tennis tournament where she waved at the crowd. Hu said the footage was from the opening ceremony of a final in Beijing on Sunday. A further clip of Peng signing tennis balls for children as “a way of inspiring more kids to play tennis” emerged from other state media outlets. It followed earlier footage released by Hu that showed Peng eating at a Beijing restaurant. The clip appeared staged, with people at the table carefully specifying the day’s date being 20 November. Other photographs of the former world No 1 doubles player at the tennis match were published on the WeChat page of the China Open tournament, reported Reuters, which said it could not verify them. On Friday, images of a smiling Peng emerged on a Chinese state-affiliated Twitter account. The authenticity of the four undated photographs also could not be verified. The rush of videos and photographs were presented as evidence that she was safe and not under duress. But without any sign of Peng being able to speak freely or the WTA being able to contact her, the images were largely dismissed. A spokesperson for the tennis body said the latest footage was “insufficient” and did not address its concerns. Responding to the restaurant video, Simon, the head of the WTA, said: “While it is positive to see her, it remains unclear if she is free and able to make decisions and take actions on her own, without coercion or external interference. “This video alone is insufficient. As I have stated from the beginning, I remain concerned about Peng Shuai’s health and safety and that the allegation of sexual assault is being censored and swept under the rug. I have been clear about what needs to happen and our relationship with China is at a crossroads.” Hu is one of the only Chinese state voices to have publicly spoken on Peng, but he kept his comments to English-language posts on Twitter and does not mention any specifics. On Friday, he referred to her allegations as “the things people talk about”, while on Saturday he claimed Peng was at home “freely” and did not want to be disturbed. “She will show up in public and participate in some activities soon,” he added. The UN, the US and UK are among those to have demanded China provide “verifiable evidence” of Peng’s whereabouts and wellbeing. On Sunday, France added to the chorus, its foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, called on Beijing to let her speak publicly to clarify her situation and warned that there could be diplomatic consequences if this did not happen. The global campaign over Peng’s treatment has escalated, and has raised questions about sport’s balancing act between catering to the Chinese market and human rights advocacy. The WTA has been the most vocal in its support for Peng, saying it is willing to jeopardise its lucrative deals with China to secure her safety as well as an investigation into her accusations. On Saturday, the chair of the ATP, Andrea Gaudenzi, said the latest developments were deeply unsettling, and the issue was “bigger than tennis”. The ATP has not made any commercial threats. International tennis stars have also called for answers, including Serena Williams, Roger Federer, Martina Navratilova, Novak Djokovic, Naomi Osaka, and Andy Murray. The Chinese government has a long history of disappearing and detaining those who speak out against the state. Last week, the state broadcaster CGTN tweeted a block of text it claimed was an email Peng sent to the head of the WTA. But the text was widely regarded as faked or potentially forced, as there was no evidence she had sent it herself and the language of it emulated previous forced confessions broadcast by CGTN.Austria has clamped down on public life from Monday as its fourth national Covid-19 lockdown began, making it the first western European country to reimpose the measure in the face of surging coronavirus infections. German politicians are debating making Covid-19 vaccinations compulsory for citizens in light of soaring infections and low inoculation rates. The US government’s chief medical adviser Dr Anthony Fauci warns that time is running short to prevent a “dangerous” new surge of Covid-19 infections from overwhelming the upcoming holiday season. England’s flagship test-and-trace service is still spending more than £1m a day on private consultants, official figures reveal weeks after MPs lambasted it as an “eye-watering” waste of taxpayers’ money that is failing to cut Covid infection levels. In the UK, Covid booster jabs are likely to be offered to all adults eventually, with the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation already considering the issue, the health secretary has suggested. Some Pacific countries will have less than a quarter of adults vaccinated by the end of the year, with predictions that Papua New Guinea will take five years to vaccinate just one-third of its population, undermining economic recovery and threatening huge loss of life across the region. The Delta variant was first detected a year ago and is now dominant across the globe. Scientists are concerned that a new strain could supersede it. Violence erupted at demonstrations in Belgium and the Netherlands over the weekend as tougher Covid-19 restrictions to curb the resurgent pandemic led to angry protests in several European countries. The US Marine Corps has the worst vaccination record among US military branches, Reuters reports, with thousands of active-duty staff set to miss a 28 November deadline for personnel to be fully vaccinated. The World Health Organisation said it is “very worried” about a fresh wave of European infection. The French government has warned that Covid is spreading at “lighting speed”. The seven-day average of new cases in France reached 17,153 on Saturday, an increase of 81%. German politicians are debating making Covid-19 vaccinations compulsory for citizens in light of soaring infections and low inoculation rates. Several members of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s conservative bloc said on Sunday that federal and state governments should introduce compulsory vaccinations soon as other efforts to push up Germany’s low inoculation rate of just 68% have failed. “We’ve reached a point at which we must clearly say that we need de facto compulsory vaccination and a lockdown for the unvaccinated,” Tilman Kuban, head of the youth wing of Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU), wrote in Die Welt newspaper. Bavarian State Premier Markus Soeder called for a quick decision to make Covid-19 vaccinations compulsory while Schleswig-Holstein State Premier Daniel Guenther said authorities should at least discuss such a step to increase the pressure on unvaccinated citizens. Danyal Bayaz, an influential member of the Greens and Finance Minister in the southwestern state of Baden-Wuerttemberg where infection rates are very high, said it would be a mistake at this point of the pandemic to rule out compulsory vaccination. The Greens are currently in talks with the centre-left Social Democrats (SPD) and the libertarian Free Democrats (FDP) to form a three-way coalition government on the federal level, Reuters reports. The three parties are in the final stages of sealing a coalition agreement which would pave the way for outgoing Finance Minister Olaf Scholz from the SPD to succeed Merkel as chancellor in the first half of December. Scholz has said he wants a debate about whether to make vaccination compulsory for health care workers and geriatric nurses. FDP members have voiced their objections to such a step as the party puts a bigger emphasis on individual freedom. Hello I’m Samantha Lock taking over from colleague Jem Bartholomew from over here in Sydney, Australia. First up, some news out of Austria for you. The European nation has clamped down on public life from Monday as its fourth national Covid-19 lockdown began, making it the first western European country to reimpose the measure in the face of surging coronavirus infections. This lockdown is similar to previous ones but is the first introduced since vaccines became widely available. Most places people gather, like restaurants, cafes, bars, theatres, non-essential shops and hairdressers cannot open their doors for 10 days initially and maybe as many as 20, the government says. Christmas markets must also shut but ski lifts can remain open to the vaccinated. Hotels will, however, close to tourists not already staying there when the lockdown began. “It is a situation where we have to react now,” Health Minister Wolfgang Mueckstein told ORF TV on Sunday night, Reuters reports. “A lockdown, a relatively tough method, a sledgehammer, is the only option to reduce the numbers (of infections) here.” The conservative-led government imposed a lockdown on the unvaccinated last week but daily infections kept extending far above the previous peak reached a year ago and intensive care beds are running short. On Friday, the government announced it was reimposing a full lockdown as of Monday and would make it compulsory to get vaccinated as of 1 February. Thought-provoking opinion article here from an anonymous NHS respiratory consultant in the UK. They discuss how the “selfish” decisions of the unvaccinated are hard to sympathise with, despite a medical professional’s typical instinct to treat patients without judgement. Full story here: “ICU is full of the unvaccinated – my patience with them is wearing thin” As a respiratory doctor, I have spent my whole career treating people whose lung diseases have been caused by smoking, including long after they knew the risks. ... I personally – unlike some of my colleagues – have never felt any ambivalence about treating smokers without judgment in exactly the same way as people with diseases that are not seen as self-inflicted. Enshrined in the way we protect patients’ autonomy is the recognition that others may reasonably make decisions we may see as irrational or wrong... Translating this to the choice not to take the vaccine, however, I find my patience wearing thin. ... Even if you are not worried about your own risk from Covid, you cannot know the risk of the people into whose faces you may cough; there is a dangerous and selfish element to this that I find hard to stomach. The New York Times reports on the toll on US hospital staff from the pandemic and a recent rise in hospitalisations. The state of Michigan has seen Covid cases up 78% over the last two weeks, according to the NYT database, with hospitlisations jumping 46% over the same period – the second-worst percentage rise in the country behind New Hampshire. The surge in hospitalisations are exerting further strain on an already-creaking medical system – with staff morale taking a pummelling by the new wave. “We’re all scared to death because this is now so hard to predict what will happen,” Dr. Darryl Elmouchi, the president of Spectrum Health West Michigan, said in an interview Saturday. “We’re preparing for the worst.” “It’s one thing if you ask people to take extra shifts for a few weeks,” he said. “It’s another thing if you ask people to take extra shifts for months.” NYT reporter Vimal Patel has the full story here. The US Marine Corps has the worst vaccination record among US military branches, Reuters reports, with thousands of active-duty staff set to miss a 28 November deadline for personnel to be fully vaccinated. The Marine Corps recorded 91% of active personnel fully vaccinated and 94% part-vaccinated by Wednesday, it said in a statement on Sunday. That trails behind the US Navy (96.7% fully-jabbed), the Air Force (96.4%) and the Army (93%). Reuters has the details: Service members are considered fully vaccinated 14 days after getting a single Johnson &amp; Johnson shot or 14 days after their second dose of Pfizer or Moderna vaccine - meaning it is too late for many to complete the vaccination process by the deadline. Army Secretary Christine Wormuth warned on Tuesday that soldiers, including National Guard members, who refuse to get vaccinated would not have their service renewed unless they have an approved exemption, according to a memo seen by Reuters. Brazil registered 5,126 new coronavirus cases in the last 24 hours, down from 14,642 new infections last Saturday. The country reported a further 72 Covid-related deaths on Sunday, Reuters reports. The seven-day average for Covid deaths is now 197. Brazil has the second-highest Covid deaths in the world, behind the US, with coronavirus-related deaths over 600,000. Daily deaths peaked in April this year – when they reached heights of 3,000 people dying a day – before falling gradually over summer and autumn. After the World Health Organisation said it is “very worried” about a fresh wave of European infections, here’s the data visualised across continent. WHO regional director Dr Hans Kluge warned that 500,000 more deaths could be recorded by March unless urgent action is taken. Anthony Fauci, the US federal government’s chief medical adviser, warned on Sunday that time is running out to prevent a “dangerous” new surge in cases from overwhelming the upcoming holiday season. The US is reporting a jump in Covid cases for the first time in weeks and there are fears Thanksgiving on 25 November will turbocharge infections, as families travel across the nation to celebrate together. The daily average of new cases has risen 29% in the last 14 days, according to analysis by the New York Times. Fauci urged unvaccinated Americans to go get jabbed on CNN: We still have about 60 million people in this country who are eligible to be vaccinated who have not been, and that results in the dynamic of virus in the community that not only is dangerous and makes people who are unvaccinated vulnerable, but it also spills over into the vaccinated people. Read the full report here from my colleague Richard Luscombe in Miami, Florida. Bulgaria reported 1,455 new coronavirus infections on Sunday, showing signs the country’s epidemic is decreasing after new daily infections peaked at 6,816 on 26 October. Bulgaria saw a spike in cases amid late-October and early-November. A further 56 people died from Covid-related deaths in the past 24 hours, local media reported, taking the seven-day average to 137 deaths a day. (Reported figures tend to be lower at weekends.) England’s flagship test-and-trace service is still spending more than £1m a day on private consultants, official figures reveal weeks after UK MPs lambasted it as an “eye-watering” waste of taxpayers’ money that is failing to cut Covid infection levels. My colleague Andrew Gregory has the full report here. Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), who is responsible for NHS test and trace, told MPs in July there was a “very detailed ramp-down plan” to cut the number of consultants. But latest figures show that at the end of October it employed 1,230 consultants. Test and trace has average daily contractor rates of £1,100, potentially equating to £1,353,000 a day. The ratio of consultants to civil servants in NHS test and trace in September was 1:1, separate data shows, despite a target set a year ago to reduce the ratio to 60%. France reported 19,749 new coronavirus infections on Sunday, a 58% jump from 12,496 a week ago. A further 15 people died from Covid-related causes in French hospitals on Sunday. The seven-day average is now 44 coronavirus-related deaths a day. There are 1,339 people in intenstive care with Covid in French hospitals, up 6 in the past 24 hours. Government spokesman Gabrial Attal told media “the fifth wave is starting at lightning speed.” For the wider context on France and its battle with a surging wave of infections see our earlier post here (11:49am GMT). Poland reported 18,883 fresh coronavirus infections on Sunday, according to local media Polskie Radio, up 31% from 14,448 a week ago. A further 41 deaths were recorded, down from the 382 deaths yesterday – which gave Poland the world’s second-highest death toll on Saturday behind Russia, according to AFP. (Weekends often mean lower reporting numbers.) The country has maintained an upwards trajectory of cases since the start of October; the WHO has warned of a worrying acceleration in European Covid infections. The New York Times has published some really interesting reporting on a new part of all our lives – the nasal swab test. One Canadian said it felt like a painful poke to his brain. An American heard crunching sounds in her head. A Frenchwoman suffered a severe nosebleed. Others got headaches, cried or were left in shock. They were all tested for Covid-19 with deep nasal swabs. While many people have no complaints about their experience, for some, the swab test — a vital tool in the global battle against the coronavirus — engenders visceral dislike, severe squirming or buckled knees. “It felt like someone was going right into the reset button of my brain to switch something over,” Paul Chin, a music producer and DJ in Toronto, said of his nasal swab test. “There’s truly nothing like it.” Out of the various nasal swab test methods, the article reports, the nasopharyngeal swab is the gold standard – with an accuracy of 98%, compared to 82-88% for shallower swabs. Here’s how the anatomy works: The [nasopharyngeal] swab traverses a dark passage that leads to the nasal cavity. That is enclosed by bone covered in soft, sensitive tissue. At the back of this cavity — more or less in line with your earlobe — is your nasopharynx, where the back of your nose meets the top of your throat. It is one of the places where the coronavirus actively replicates, and it is where you are likely to get a good sample of the virus. Read the full story here from NYT reporters Livia Albeck-Ripka and John Yoon. Italy reported 9,709 new Covid infections on Sunday, up from 7,565 new cases a week ago. The health ministry also said 46 people died from coronavirus-related deaths in the past 24 hours, taking the seven-day average to 57 deaths a day – up from 42 two weeks ago. While Italy has not reported case rates per 100,000 as high as Germany, Austria the UK or Netherlands recently, the World Health Organisation said yesterday it is “very worried” about the surge of Covid across Europe as the continent battles a fresh wave of infections. Italy faced protests in Rome this weekend – at the ancient Circus Maximus chariot-racing ground – against the coutnry’s “green pass” certificates (vaccination, negative test or virus antibodies) required at workplaces, venues and on public transport, which the government has banked on to suppress the virus. The US vaccine drive has kicked up a gear in recent weeks, reports the New York Times. The US is now administering about 1.5 million vaccine doses a day, compared with 1.3 million two weeks ago, according to the Times’s Covid tracker, which draws on data form the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the US Census Bureau. Booster and third doses are powering the uptick. Across the country, 82% of people aged 18 and over are jabbed with at least one dose, while 71% are fully vaccinated. Russian President Vladimir Putin has been revaccinated against Covid, Russian news agencies reported Sunday. “Today, on your recommendation and that of your colleagues, I got another vaccination, Sputnik Light. This is called revaccination,” Putin said at a meeting with the deputy director of the Gamaleya Research Centre for Epidemiology and Microbiology. The Russian president said in June he’d been inolculated with the Sputnik V vaccine. Here’s that UK Covid case data visualised. As you can see, new daily infections have been above 30,000 for the last few months. Today’s figure jumped above 40,000 again, as on Thursday and Friday. The UK has reported another 40,004 cases, which is 937 fewer than Saturday’s figure, but 3,487 more than last Sunday’s figure. A further 61 deaths were also recorded. Here’s a summary of the main developments today: Riot police in Brussels clashed with people protesting on Sunday at new Covid restrictions in Belgium. Police fired water cannon and tear gas in response to a group of participants throwing projectiles. At least 35,000 took part in the demonstration against a ban on unvaccinated people from restaurants and other venues. Five police officers were injured and at least 40 people were arrested in anti-lockdown protests in the Netherlands on Saturday. The worst violence occurred in the Hague on Saturday night following what the mayor of Rotterdam described as a “orgy of violence” in the country’s second city on Friday night. The French government has warned that Covid is spreading at “lighting speed”. The seven-day average of new cases in France reached 17,153 on Saturday, an increase of 81%. The health secretary Sajid Javid has warned that racial bias in medical devices, such as oximeters, may have caused unnecessary deaths from Covid. The issue will be investigated as part of a review Javid ordered into systemic racism and bias in medical devices, procedures and textbooks. Javid has ruled out introducing mandatory Covid vaccination in the UK, as the government in Austria has imposed. He told the BBC: “We are fortunate in this country, although we have vaccine hesitancy, it’s a lot lower than other countries in Europe. It should be a positive choice”. Javid also said booster jabs could be extended to all adults. Bayern Munich have fined and quarantined five players including the German international midfielder Joshua Kimmich. Bayern bosses summoned Kimmich and four other unvaccinated teammates to inform them of a pay cut when they are in isolation because they have not taken the jab. From Monday, people aged 40-49 in England will be able to book a Covid jab, the Department of Health and Social Care has confirmed. Sixteen and 17-year-olds will also be able to book in for their second jab. Russia has reported a 1,252 deaths from Covid - following a record 1,254 deaths on Saturday. Russia also reported 36,970 new cases compared to 37,120 on Saturday. Bloomberg has footage of the clashes in Brussels between police and those protesting at new Covid restrictions in Belgium. Violence broke out at a protest against anti-covid measures in Brussels on Sunday, where police said tens of thousands of people were participating, AFP reports. The march began peacefully but police later fired water cannon and tear gas in response to a group of participants throwing projectiles. Several of the demonstrators caught up in the clash wore hoods and carried Flemish nationalist flags. The stand-off with riot police took place near the Belgian capital’s EU and government district. Police said 35,000 protesters marched from the North Station in Brussels against a fresh round of Covid measures announced by the government on Wednesday. The demonstration, called “Together for Freedom”, largely focused on a ban on the unvaccinated from venues such as restaurants and bars. Europe is battling another wave of infections and several countries have tightened curbs despite high levels of vaccination, especially in the west of the continent. Belgium, one of the countries hit the hardest by the latest wave, on Wednesday expanded its work-from-home rules and strengthened curbs against the unvaccinated. Northern Ireland has reported another 1,406 new cases and seven more deaths from Covid. Scotland reported no more deaths and an increase of 2,677 cases. And Wales has reported 2,408 and seven new deaths. Jon Henley has a roundup of the latest on the anti-lockdown unrest in Europe: Five police officers have been injured and at least 40 people arrested in a second night of violence in the Netherlands, as tougher Covid-19 restrictions to curb the resurgent pandemic led to angry protests in several European countries. Dutch authorities on Saturday deployed water canon, dogs and mounted police to dispel crowds of rioting youths who lit fires and lobbed fireworks in The Hague and elsewhere, after more than 50 people were arrested in Rotterdam on Friday. There were also demonstrations in Austria, Italy, Switzerland, Denmark, Croatia and the French overseas territory of Guadeloupe as governments in multiple EU countries battle a fourth wave of the pandemic, imposing partial lockdowns and tighter restrictions particularly on the unvaccinated. Read the full story here: Bayern Munich’s troubles over players unvaccinated against the coronavirus have deepened after four more unimmunised players joining Joshua Kimmich in quarantine, AFP reports. Hours after reports emerged that the club was docking the pay of unvaccinated players put in quarantine, Bayern said Serge Gnabry, Jamal Musiala, Eric Maxim Choupo-Moting and Michael Cuisance also had to be isolated over contact with an individual who tested positive. All besides Cuisance had only just completed a first round of house isolation on Tuesday as they had contact with Bayern team-mate Niklas Suele, who tested positive last week. The latest quarantine order risks inflaming an already heated debate over whether sports personalities should be required to take the jab as Germany ails under a vicious fourth wave. Kimmich, 26, had drawn sharp criticism since revealing he opted not to be vaccinated due to “personal concerns”. Bayern bosses reportedly summoned him and his four unvaccinated teammates on Thursday to inform them of the pay cut when they are in isolation because they have not taken the jab, Bild said Sunday, quoting unnamed sources from the team. The shadow justice minister, Alex Cunningham, is the latest MP to announce he has tested positive for coronavirus. South Korea has reported more 3,000 new coronavirus cases for the fifth day in row amid doubts about the wisdom of lifting restrictions, Yonhap news agency reports. It also announced 30 more deaths from Covid, bringing the death toll to 3,274 Yonhap says: Daily cases have not shown signs of slowing down in recent weeks, as the country began easing virus curbs on 1 November in the first of the three-phase “living with Covid-19” scheme for a gradual return to normalcy. Under the first phase, people are allowed to gather in groups of up to 10, regardless of vaccinations. Operation hour curfews for businesses, like restaurants, cafes and movie theaters, are fully lifted, except for adult entertainment facilities, such as clubs and bars. Booster jabs could be extended to all adults, the health secretary has suggested, as he urged 40-49-year-olds to come forward for their third dose of Covid vaccine from Monday. The independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has been asked to keep under review the timings and options for “revaccination” of adults. It has already recommended that over-50s be given a third dose, and from Monday they will be joined by 40-49-year-olds, but Sajid Javid said he was awaiting advice on whether younger adults should also be included. “If it makes sense to go further, we will. The latest data shows that the boosters are immensely effective,” he told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday, stressing he would follow JCVI advice. Read the full story here: Scientists are hopeful that the booster jabs rollout and immunity from the summertime spread of the more transmissible Delta coronavirus variant should help the UK escape the surge in infections seen in parts of Europe, PA reports. Professor Sir Andrew Pollard, one of those behind the creation of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, said it is “unlikely” the UK will see a rise similar to parts of Europe. He told BBC One’s Andrew Marr Show: “We’ve actually had some spread (of the virus) going on since the summer, and so I think it’s unlikely that we’re going to see the very sharp rise in the next few months that’s just been seen. We’re already ahead of that with this particular virus, the Delta variant.” Professor of public health at the University of Edinburgh, Linda Bauld, said while the picture remains “uncertain”, there are a number of factors which could help the UK avoid the situation seen in other countries. She told Sky’s Trevor Phillips On Sunday programme: “We dealt with our Delta wave in the summer and early autumn. We’re still in it of course but not those big rises. “And then the other features are around, unfortunately, because we’ve had high infections in the past, we’ve probably a bit more natural immunity in the population - as in immunity post-infection, particularly for younger groups who’ve not been eligible for vaccines.” The vaccine rollouts are also slightly different in that the dosing gap between first and second doses in many of the European countries was smaller than in the UK, she said. “So they’re certainly seeing waning now and they’ve also got, in some parts of the population, some pockets of hesitancy, which are causing real concern, so we may not be the same, but you know, it’s very uncertain.” But she added there is an element of “grave concern actually in trying to determine whether there are differences in the situation in Europe, or whether it’s just a matter of time until this faces us here”. Sir Andrew said reaching the point where the virus no longer spreads is “not going to be a thing”, saying the Covid-19 will be around “for decades”, but he added that vaccines are successfully slowing it down. He said coronavirus remains “a major global public health problem”, but that in the UK “the balance is shifting because of the vaccine programme that has been in place”. Sir Andrew said that, taking into account last year as to how the pandemic could unfold, vaccines might have prevented about 300,000 deaths in the UK. There is already “quite a lot of immunity building” in younger age groups, he said, when asked about reports of plans to jab five-year-olds, while Health Secretary Sajid Javid said the current focus is the booster rollout and second jabs for 16 and 17-year-olds. Professor Bauld said taking up booster offers and continuing to demonstrate cautious behaviour will help avoid winter being a “disaster” and a repeat of last Christmas. Fifth-wave coronavirus infections in France are rising at an alarming rate, the government reported Sunday, with new daily Covid cases close to doubling over the past week, AFP reports. The seven-day average of new cases reached 17,153 on Saturday, up from 9,458 a week earlier, according to the health authorities, an increase of 81%. “The fifth wave is starting at lightning speed,” government spokesman Gabrial Attal told media. The latest seven-day increase is three times the average rise of cases recorded over the previous three weeks, indicating an exponential acceleration of infections. For now the spike in infections has not led to a massive influx of Covid patients into hospitals, with the authorities attributing the limited number of intensive care patients to France’s high rate of vaccinations which appear highly effective against the most dangerous forms of Covid. On Saturday, hospitals reported a total of 7,974 Covid patients in their care, with 1,333 of them in intensive treatment. This compares to 6,500 and 1,000, respectively, a month earlier. “There is a very strong increase in infections, but we also know that in France we have a very large vaccination cover,” he said. “We seem to be ahead of our neighbours concerning booster shots.” France’s introduction of a health pass ahead of other countries in the summer was also helping to keep Covid in check, he said. The health pass, required in French restaurants, cafes and many cultural venues, certifies that a person is fully vaccinated, has recently recovered from Covid, or has tested negative for the virus. The government continues to stand by its choice to “bring the weight of restrictions to bear on non-vaccinated people rather than vaccinated people”, Attal said. The pandemic has made it more difficult to send failed asylum seekers back to the countries from which they came, Sajid Javid has said, PA reports. Shadow home secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds said on Sunday that at the current rate, more migrants will be travelling to Britain via the English Channel that there are voters in the Home Secretary’s constituency if the Government doesn’t act. And hundreds more people, including very young children, have made the dangerous Channel crossing to the UK over the weekend. The health secretary Sajid Javid defended efforts and said Covid had made things more difficult. He told the BBC’s Andrew Marr programme: We do need new agreements with countries, predominately with the countries where most of the failed asylum seekers are coming from, and those aren’t always European countries, and this Home Secretary has done that, she has signed new agreements and put those in place with countries like India. But also I would say that the pandemic has made returning people across the world, across asylum systems, much harder, and we do have to take that into account as well. Some Pacific countries will have less than a quarter of adults vaccinated by the end of the year, with predictions that Papua New Guinea will take five years to vaccinate just one-third of its population, undermining economic recovery and threatening huge loss of life across the region. The predictions come from modelling released on Sunday by the Lowy Institute, which takes into account factors including access to vaccines, numbers of healthcare workers, urbanisation, topography and vaccine hesitancy to estimate when Pacific countries will hit key vaccine milestones. The modelling reveals a divided region. Papua New Guinea, which is in the midst of a devastating Delta outbreak, currently has around 3% of its adult population vaccinated. Solomon Islands is predicted to have just 23% of its adult population vaccinated by the end of the year, with Vanuatu predicted to have just 29% of adults fully vaccinated. See the full story here: Here’s a summary of the main developments so far today: The health secretary Sajid Javid has warned that racial bias in medical devices, such as oximeters, may have caused unnecessary deaths from Covid. The issue will be investigated as part of a review Javid ordered into systemic racism and bias in medical devices, procedures and textbooks. Javid has ruled out introducing mandatory Covid vaccination in the UK, as the government in Austria has imposed. He told the BBC: “We are fortunate in this country, although we have vaccine hesitancy, it’s a lot lower than other countries in Europe. It should be a positive choice”. Five police officers were injured and at least 40 people were arrested in anti-lockdown protests in the Netherlands on Saturday. The worst violence occurred in the Hague on Saturday night following what the mayor of Rotterdam described as a “orgy of violence” in the country’s second city on Friday night. Bayern Munich have finned unvaccinated players including the German international midfielder Joshua Kimmich. Bayern bosses summoned Kimmich and four other unvaccinated teammates to inform them of a pay cut when they are in isolation because they have not taken the jab. From Monday, people aged 40-49 in England will be able to book a Covid jab, the Department of Health and Social Care has confirmed. Sixteen and 17-year-olds will also be able to book in for their second jab. Russia has reported a 1,252 deaths from Covid - following a record 1,254 deaths on Saturday. Russia also reported 36,970 new cases compared to 37,120 on Saturday. Booster jabs will now show up on the NHS Covid pass, the Department of Health and Social Care has confirmed. The number of arrests of anti-lockdown protesters in the Netherlands on Saturday has reached at least 40, according to Reuters. Another 13 arrests were reported by police in two towns in the southern province of Limburg, while disturbances were also reported in the northern province of Flevoland. Eight people were detained in the town of Urk, where a testing station was torched earlier this year. Dutch police have arrested more than 30 people during anti-lockdown unrest in The Hague and other towns in the Netherlands that followed an “ orgy of violence” the previous night, AP reports. The violence by groups of youths in The Hague and elsewhere Saturday night wasn’t as serious as Friday night in Rotterdam, where police opened fire on rampaging rioters and arrested 51 people. Police said Sunday that they arrested 19 people in The Hague and used a water cannon to extinguish a fire on a street. Two football matches in the country’s top professional league were briefly halted when fans — banned from matches under a partial lockdown in force in the Netherlands for a week — broke into stadiums in the towns of Alkmaar and Almelo. In The Hague, police said five officers were injured as they tried to break up unrest by a group of youths who set at least two fires on streets and threw fireworks. Police said in a tweet that one rioter threw a rock at an ambulance carrying a patient to a hospital. In the southern towns of Roermond and Stein, police said they arrested a total of 13 people for setting fires and throwing fireworks, and in the fishing village of Urk police arrested eight people for public order offenses, Dutch broadcaster NOS reported. Officers in Rotterdam arrested 51 people, about half of them minor, police said Saturday afternoon. One police officer was hospitalized with a leg injury sustained in the rioting, another was treated by ambulance staff and “countless” others suffered minor injuries. Rotterdam Mayor Ahmed Aboutaleb called the rioting in his city an “orgy of violence” and said that “on a number of occasions the police felt it necessary to draw their weapons to defend themselves.” Coronavirus vaccines might have prevented around 300,000 deaths in the UK, a scientist who helped create the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab has said. Professor Sir Andrew Pollard told the BBC’s Andrew Marr: We have, with the Oxford vaccine, got to two billion doses. But if you look at all the developers, we’re at 7.6 billion doses out there. Without those 7.6 billion doses globally, we’d be in a very different situation. So if we just look at the UK, the predictions last year were that there would be between 300,000 and 500,000 deaths. And actually when you look at the data on lives saved so far this year, we’re actually not far off to actually think that that is the right number, that we might have been at around about 300,000 deaths by now without a vaccine. Pollard also called for more vaccine for lower income countries. He said: If your phone today was at about 75% charged, and mine was at 5%, I think it would be easy to work out who should get the phone charger. It should be me. And of course, that’s where we are today. We’ve got around about 75% of the whole population here in the UK vaccinated. In low income countries we’re still at 5%. So we really do need to get doses to those populations. And Pollard reckons it is “unlikely: the UK will see a sharp rise in Covid cases in the UK over the next few months. Bundesliga champions Bayern Munich have finned unvaccinated players including the Germany-capped midfielder Joshua Kimmich, AFP reports citing Bild am Sonntag. Kimmich was sent into a second round of isolation on Friday because of a new coronavirus exposure. He had just been released on Tuesday from quarantine arising from contact with team-mate Niklas Suele who tested positive last week. Kimmich, 26, has sparked a debate in Germany since revealing he opted not to be vaccinated due to “personal concerns”. Bayern bosses reportedly summoned him and four other unvaccinated teammates on Thursday to inform them of the pay cut when they are in isolation because they have not taken the jab, Bild said, quoting unnamed sources from the team. Under new rules taking effect from 1 November, employees who miss work because of a quarantine are no longer entitled to receive compensation if they are unvaccinated. Besides Kimmich, his teammates Serge Gnabry, Jamal Musiala, Eric Maxim Choupo-Moting and Michael Cuisance are also unvaccinated, Bild said. For Kimmich, whose annual pay reaches €20m, a week’s quarantine means earning losses of about €384,000. Javid also told Marr that racial bias in oximeters may have caused unnecessary deaths from Covid. He said: What I found is a racial bias in some medical instruments. It is unintentional but it exists and oximeters is a really good example of that. If I had a pulse oximeter here right now, [and if] you use it, it is going to give an accurate reading. [If] I put my finger in it, it is to more likely to give an inaccurate reading. That cannot be acceptable at any level. Marr asked whether people have died of such inaccurate readings. Javid said: “I think possibly Yes. I don’t have the full facts.” He added: A lot of these medical devices – [and] there are even some of drugs and procedures and the textbooks – most of them are put together in majority white countries. And I think this is a systemic issue. A third of the people in ICU units from Covid were for black minority ethnic backgrounds, double the representation in the general population. I want to make sure that we do something about it. There’s more here about the review: The health secretary Sajid Javid says he would never accept mandatory Covid vaccination in the UK. Asked on the BBC’s Andrew Marr show whether the UK would follow Austria’s example of making jabs compulsory, Javid said no. He added: “We are fortunate in this country, although we have vaccine hesitancy, it’s a lot lower than other countries in Europe. It should be a positive choice”. Javid’s comments came as over-40s were told they could book their booster jab from Monday. Children aged 16 and 17 can also book their second vaccine dose. From Monday, people aged 40-49 in England will be able to book a Covid jab, the Department of Health and Social Care has confirmed. Sixteen and 17-year-olds will also be able to book in for their second jab. Taking up the offer of a second or third dose will help protect the progress of the vaccine rollout in the face of waning immunity, and mean people can “enjoy Christmas safely”, the Department of Health and Social Care said. Jabs should help to keep the coronavirus surge seen in parts of Europe “at bay”, Health Secretary Sajid Javid said. People eligible for a booster can get the top-up jab from six months after having their second dose. But they can book their appointment from 7am on Monday when the National Booking Service opens for people aged 40 and over, as well as for young people aged 16 and 17 in England. Almost 200,000 teenagers in this category are currently eligible for a second jab, NHS England said. It added that almost 500,000 people aged in their 40s are currently eligible for a booster, having had a second jab at least six months ago. Bookings can be made online or by calling 119. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, has warned the NHS is under “an unprecedented degree of pressure for this time of year.” Speaking to Sky News he pointed out that we have yet to reach the traditional winter peak in early to mid January. He said: We simply don’t know how many people who didn’t come forward during Covid-19, during the pandemic, will actually come forward, and therefore we are in a bit of a guessing game about exactly how many. But the bit I can assure you is that NHS staff and NHS leaders are working incredibly hard at the moment to create that plan to ensure that we can get through that backlog as quickly as possible. Earlier, Javid revealed there are 5.9 million people currently waiting for elective procedures on the NHS waiting list. He conceded that this figure “will go up before it comes down” because up to 9 million people stayed away during the height of the pandemic. The government has launched an investigation into one of the NHS’s main suppliers of personal protective equipment over its alleged use of forced labour. Officials at the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) are investigating Supermax, which won a £316m contract for 88.5m rubber gloves as the Covid pandemic began to unfold. Last month the US forbade the Malaysian company from selling its products there after an inquiry found “ample evidence” that it had used forced labour in the manufacture of its rubber gloves. Customs officers were told to seize any disposable gloves made by Supermax as part of a government order banning the import into the US of any goods made by forced labour. The UK government has instigated its own inquiry after Jeremy Purvis, a Liberal Democrat peer, demanded scrutiny of Supermax and action to ensure that products made using modern slavery are not used in Britain. Read the full story here: Five police officers were injured in the Netherlands and at least 28 people detained across three provinces as violent protests against Covid restrictions continued for a second night, Reuters reports. Dutch authorities used water canon, dogs and mounted police to stop rioting youths who set fires and threw fireworks in the worst disturbances since a full lockdown led to widespread disorder and more than 500 arrests in January. The latest unrest began on Friday night in Rotterdam, where police opened fire on a crowd that had swelled to hundreds during a protest the city’s mayor said had turned into “an orgy of violence”. Three people believed to be hit by police bullets remained in hospital on Sunday, a statement by the authorities said. The protests were sparked by opposition to government plans to restrict use of a national corona pass to people who have either recovered from Covid or have been vaccinated, excluding those with a negative test result. The Netherlands reimposed some lockdown measures on its 17.5 million population last weekend for an initial three weeks in an effort to slow a resurgence of the virus, but daily infections have remained at their highest levels since the start of the pandemic. Youths were also angered by a New Year’s Eve firework ban to avoid added pressure on hospitals that have already been forced to scale back care. Some of the most serious confrontations on Saturday night were in The Hague, where five officers were hurt, one of them seriously, a police statement said. Police carried out charges on horseback and arrested seven people, one of them for throwing a rock through the windshield of a passing ambulance. Another 13 arrests were reported by police in two towns in the southern province of Limburg, while disturbances were also reported in the northern province of Flevoland. Eight people were detained in the town of Urk, where a testing station was torched earlier this year. Russia has reported a 1,252 deaths from Covid - following a record 1,254 deaths on Saturday. The death toll from Covid in Russia now stands at 264,095 people. Russia also reported 36,970 new cases compared to 37,120 on Saturday. Javid also said England is “firmly” sticking with it current Plan A for tackling Covid and suggested moving to Plan B involving working from home, vaccine passports and mandatory masks was unlikely. He said: If we needed to take further measures with Plan B then we would do so but we’re not at that point. The package that we’ve set out in plan A and making sure that we’ve got contingency measures in place the so called Plan B has been proven to be the right path. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has confirmed plans to the review racial bias of pulse oximeters - medical devices that measure oxygen levels crucial to treating Covid. Speaking to Sky News, Javid said false readings for people from black and minority ethnic backgrounds have been known for sometime. He said: “What really got me was this was already known, there are research papers already on this, and we don’t do anything about it.” He added: It’s a systemic issue potentially with medical devices and it may go even further than that with medical textbooks.” This particular issue about racial bias in medical instruments is global. These oximeters are being used across the world. They all have the same problem. Britain is in a place to take some leadership on this. Stopping “dangerous” crowding in emergency departments should be the government’s number one priority in hospitals as pressures mount on the NHS throughout winter, a health executive has warned. The Royal College of Emergency Medicine’s chief executive, Gordon Miles, issued his warning after a report found thousands of deaths were caused by crowding in emergency departments. Dr Miles said demand and capacity in emergency care are “severely mismatched”. In a letter to the Sunday Times he added: Emergency departments now sustain other parts of the healthcare system and are the first port of call for many patients, despite not always being the most appropriate place to receive care. There is an urgent need to plan for our future healthcare requirements - and eliminating dangerous crowding in emergency departments must be the number one priority. The college’s report published days earlier suggests at least 4,519 patients died as a result of crowding and 12-hour stays in A&amp;E departments in England in 2020-2021. It said the discovery adds to NHS England’s own findings that one in 67 patients staying in the emergency department for 12 hours comes to excess harm. Thousands of people have taken to the streets in cities across Europe and Australia as anger mounted over fresh Covid restrictions imposed against a resurgent pandemic, according to a roundup by AFP. And Dutch police faced a second night of rioting - this time in The Hague - after the previous night’s violence in the port city of Rotterdam. Clashes erupted after a day of mainly peaceful protests elsewhere in the Netherlands, with rioters throwing stones and fireworks at police and setting fire to bicycles. Several people were arrested. Europe is battling a fresh wave of infections and several countries have tightened curbs, with Austria on Friday announcing a nationwide partial lockdown - the most dramatic restrictions in Western Europe for months. The Netherlands went back into partial lockdown last Saturday with at least three weeks of curbs, and is now planning to ban unvaccinated people from entering some venues, the so-called 2G option. Several thousand protesters angry at the latest measures gathered in Amsterdam. Another thousand marched through the southern city of Breda near the Belgian border, carrying banners with slogans such as “No Lockdown”. Organisers said they opposed Prime Minister Mark Rutte’s plans to exclude the unvaccinated from bars and restaurants. “People want to live, that’s why we’re here,” said organiser Joost Eras. But “we’re not rioters. We come in peace,” he said, distancing himself from the chaos the previous night in Rotterdam, in which police said they had fired both warning and targeted shots and used water cannon. In Austria, around 40,000 came out to protest in central Vienna near the Chancellery, responding to a call from the far-right FPO party. They held up banners decrying “Corona dictatorship” and slamming the “division of society”. “It’s not normal that the government deprives us of our rights,” said 42-year-old teacher Katarina Gierscher, who travelled for six hours to attend the rally. Some protesters wore a yellow star reading the words “not vaccinated”, a nod to the Star of David many Jews were forced to wear during the Nazi era. Austria’s Interior Minister Karl Nehammer expressed his outrage, saying in a statement that it “insults the millions of victims of the Nazi dictatorship and their families”. From Monday, 8.9 million Austrians will not be allowed to leave home except to go to work, shop for essentials and exercise. The restrictions will initially last 20 days with an evaluation after 10 days. Vaccination against Covid-19 in the Alpine nation will be mandatory from February 1 next year. Thousands also marched in Croatia’s capital Zagreb and in Denmark, around a thousand people protested against government plans to reinstate a Covid pass for civil servants going to work. “Freedom for Denmark,” cried some of the marchers at a rally in Copenhagen organised by the radical Men in Black group, who believe Covid-19 is just a “scam”. In Australia around 10,000 marched in Sydney and there were also protests in other major cities against vaccine mandates applied to certain occupations by state authorities. “In Australia where a fanatical cult runs our health bureaucracies, they say it’s OK” to vaccinate children, right-wing politician Craig Kelly told the Sydney crowd to large cheers. On Saturday, France dispatched dozens of elite forces to its Caribbean island of Guadeloupe after arson and looting overnight in the overseas territory, despite a newly imposed night curfew. Welcome to a Sunday edition of our coronavirus live blog covering the latest on the outbreak in the UK and across the world. These are the main developments overnight: Dutch police faced a second night of anti-lockdown rioting. Unrest in The Hague follows a previous night’s violence in the port city of Rotterdam. Sajid Javid has commissioned a review into possible racial and gender bias in medical devices as he vowed to “close the chasms that the pandemic has exposed”. Bookings for coronavirus booster jabs are opening this week for people aged 40 and over in England. And 16 and 17-year-olds will also be able to book in for their second jab from Monday. The United Nations has urged China to release a citizen journalist jailed for her coverage of the country’s Covid-19 response and who her family say is close to death after a hunger strike.One Nation’s anti-Covid vaccination mandate bill has been rejected in the Senate, despite five government senators crossing the floor to support it. On Monday morning Liberals Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic, who have threatened to withhold support from government legislation, voted for the bill contradicting the Morrison government’s aged care vaccine mandate and state government public health orders. The rebel pair were joined by Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, Matt Canavan and Sam McMahon, who has opened a fresh front of dispute with her own government, complaining her territory rights bill to restore legislative power on euthanasia had been bumped from the agenda to make way for the vaccine mandate debate. One Nation leader, Pauline Hanson, and senator Malcolm Roberts signalled they supported their bill, but were not allowed to vote in the Senate as both attended parliament remotely from Queensland. At a press conference, Scott Morrison played down the significance of the government division, explaining that the Liberal and National parties are “not run as an autocracy”. “We don’t take people out of our party if we happen to disagree on an issue they feel strongly,” he told reporters in Canberra. “The government opposed the bill … and the bill has not been successful.” The vote is a curtain-raiser for a difficult sitting fortnight for the government, which faces internal criticism of its religious discrimination bill, a crossbench revolt calling for a national integrity commission despite Coalition delay, and the prospect of its controversial voter ID bill being shunted to a Senate committee. One Nation’s bill proposed banning discrimination on Covid-19 vaccination status in the fields of goods, services, facilities, employment, education, accommodation and sport. The bill would have overridden state health orders requiring customers of businesses including retail and hospitality to be vaccinated, a centrepiece of reopening plans that have helped boost vaccination rates and keep vaccinated patrons safe in states with coronavirus outbreaks. It also contradicted vaccine mandates linked to employment, including the nationwide requirement for aged care workers to be vaccinated, and more extensive mandates in states including New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia. Morrison told reporters the bill would have “threatened funding for hospitals and schools” and seek to “centralise power more in Canberra” which the Coalition had traditionally opposed. “I respect the fact that individual members will express a view and vote accordingly and that’s what’s happened today.” Introducing the bill on Monday morning, Hanson warned senators “if you don’t support my legislation, then you don’t support Australian democracy and freedom and you don’t support the right to choose”. Canavan foreshadowed an amendment to carve out the aged care sector, but ultimately supported the bill, arguing “you should not need to undergo a medical procedure to earn a living”. Independent Jacqui Lambie excoriated One Nation for the private senator’s bill, accusing the minor party of “using fear to make money”. “It’s all about cash, it’s all about power, it’s all about One Nation seats, and that is all this is,” Lambie told the Senate. Lambie said that people are free to choose not to be vaccinated “but if you make a choice, those choices have consequences” including that you “can’t work where you want to work”. “If you want to work as a cabbie, you need a licence to drive a cab, [but] people without a licence are not being discriminated against. “If you want to work in aged care, you need to have a flu vaccine – that has always been in place since before Covid-19 was even a twinkle in a Chinese bat’s eye ... “People have a right to choose, but you don’t have a right to put vulnerable people’s lives at risk.” In November Guardian Australia revealed Rennick would withhold his vote unless the government improved the indemnity scheme for people who experience adverse effects from vaccines, including by removing a $5,000 threshold for costs before patients can make a claim. In the Senate, Rennick added that he wanted compensation for loss of income and “in the case of healthy people with no underlying conditions, the onus should be on the government to prove that the injury is not caused by the vaccine”. “Politicians should not be holding people to ransom with their health,” Rennick said. “They should not be held for ransom with their livelihoods.” Labor’s Kristina Keneally told the Senate the opposition supports mandatory vaccines when based on public health advice and accused Morrison of “pandering to these extremist elements” by allowing debate on Hanson’s bill. Debate on the bill was facilitated by the government, taking up private senator’s bill time that McMahon had argued should be spent on her territory rights bill. In a statement, McMahon accused Hanson of having “hijacked legislation priorities” by threatening to withhold her vote unless it was debated. “I am extremely disappointed this has occurred to all territorians,” McMahon said. “I was pushing along with other senior government leaders for this to occur, however Senator Hanson made it quite clear where her priorities were, and they aren’t [with] territorians.” At the conclusion of debate, Hanson asked that her and Malcolm Roberts’ vote for the bill be recorded, but the government leader in the Senate, Simon Birmingham, explained that although their intention could be noted on hansard, it “doesn’t change the tally”. Just the five government senators voted in its favour, with Labor, the Greens, Lambie, Stirling Griff and the majority of government senators combining to defeat the bill.One Nation has been accused of helping the Coalition to “silence” Australian charities after it pledged support for a planned crackdown on the sector. The government has ignored the recommendations of a Liberal-led committee that found broad new powers for the regulator would threaten free speech and should be scrapped. The powers would allow the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission to investigate and deregister charities and not-for-profits for engaging in or promoting a range of minor offences. The sector has warned that the changes would threaten entire organisations with deregistration on the mere suspicion of a minor offence – trespass or harassment, for example – and would restrict their ability to engage in protests. News Corp Australia reported on Monday that One Nation, previously undecided on the changes, had struck a deal with the government on the proviso that it better shield churches from the changes. But the opposition says the changes don’t do anything to address the concerns raised by either the sector or the Senate standing committee for the scrutiny of delegated legislation. The new legislation proposed by the Coalition appears to have changed slightly the range of offences a charity can be investigated for, removing a reference to offences that cause personal injury or other impairment to a person’s health. That part of the legislation now refers only to offences that cause “physical harm to an individual”. “The changes Senator [Pauline] Hanson says ‘protect churches’ don’t address any of the concerns raised by the sector and the Liberal-led scrutiny committee,” Labor’s spokesperson for charities, Andrew Leigh, said. “Fears over the breadth of the powers this bill would give the charity commissioner and the limits it places on political communication remain. “Churches and charities that stand up for their beliefs and their communities against the authorities will have a harder time thanks to Scott Morrison and One Nation. Senator Hanson cannot say she supports free speech when she is helping the Liberals silence our hard-working charities.” The sector, including churches, is outraged by the changes. An alliance of more than 100 organisations have formed the group Hands Off Our Charities to oppose the new powers, and on Sunday released a report showing they would cost charity and advocacy groups more than $150m in additional administration costs. The group’s spokesperson, Ray Yoshida, described the approach as heavy-handed. He said the changes would take funds away from where they were most needed and threaten free speech. “With this additional regulation the Morrison government is putting vulnerable people at risk,” Yoshida said. Barnardos Australia chief executive Deirdre Cheers said it would be a “tragedy” if the organisation had to turn away even a single child to meet the costs of the legislation. “We are sure the Morrison government has the best of intentions; however, their misguided legislation is placing vulnerable children in danger of being ignored, left homeless, abused, or sadly lost,” Cheers said. Senator Rex Patrick has moved a disallowance motion to scrap the proposal. It is expected to be voted on later this month.Parents have spoken out against a sponsorship deal that gives the fossil fuel company Woodside Energy naming rights over a children’s learn-to-swim program, saying the climate emergency is a “child’s crisis” and the company has a role in making a product that drives climate change. Woodside Energy, which is proposing to open up the Scarborough gasfield in Western Australia that would create more emissions than the Adani coalmine, was given the naming rights to the Nippers program by Surf Life Saving WA in 2019. The deal marked an expansion of a 10-year-long partnership between the organisations. Full details of the arrangement have not been made public but SLSWA clubs receive $10,000 cash each year in addition to Woodside-branded equipment including a trailer, flags, uniforms for patrol officers and children’s swim gear. Wearing the branded uniforms is mandatory, with each child issued a cap, shirt and hat. Clubs are required to ensure the trailer is visible while activities are taking place and must refer to the program as “Woodside Nippers” when speaking in public or on social media. Lucy Gunzburg, a longtime SLSWA member, said there had been frustration about the sponsorship of grassroots sport by a fossil fuel company but people had been reluctant to speak out until now, as concerns about climate change grew more pressing. “We’ve contacted different clubs along the coast and there’s concern from clubs up in Broome right down to Denmark about the effects climate change will have on surf life saving as a movement,” Gunzburg said. “Obviously the climate crisis is a child’s crisis. Our children are inheriting a problem that’s not of their making.” The International Energy Agency said in May that limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop this year. A 2011 report from the Surf Life Saving Australia that found 55% of physical club infrastructure in WA is at risk from extreme weather and coastal erosion, made worse by the effects of the climate crisis. Tahlia Stolarski, a graphic designer who has done work for environmental protest groups but is not a member any organisation herself, said when her five-year-old started at Nippers with the Fremantle club this year, she had used red paint pens to deface the uniforms by colouring in the Woodside logo. “[The deal] means if your child wants to attend Nippers, which is an institution for Western Australian surf culture families, you don’t have a choice,” Stolarski said. “You have to plaster Woodside across your child’s chest for two hours every week. “And Nippers is so iconic that there is no option to do something like that in Perth. It’s not like you can take your business elsewhere.” Bo Wong, a patrol officer and veteran member of the Denmark Surf Life Saving club, said when the sponsorship agreement came into effect her club had been forced to send unbranded uniforms to landfill. Wong, who felt compelled to speak out by her concerns about climate change, said the club was a “hugely important” community group in such a small regional area, where there was no other option for children to learn to swim in rough waters. “It’s immoral, I believe,” she said. “Woodside are using our kids. They’re using our patrol members who are trained safety people. They’re using all of us to market themselves. And what they’re getting from us is far greater than what we’re getting from this. “You can’t buy [trust] but that’s what Woodside’s trying to do.” A lecturer in marketing at the University of Melbourne, Robin Canniford, said as climate change worsened, sponsorship deals with fossil fuel companies risked damaging the “integrity” of an organisation’s brand. “You’re undermining the values that make you a useful organisation to society.” Kerrie-Ann Garlick believes this is already happening. Garlick said her 10-year-old son had refused to join Nippers after seeing a billboard advertising the “Woodside Nippers” and asking, “What’s Woodside?” “He went on to say, ‘Why do Woodside get to sponsors Nippers? Do they come down and help them?’” she said. “I said no, and he said, ‘Well, why do they have their name on the billboard?’” Guardian Australia spoke to other parents about their concerns with the partnership arrangement but many declined to speak on record for fear of being interpreted as criticising the SLSWA volunteers or Woodside workers. All said that even if they do no like Woodside’s sponsorship arrangement, they support their club, the aim of the Nippers program and the Woodside workforce. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A spokesperson for Woodside Energy said the Nippers program “is an extension of our longstanding partnership with Surf Life Saving Western Australia” and the free uniform provided to children made the program “more accessible”. “The partnership provides significant support to the WA surf clubs and volunteers running the programs through the provision of program safety equipment and resources,” the spokesperson said. A SLSWA spokesperson said the club could not comment on the “broad concerns” expressed by parents as it had “not received” critical feedback from its membership regarding the partnership. “We can confirm that all of WA’s 31 x Surf Life Saving Clubs have confirmed their support of the program for 2021/22 season,” the spokesperson said.In early 2007 I spoke at the premiere release of the film Amazing Grace in the parliamentary theatre in Canberra. It was the story of independent MP William Wilberforce’s courage withstanding even attacks from fellow Christians who claimed that faith had nothing to say about slavery. Afterwards a few Christian Coalition MPs took me aside and said they were so inspired they thought they should start a Parliamentary Clapham Sect (Wilberforce’s group) and invite my brother to join. I said, “Fantastic! You could immediately look at the policy of locking up children in detention.” They were unimpressed and walked off. I realised that most of us prefer our heroes to be long dead. I have read about former British Tory PM William Pitt the Younger declaring the death knell of the British slave trade. He had been influenced by his close friend, Wilberforce, who prime minister Scott Morrison mentioned in his maiden speech as one of his Christian heroes. It made me wonder if Morrison realised that when Wilberforce started fighting for the abolition of the slave trade in 1789, slavery was much more economically crucial for the British Empire than coal is for Australia today. Self-interest meant it was unthinkable that slavery be abolished. The most powerful arguments then were that, yes, slavery was a bad business, but other nations would not follow us and it would only economically empower France, which was Britain’s major competitor and threat. And the market in slaves would continue its insatiable appetite but only Britain would suffer with greater economic hardship from the gesture politics of abolitionism. Sound familiar? The demand for our coal is such that we must go on selling it to the world or hurt ourselves. Post-Glasgow the politics are settled. The government will trumpet its zero commitment by 2050 in its Liberal suburban heartland, and its continued commitment to coal in regional Australia. Both the PM and his deputy will not countenance phasing out coal because markets such as India and China still want it. The market is our defence and it will protect Australia’s second biggest export from both our signed agreement at Cop26 for a phase-down and Boris Johnson’s declaration that the final Glasgow communique sounds the death knell for coal. There has been much unfair carping about Morrison’s much publicised faith. A Pentecostal PM is no more a breach of church-state separation than will be the first Muslim or Sikh PM that I will welcome. A religion-state separation is to protect religion from the state, not the state from religion, as is clear in our constitution’s requirement that there be no religious test for public office. So “secular” should mean that all views, whether religious or secular, are on equal footing and none will be privileged. It does not mean religious views are banned. My criticism is not the PM having a strong Christian faith but whether he is sufficiently acting on it. When it comes to treatment of refugees and helping the poor through our aid program, the Bible would expect a Christian to lead more in the manner of William Pitt the Younger than take a free political kick by locking up refugees, cutting aid, and turning a deaf ear to our Pacific neighbours desperate to see Australia phase out coal. I am proud that we are seeing some unity on some of these justice issues in the Australian church today. The whole of the Christian church is united on a call for Australia to take an additional 20,000 refugees from Afghanistan – from the Australian Christian Churches (ACC), the PM’s own denomination, to Catholics and the Australian Christian Lobby. Yes, Christians are lobbying for Muslims and calling for an end to temporary protection visas. However, despite strong united representations to the government we have not seen any policy movement. I am pro-life (as Wilberforce was with slaves) but that also means I am passionately for the life of the planet and cutting coal out so all species have a chance of survival. Wilberforce also founded the RSPCA because he believed all animals and all of creation carried the stamp of the creator. I find it embarrassing to see faith politicised, and both left and right Christians can do that. I want my faith to influence my politics but I do not want the reverse. When faith is reduced to a political program of just a few issues such as abortion and being anti-gay marriage, it is a politicised faith. It must include refugees (welcome of the stranger), mentioned so often through scripture, and the environment, or creation care in theological language. I wish more Christians would surprise me by being less predictable with their politicised faith calling card, by saying they are passionately anti-abortion and in the same breath tell me they are passionately anti-coal and fossil fuels, given that we know what pumping carbon into the atmosphere is doing. It is why I encourage Christians to become swinging voters because neither side has a monopoly on faith and governments inevitably become arrogant and need to be turned out. Anything other than a swinging vote is in my view a denigration of democracy. Too many Australians are lifelong supporters of their political tribe and regard it as similar to their footy team, where to defect is unthinkably disloyal. Political tribes are not the same as your football team, barracking for them through rain, hail or shine. Your loyalty should be to the good of the nation and to the planet. Putting a political tribe first is just another form of identity politics. In his maiden speech, PM Morrison spoke of increasing aid to make poverty history. He spoke of his heroes, like Wilberforce and Archbishop Tutu, so he knew exactly the heart of the Christian vision. Today we need a transition package so as not to heap unfair burdens on regional coal communities. And although the Bible and Christian faith are not a policy document, their vision of all flourishing, including creation, is unequivocally clear. William Wilberforce had the courage in the challenges of his day to live out that costly faith. He allowed his faith to shape his politics, not the reverse. Where are our Wilberforces in this crucial moment of time? • Tim Costello is a senior fellow at the Centre for Public ChristianityFor a sporting body, the chance to play a card like Patrick Cummins is rare indeed. He has every attribute to be a success with media outlets and the sporting public: tall, good looking, sufficiently young without being too young, intelligent, well spoken, a winning smile, a hint of political progressivism without – you know – talking about it too much, a seriously good highlight reel, a winning CV, and a place in all formats that is never open to question. Unless some unlikely transgression is dug up from his past, he is the ultimate cleanskin at a time when Cricket Australia desperately needs one. All of which means that he will surely be installed as Australia’s next Test captain once his obligatory milkshake duck check is complete. After the sandpaper farrago in 2018, some of the cricket world did manage to dredge up enough goodwill to see whether the Australian men’s players and the governance body responsible for them could remake their culture into a kinder, gentler polity. The public relations version of that image was maintained via new captain Tim Paine while he and CA put their preaching of “elite honesty” into practice by covering up an investigation into his off-field behaviour. Three years later, and a tearful resignation press conference ended Paine’s tenure just as one had begun it. Once again, a captaincy shuffle will be the tactic to convince observers that a bold new era has begun, one completely distinct from the past despite sharing every other attribute. To make that sell, those running CA need an exceptional candidate rather than just the next in line. They have one in Cummins, who can make followers of the sport feel lightheaded by nothing more than a looping GIF of him bowling Joe Root at Old Trafford. Aside from all of the attributes above, he also offers the novelty of seeing a fast bowler lead Australia. Novelty combined with integrity could be a powerful public analgesic. Fast bowlers don’t get to captain Australia. Ray Lindwall did it once, filling in. That’s the list. The generally accepted reason is that fast bowling is intensely hard physical work, therefore those poor souls need to gasp for breath between their overs, or to switch off for an hour at fine leg recovering from a long spell, without having to stay focused on the tactics and progression of the match. No doubt it’s easier to marshal the field as a specialist batter standing at slip all day. But that probably underestimates fast bowlers who, even when they are not bowling, have more at stake than anyone in how the opposition is progressing. Fast bowlers also tend to get injured, or at least need breaks, more than players who bat or keep wicket or even bowl spin. But Cummins after his youthful injury years has become Australia’s most durable. Aside from skipping a two-Test jaunt to Dubai to play Pakistan in late 2018, he has played all of the team’s other 33 Tests since his comeback. That includes two five-Test Ashes series and another six-Test home summer. As for his quality with the ball, he is the one player who Australia will mot want to rotate out if they can avoid it. In any case, a captain who misses a match here and there, or even has to miss a series, is nothing new in cricket. It is more generally accepted in other countries, where the process around captaincy involves less formality and reverence. Sometimes, it just needs somebody to do the job. In any case, there isn’t exactly a suite of alternatives. If administrators are too spooked by the idea of picking a bowler, they could turn back to the former captain before the former captain, Steve Smith. He is still there, still twitching, still willing to take up the task again. But in the middle of another public relations disaster based around CA’s chronic unwillingness and inability to demand integrity or hold anyone accountable, restoring a formerly disgraced captain would only exacerbate and underline the problem. For an organisation more interested in brand management than in what the entity behind the brand actually stands for, this will not do. They need a pick that communicates a vista towards the future, a(nother) fresh start, a(nother) pledge to do things differently. Whether that is actually true is not important, only whether it looks true. The one consolation for those who love Australia cricket is that in this case, the option which looks best also happens to be the option that is best. One is left to hope that Cummins brings some substance to add to CA’s desired style.Australia’s “red hot” property market has started to cool, with prices to peak next year and sink 10% in 2023 as higher borrowing costs and “natural fatigue” set in, the nation’s largest mortgage lender predicts. Home prices in Sydney, which will post among the fastest gains in 2021 with a forecast 27% jump, will moderate to a 6% advance in 2022, according to Gareth Aird, head of Australian economics for the Commonwealth Bank. By 2023, though, the harbour city’s prices will fall 12%, the equal most of any capital city, matching Hobart’s predicted retreat. Melbourne, which was harder hit by pandemic-related lockdowns, will post a 17% rise in property prices in 2021, among the smallest gains. Price pressures will persist a bit longer, with the CBA tipping an 8% advance in prices next year before a 10% decline in 2023. “The Australian housing market is in the twilight of an incredible boom that has been fuelled by record-low mortgage rates,” Aird said in the note. “The phenomenal lift in prices is not over yet given dwelling prices are still rising briskly in most capital cities,” he said. “But near-term indicators of momentum coupled with the recent move higher in fixed rate mortgages suggest that conditions will moderate from here.” Signs have been gathering that the run-up in property prices is losing steam. One was the decision in October by regulator the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority to expand the buffer on borrowers’ ability to make loan repayments to at least 3 percentage points above the loan rate from 2.5 percentage points previously. Banks have also lifted their fixed-rate mortgage costs, reflecting their own higher cost of capital as investors’ expectations about inflation have picked up globally in recent weeks. There’s also an increased supply of properties on the market. CoreLogic last week noted auction volumes were on track for their busiest week since late March, and the fourth busiest since the consultancy’s data began in 2008. Preliminary data from Domain shows clearance rates in Sydney on Saturday were at 71%, down from 76% a year earlier, while those in Melbourne came in at 69%, also lower than the 74% notched a year ago. Tim Lawless, research director at CoreLogic, said new listings were “really surging higher”, with Sydney running at 30% higher than the five-year average for this time of year. Melbourne was up 26% and Canberra 11%, with the latter in line with the national average for new listings. The extra properties on offer meant there was more choice for would-be buyers and also less urgency to settle. “It’s still a sellers market but there has been a definite change” as stock numbers rise, Lawless said. The pace of price rises had peaked in March for markets such as Sydney and Melbourne, although Brisbane and Adelaide remained near the top of the cycle in terms of the rate of increases, Lawless said. Aird, though, downplayed the role of supply, saying there was not a very strong correlation between house prices and the amount of stock on the market. Instead, income and borrowing rates were the main propellants or drags for property prices. Instead, Aird forecast the Reserve Bank of Australia would begin a “gradual and shallow” cycle from next year, taking the official cash rate from its current record low of 0.1% to 1.25% by the third quarter of 2023. Those higher rates were at the “heart of our expectation that home prices will contract over 2023,” Aird said. “The cash rate is forecast to lift because the economy will be at full employment and annual wages growth will have pushed to the desired level of 3%.” The RBA itself has indicated it is prepared to be patient before pushing rates up, suggesting it won’t move before 2023 at the earliest on current economic trends. “House prices are not about to start falling [immediately],” Aird said. Even if they did, the market and borrowers had weathered similar sized corrections – such as a 10% drop in national home prices between September 2017 to June 2019 – and the CBA believes the economy “will be well-positioned to absorb a decline” of that magnitude in 2023. Rising income will partially offset the higher costs that are already being felt by some borrowers as banks lift fixed-rate loans rates. An expected restart of population growth as borders reopen to migrants and student should also temper some of the expected declines, particularly for flats. House prices this year will rise 25% nationally, compared with a 14% advance for units, CBA predicted. Come 2023, however, apartment prices are forecast to decline 7%, or less than the expected drop in house prices, the bank said.LeBron James was ejected from the Los Angeles Lakers-Detroit Pistons game after drawing blood on Isaiah Stewart’s face when they fought for a rebound on Sunday night. James’ left elbow and hand appeared to make contact with Stewart above the neck, sending the Detroit center into a rage. Stewart had to be held back more than once, keeping him separated from James. Stewart, who was called for a foul before James made contact, was also ejected from the game early in the third quarter after being assessed two technical fouls for his role in the fray. James was called for a Flagrant 2 foul. Lakers guard Russell Westbrook was assessed a technical after the officials reviewed the play and its fallout, determining he was an “escalator,” while there was pushing, shoving and trash talking. James and Stewart were not made available for comment after the game. Anthony Davis of the Lakers praised players, coaches and Pistons security for keeping the peace. “Everybody did a great job trying to deescalate the situation,” Anthony said after the Lakers beat the Pistons 121-116. “You never want it to get to that point like 17 years ago.” Then, not far away, the scene was much different. A cup was tossed from the stands in Detroit on an infamous night in November 2004, triggering perhaps the worst brawl in US sports history when a melee with the Pistons and Indiana Pacers spilled into the stands. During Sunday’s game against the Lakers, former Pistons Ben Wallace and Rip Hamilton, who had courtside seats, were close to the latest fracas. Stewart’s face was covered with blood after he and James were trying to get position for a rebound off a free throw. James appeared to attempt to apologize to Stewart as he lay on the court, but the 20-year-old center tried to charge toward his opponent. “Everyone in the league knows LeBron isn’t a dirty guy,” Davis said. “As soon as he did it, he looked back and told him, ‘My bad.’” Stewart broke free more than once and appeared to be running into a tunnel that potentially provided a path toward the Lakers’ bench. “I don’t think James is a dirty player, but Stew cut his eye,” Detroit coach Dwane Casey said. “He felt like he had been cheap-shotted across the brow. I’m not even sure he knew who hit him.” Earlier this season, Stewart faced off with former teammate Blake Griffin of the Brooklyn Nets after they were tangled up during a game. “He needs to just keep his head and not get a reputation,” Casey said.International students and skilled workers will be allowed exemption-free travel to Australia from next week, in what the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has hailed a “major milestone” for the country returning to normal. From 1 December, travel exemptions will no longer be required for fully vaccinated eligible visa holders – including students, skilled workers, and those on humanitarian, working holiday and family visas – for the first time since borders closed in early 2020. A travel bubble operating for Singapore will also extend to Japan and South Korea, allowing quarantine-free travel for these citizens, including tourists, subject to a negative Covid test before departure. Government figures show that there are about 235,000 eligible visa holders who would be free to travel to Australia under the eased restrictions, including 162,000 international students. The move comes amid sustained calls from employment groups and the university sector to restart Australia’s temporary migration program, which many sectors have become reliant upon to meet skills shortages. Morrison said the announcement would allow Australia to take full advantage of the economic recovery as states emerged from the pandemic, with workers “desperately needed” across the country. “It is another win for Australians who have got vaccinated, it’s another win for Australians who want to see Australia to return to some form of the normality that we once knew pre this pandemic,” he said. “The return of skilled workers and students to Australia is a major milestone in our pathway back. It’s a major milestone about what Australians have been able to achieve and enable us to do.” Morrison hailed the country’s “extraordinary” vaccination rate, with an 85% full vaccination rate for those older than 16, and 91.5% having had one dose. While Monday’s announcement will ease travel restrictions for a large number of visa classes, the government has not yet announced when an estimated one million tourists wanting to travel to Australia will be allowed the same access. “We will now monitor how we move to this next stage,” Morrison said. “I think Australians are very keen to see us take this step-by-step approach. They’ve been through a lot and have sacrificed a lot to ensure that we can open safely so we can stay safely open, and that’s what we’ll continue to do.” The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, said she expected about 200,000 visa holders to arrive in coming months who would be subject to the quarantine arrangements of the states, but said the government was “actively looking to bring as many people into Australia as soon as we possibly can”. The prime minister said the latest easing of restrictions was an example of “getting government out of people’s lives”, amid a furious debate about the merits of “freedom” protests across the country. Morrison has come under fire for appearing to sympathise with those rallying over the past week, with Labor accusing him of “pandering to extremists” by saying he understood their concerns. When challenged on his stance after he previously endorsed state-imposed lockdowns and resisted calls from the NSW premier Dominic Perrottet to ease restrictions earlier, Morrison said that the federal government had needed to “make decisions that had to reach into people’s lives”. “You’ve got to deal with the situation as you find it, and the situation when you have a pandemic raging through when people’s lives are at risk, well you have to take decisions to protect those lives,” Morrison said. “As the circumstances change, then it’s time for us to move back, which is what the national plan was designed to do. “So I just don’t buy this binary proposition that somehow you’re either for or against this at all points in the cycle. Times change over that (cycle), circumstances change, and governments that are interested in balanced, practicable, sensible decisions, will make them, in the moment, with the circumstances they have to face.” He said there were extremes at both sides of the debate, but the vast majority of Australians were “just looking for people to just make sensible decisions”. Morrison also brushed off government divisions over vaccine mandates after a Senate vote on Monday morning resulted in five government senators crossing the floor to support Pauline Hanson’s vaccine discrimination bill. “In the Liberal party and the National party, we don’t run it as an autocracy, we don’t kick people out of our party if they happen, from time to time, to disagree on an issue on which they feel strongly,’’ he said. “I respect the fact that individual members from time to time will express a view and they’ll vote accordingly and that is what has happened today. “We’re big parties, we can deal with any differences of views that occur from time to time.’’Australia’s international border will be further eased from next week under substantial changes announced by the federal government on Monday. From 1 December, Australia’s travel bubble will be expanded and skilled workers, eligible visa holders and international students will be able to arrive quarantine-free, subject to some conditions. Here’s what you need to know. What’s changing for international travel? From 1 December, there will be a significant relaxation of the nation’s international travel rules allowing fully vaccinated eligible visa holders to come to Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption. Foreigners including working holiday-makers, temporary and provisional visa holders will be able to enter Australia from next week under the changes, subject to limited conditions. The minister for home affairs, Karen Andrews, said travellers would need to be fully vaccinated with a Therapeutic Goods Administration-approved vaccine, provide proof of their vaccination status and present a negative PCR test within three days prior to departure in order to enter Australia. Travellers must comply with the quarantine requirements in the state or territory of their arrival. Who will be able to come to Australia? Overseas students and skilled workers will be able to fly to Australia from 1 December provided they’re fully vaccinated and test negative to the virus within three days prior to flying. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said it would be a “major milestone” for the nation’s economic recovery. Some 200,000 students and eligible visa holders were expected to travel to Australia between now and January, subject to the quarantine arrangements in their state of arrival when the changes come into effect. Australia will also reopen its borders to refugees and humanitarians under the relaxed restrictions. Morrison said it would be the government’s “highest priority” to secure flights for Afghan visa holders in the first stages. The federal government allocated an initial 3,000 humanitarian visas when Afghanistan fell to the Taliban in August. “I always saw that number as a floor, not a ceiling,” he said. “It was a topical conversation I had with quite a few leaders when I was overseas, particularly in the UK and in Canada. We are all working together on what is a very challenging issue.” Are there any changes to the travel bubble? Japanese and Korean citizens will join Singapore and New Zealand as international “safe travel zones” from 1 December provided they are fully vaccinated and receive a negative Covid test within three days of departure. The travel bubble has been operating since 1 November, when one-way quarantine-free travel resumed from New Zealand to Australia. On Sunday, it was expanded to allow fully vaccinated Singaporean citizens to arrive. Under the arrangements, tourists from Japan and Korea will be able to travel from their home countries quarantine-free without needing to seek a travel exemption, provided they hold a valid visa. “They will need to depart from their home country, they will also need to be fully vaccinated and provide proof of their vaccination status,” Andrews said. “They will need to hold an eligible visa and … have a negative PCR test within three days … of their departure.” What about other tourists? Morrison said Australia’s high vaccination rates allowed him to make the “important first step” in relaxing Australia’s border rules, as was laid out in the national plan. More than 80% of eligible Australians were now fully vaccinated. “Japan and Korea and Singapore are all very important tourist markets for Australia … I make those decisions in the national interest above all others,” he said. “As circumstances change, that is the time to ask [governments] to move back, which is what the national plan was designed to do.” It will be a “step by step” approach to welcoming tourists from other nations, including Europe, which had again become the epicentre of the virus. Morrison said that between now and the end of the year the government would “look carefully” at extending free travel. Fully vaccinated Australians, permanent residents and their immediate family members have been able to return home since 1 November.Kurdish-led forces in charge of jails in north-east Syria housing about 10,000 men with alleged links to Islamic State are releasing prisoners in exchange for money under a “reconciliation” scheme, according to interviews with two freed men and documents seen by the Guardian. Syrian men imprisoned without trial can pay an $8,000 (£6,000) fine to be freed, a copy of the release form shows. As part of the deal, the released prisoners sign a declaration promising not to rejoin any armed organisations and to leave the parts of north and east Syria under control of the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). The SDF declined to answer the Guardian’s questions based on the testimony of the two freed former IS members, but claimed the document was fake and denied that freedom was being exchanged for payment. On their release, the two men the Guardian met – both of whom had fought with IS until the group’s so-called caliphate collapsed in March 2019 – were reunited with their wives and children, who were also freed from al-Hawl detention camp under the deal. The families then travelled to Idlib province, which is run by rival Islamists, and crossed the border to Turkey. Both men are now living, they believe, under the radar of the authorities in the country they have made their new home. One says that he never bought into the IS ideology, and the other that he was initially attracted to the religious component but did not realise the group would grow to be so violent. It is not known how many men have been able to buy their freedom in this manner, but the two released men estimated at least 10 people they knew from their time in Hasekeh prison had left in the same way since the reconciliation scheme was implemented in 2019. About 8,000 Syrian and Iraqi men accused of being IS members, and 2,000 more foreigners who have not been repatriated by their home countries, are held in three overcrowded SDF-administered prisons in north-east Syria. The SDF has pushed its western partners to set up an internationally recognised court system to ease the pressure on its prisons and sometimes agrees reconciliation deals with tribal leaders who vouch that the prisoners are not extremists and will return to their families. An SDF spokesperson, Farhad Shami, described the document obtained by the Guardian, which the released men said they had signed, as “absolutely fake” and said no such practice was taking place. “SDF has previously freed some prisoners who had links with IS [through tribal reconciliation], however their hands were not stained by blood of innocent civilians and [they] didn’t do any crimes. They were either employees in IS-run offices or were forced to join IS,” he said. “Those who have been freed are being monitored by security forces to make sure they don’t try to rejoin IS.” The international anti-IS coalition said it could not comment. “The coalition does not control or operate detention facilities or IDP camps. These detention facilities and IDP camps are both operated only by the SDF in north-east Syria,” it said in an email. The releases pose a significant security risk inside and outside Syria and raise the prospect that men who committed grave crimes will not face true justice. Abu Jafar, who was released in March, was a security officer in IS-held Raqqa, where he worked for a branch notorious for punishing and executing local people who did not follow the group’s austere interpretation of Islam. In addition to the $8,000 fine, Abu Jafar, who denies ever hurting anyone, paid another $22,000 in bribes to various SDF officials, money he raised by asking his wealthy family in nearby Tabqa to sell some of their properties. He claimed to have joined IS just to make money, but continues to refer to the group by its full name in Arabic, rather than the more commonly used derogatory term Daesh. “You can choose to be in IS of your own free will, but leaving isn’t something you can control. The moment you leave, they consider you as kafir [unbeliever] and you have to die,” he said. “I was arrested in Baghuz [IS’s last stronghold] after being injured in an airstrike and turning myself in with other fighters during a ceasefire in March 2019. They moved our families to the [detention] camps and moved us to the jail. For around two years, we were waiting for a court or something to clarify our destinies. After a point, we knew we had to find our own way to get out of that place.” Abu Muhammad, from Deir ez-Zor, led a fighting unit in the battle against the SDF for the town of Kobani in 2014. He survived five years on the frontline, until he was also arrested in Baghuz in 2019, and released along with his family in January this year. He described conditions in Hasekeh jail that amounted to torture and ill treatment, which the SDF has previously denied. He said: “SDF guards used to hang us to the roof of investigations rooms to torture us, and leave us hungry and thirsty. They did the same thing that we did to the people we arrested when we were in charge as IS leaders. I really regret that now, but I can’t describe myself as a victim after everything I did. “The releasing process wasn’t easy, but after contacting many SDF leaders my family was able to get me out of jail after paying $14,000 in bribes in addition to the official $8,000 to the SDF’s public finance department.” The details the two men gave about how they left prison corresponds with a release document for a different man the Guardian was able to obtain from an SDF source. Both men said they had signed the same form. It has become common knowledge in places such as Raqqa that local men with links to IS whose families can raise the funds are able to get their sons out of prison, but the development has been greeted with anger and anxiety from most of the city’s residents, who suffered some of the group’s worst atrocities. “As Raqqa people, we believe that releasing those dangerous people is just a matter of money. The SDF doesn’t care about the crimes those people committed against us. It’s just a way for the SDF to gain more money,” said Mohab Nasser, a civil society activist. Four years since IS was driven from Raqqa by the SDF and US air power, much of the city still lies in ruins and residents are beginning to lose hope that IS will ever face true justice. Mahmoud, 24, lost his mother during the IS occupation. The militants executed her in a makeshift prison after accusing her of spying, and her body never returned to the family. Seeing the people he blames for his mother’s death return to the city has frustrated him to the point he is now considering dealing with the problem himself. “They accused my mother of being a spy for the coalition, but she didn’t even know how to use a mobile phone. Today we know who [the released IS members] are. Sometimes we see them in Raqqa’s streets, but without a real judicial system, we cannot prove that. One day, we will take our revenge into our own hands.” • This article was amended on 26 and 30 November 2021. An earlier version referred to the release form seen by the Guardian as an “official document”. This is denied by the SDF, who did not answer specific questions about the accounts of the freed former IS members but stated before publication that they believe the release form to be a fake. Text has been updated to reflect this position, and an image caption corrected to refer to the insignia of the YPG, not the SDF.More than 5,000 new homes in flood-risk areas of England have been granted planning permission so far this year, as local authorities try to tackle the housing shortage. Researchers analysing 16,000 planning applications lodged between January and September discovered about 200 had been approved, for a total of 5,283 new homes, in areas where more than 10% of homes were already at significant risk of flooding. Insurers said they were concerned about the numbers of homes being built where owners were at risk of experiencing “traumatic and devastating losses”. But builders said that the need for new homes meant even flood-risk areas would have to be used – and with the climate crisis leaving more homes exposed, more defences and mitigation measures would have to be put in place. Martin Milliner, the claims director at LV= General Insurance, which commissioned the report, said: “Whilst we welcome the government’s commitment to increase housing we have concerns about the UK’s resilience to future flood events, and in particular the number of new housing developments in flood-risk areas that are still receiving approval. “Flooding is an extremely traumatic event which has a devastating impact on a person’s life, both physically and mentally.” Andrew Whitaker, the planning director at the Home Builders Federation, said: “We face an acute housing crisis. Planning policy already directs development away from those areas most liable to flooding. “However, where there is no other choice, or sites in high flood risk zones are the most sustainable sites for other reasons, developments have to meet extremely stringent mitigation requirements.” The Local Government Association’s housing and environment spokesperson, David Renard, said almost 99% of applications were decided in line with Environment Agency flood risk advice. He added: “Funding for flood defences needs to be devolved to local areas to ensure money is directed towards projects that best reflect local needs. The government also needs to introduce mandatory anti-flood requirements for new homes in building regulations.” An investigation by Greenpeace this year found that one-third of England’s most important flood defences were in private hands, with more than 1,000 found to be in a poor state of repair. More than 5m homes and businesses in England are at risk of flooding, according to Environment Agency estimates. The government said it was investing over £5.2bn in flood and coastal defences in England, which would improve protection for more than 336,000 properties. A spokesperson said: “Our national planning policy is clear that floodplain development should be avoided wherever possible, and protections must be put in place when building in these areas is necessary – we expect local planning authorities to follow this guidance.”Is it nicer to hate-follow someone, or to front-stab them? Has the vaccine strollout given you a menty-b? And have the excesses of lockdowns left you sober curious? The Macquarie Dictionary is on the hunt for 2021’s word of the year, and the shortlist has been heavily influenced by Covid. That was also true last year, when “doomscrolling” took out the top position, after endlessly scrolling through social media feeds of bad news became a national past-time. Macquarie will announce the winner on 30 November, and in a departure from its normal process is having a public vote for the people’s choice word of the year before the committee announces its own choice. “Brain tickler” is on the list – meaning the Covid nasopharyngeal swab that can be unpleasantly thorough. There’s “hate-follow”, which is to engage with content you dislike or disagree with, and the front-stab, meaning to betray someone quite openly. The Australian National Dictionary has already chosen “strollout” as its word of the year, and that’s on the Macquarie shortlist too. Australian Council of Trade Unions secretary Sally McManus has been given credit for coining “strollout” in reference to Australia’s initially lacklustre vaccination program. “We don’t have a vaccine rollout, we have a vaccine strollout,” she tweeted in May. Perhaps flippantly, “menty-b” has come to refer to a breakdown in one’s mental health, while “sober curious” is used to designate people who are thinking about reducing their alcohol intake. As the political palaver over electric vehicles continues, Macquarie has nominated “range anxiety” for the list, meaning “the stress experienced by the driver of an electric vehicle when they are unsure of reaching their destination or a recharging point before the vehicle’s battery runs out of power”. It’s an anxiety that may have been exacerbated by prime minister Scott Morrison’s claim that Labor’s electric vehicle policy would “end the weekend”. “What about all these charging stations, how much is that going to cost? I mean, if you have an electric car and you live in an apartment, are you going to run the extension cord down from your fourth floor-window?” he said in 2019, before his more recent embrace of the technology. There are 19 contenders, picked from the new words that have entered the dictionary over the past year. Voting is now open.Western Sydney has emerged out of lockdown more susceptible to “economic scarring”, experts say, with new figures showing the region has the highest rates of unemployment in the city. Three statistical districts in Sydney, the inner south-west, the south-west and Parramatta, make up nearly half the city’s job losses in October, with a majority of the Covid “LGAs of concern” located in those regions. Those LGAs faced harsher restrictions than the rest of the city during the Delta outbreak, including having a curfew and travel limits if you were not an “authorised worker”. In new figures released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the inner south-west, which includes the Canterbury-Bankstown LGA, had the highest unemployment rate in the city, at 8.8%, with unemployment among men in the region rising to 10.4% in October. The south-west, which includes Fairfield, Cabramatta and Liverpool, saw unemployment rate rise to 8%, the second highest in the city. Parramatta had the third highest, at 7.9%, with unemployment in women rising to 10%. By comparison, the unemployment rate for the entire city was at 5.7% in October. The region represents some of the most diverse suburbs in the city, with a large percentage of residents having a parent born overseas or speaking a language other than English at home. The region is also home to many jobs that would be impossible to do at home, including construction and hospitality roles. A report by Western Sydney Tafe from March showed the most in-demand jobs in the region included electricians, carpenters, kitchen hands and store-people, all jobs that were heavily affected by the lockdown. Matt Grudnoff, senior economist at The Australia Institute, said the nature of jobs in the region left it open to “economic scarring”, whereby people who lose their jobs never return to the workforce. “Unemployment creates what we call economic scarring, which means people become dis-attached from the labour market. If a business was expected to return and didn’t survive, or is now operating at a lower level and been badly impacted, then a lot of people won’t get their jobs back. “And if you’ve been unemployed for a year or more, you technically become long-term unemployed. And, effectively, you find it a lot harder to get a job. “Psychologically, it can be also be scarring for the individual to have lost their job, they lose their confidence, they lose their skills.” Grudnoff said the concentration of unemployment in the region indicated the “scarring” had already begun, with social disadvantage creating a vicious cycle of precarious jobs and unemployment. “We’ve seen massive growth in precarious work, and the problem with precarious workers is that the moment there is any kind of economic shock, such as a pandemic, they’re the first to lose their jobs.” Western Sydney Leadership Dialogue’s executive director, Adam Leto, said it was “no surprise” to see unemployment rise in the region. “There is no doubt that this year’s lockdown hit residents and businesses in western Sydney harder than other parts of the city. “With such a large part of our economy concentrated on construction, manufacturing and small business, sectors that were particularly exposed during the pandemic, it’s no surprise to see unemployment figures rise.” Leto added that the lockdown underscored the necessity of investment in the “liveability” of western Sydney. He said the unemployment figures reflected the inequality and “social disadvantage” in the region. “In addition to its economic impact, the pandemic highlighted the social inequity that exists in the city and any recovery package needs to seriously look at opportunities that can not only stimulate economic activity, but also address social disadvantage.” Although employment across the city fell by 215,000 during the Delta outbreak lockdown, between June and October, a majority of job losses came from the inner south-west and Parramatta, which lost 56,600 and 36,500 jobs respectively.Going mushrooming is a perilous business: they are just so darn difficult to identify. Luckily, I am with my friend Hannah, who’s an ecologist, but even she is occasionally stumped. We’re on safe ground on the sheep-nibbled grass where the white blobs are easily identifiable as snowy waxcaps (Cuphophyllus virgineus). Their widely spaced gills, stem and cap all seem to be made of the same material, as though they’d been carved out of old church candles. The delicate grey mushroom poking up out of the leaf litter on the forest floor is a different matter. Its three-inch-high stem is a single dark filament on which is balanced a tiny bell-like cap. The fine lines that radiate from centre to edge might have been painted by a Mughal miniaturist’s single squirrel-hair brush. I consult my guidebook using what Hannah assures me is a valid scientific approach known as “the flicky-flicky method”. It could be any one of half a dozen species, all with impossibly long Latin names, so I decide to call it Akbar’s earring. Further into the wood, we discover a fallen trunk, encrusted with bracket fungi, as tough as bark and patterned in concentric dark brown and creamy rings, their outer lips rimmed in pure white. Trying to prise one off is as hard as detaching a whelk from a pier. We dub this fungi city Crenellated Balcony. By now, we are on a roll. “Nipple-headed fairy mushroom,” I declare confidently, of one of the 102 types of Mycena. “Ah yes, and look over here: maroon-velvet oak clumpers,” says Hannah, of what turns out to be spindle shank. Meanwhile, the creamy-white mushrooms, whose wavy caps flare and billow, displaying their frilly gills like a chorus girl’s knickers, could only possibly be called marilyns (though others might call them trooping funnel). Some, though, already have fabulously apt names: yellow brain fungus is impossible to better. But many poisonous varieties – and herein lies the peril – look like edible ones. There’s even a whole group of them known as deceivers (we found a beautiful purple-mauve one, the amethyst deceiver, which was – ironically – impossible to mistake). But my favourite are puffballs, genus Lycoperdon, which Hannah informs me – and here she’s not kidding – means “wolf’s farts”. I do love the autumn. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryCryptocurrency is not a fad, financial services minister Jane Hume has said, arguing that government and industry should not fear the rise of decentralised finance. Hume, speaking at an Australian Financial Review summit on Monday, said cryptocurrency was “not going away any time soon”, regardless of people’s views on it. “So as an industry, and as a government, we need to acknowledge this is not a fad. We should tread cautiously, but not fearfully,” she said, comparing cryptocurrency to previous technology disruptions. “Don’t be the person who thought the iPhone would never take off because people would prefer to have their music and telephone on separate devices. Don’t be the person in 1995 who said the internet was just a place for geeks and criminals and would never become mainstream. And don’t be the person who argued that email was a passing fad.” Her comments come just days after the Reserve Bank of Australia’s head of payments policy, Tony Richards, told the Australian Corporate Treasury Association he could see plausible scenarios in the future that would “challenge the current fervour” around cryptocurrencies. He said that could lead to a crash in the value of cryptocurrencies, which currently have a market value of $US2.6tn. “Households might be less influenced by fads and a fear of missing out and might start to pay more attention to the warnings of securities regulators and consumer protection agencies in many countries about the risks of investing in something with no issuer, no backing and highly uncertain value,” he said. Other factors, Richards said, could be the high use of energy in mining cryptocurrencies, and tax authorities and police agencies focusing on the anonymity cryptocurrencies offer, and the “on and off ramps” linking cryptocurrencies to the traditional financial sector. Hume warned, however, that Australia should not risk being left behind. “Decentralised finance underpinned by blockchain technology will present incredible opportunities – Australia mustn’t be left behind by fear of the unknown,” she said. Richards said such a scenario where cryptocurrencies would crash would likely emerge if there were strong regulatory frameworks established for stablecoins – that is, crypto-assets that are more stable in value and tied to an existing asset. Coins such as tether, USD coin and binance USD, for example, are roughly the same value as the US dollar. Richards said that if central banks moved towards issuing central bank distributed currencies as stablecoins, it would offer faster, safer and more efficient transactions, which might change how people viewed cryptocurrencies. The Commonwealth Bank announced earlier this month that it would allow customers to buy and sell up to 10 crypto assets through its banking app, in a trial to launch widely in 2022. A Senate report on financial technology estimated that about 17% of Australians held cryptocurrency assets, however, Richards said he found the estimate implausible, and put it down to online surveys not being accurate. “While it is hard to point to any firmer evidence on cryptocurrency holdings by Australians, some of the estimates out there are extremely surprising and may be symptomatic of the significant amount of hype and misinformation in this area,” he said.Over the past few weeks, the news has been dominated by headlines about MPs who abuse the parliamentary rules that allow them to have second jobs. This is a misleading, generalised account of a specific and exceptional problem. The scandal is the direct result of Conservative ideology, one that has a fundamentally contemptuous opinion of public service and a tradition of leveraging political contacts to feather nests. According to research into the register of members’ interests, 148 MPs spent some time on a second job in the period from January 2020 to August 2021. Out of this number 114 were Conservatives, whose activities make up 87% of the income from those second jobs. Most of that income is from roles in the private sector; accountancy, investment banking, energy, pharmaceuticals and independent legal work. Such is the time dedicated to these roles, and the pay netted from them, that it could be argued that being a Tory MP is itself the second job; or in some instances, the third or fourth. This is not just an unfortunately timed snapshot that happens to have caught out the party with almost six times more MPs in second jobs than the Labour opposition. Nor is it a party temporarily out of control under the chaotic stewardship of its prime minister, Boris Johnson, a man whose popularity and familiarity among the British public is a result of his own various second jobs in the media as opposed to any serious political performance in office. To its credit, the Labour party took efforts to tackle the issue back in 2019. An entire pledge to ban second jobs was made in the party’s manifesto, and its then leader, Jeremy Corybn, expressly blocked any shadow cabinet members from second jobs, with limited exemptions to maintain professional registrations such as nursing. It is baffling that something identified and stigmatised, and for which a technical solution has already been proposed, should ever become a question about what to do about the risks of a “part-time parliament”. This seems like a pretty straightforward question about values, more than it is about parliamentary rules or how we can motivate MPs not to take second jobs. It’s unsurprising in a party that lauds aspiration that its MPs would be concerned about the “change in lifestyle” – presumably one that includes private school fees – if their income were to fall. Values are also drawn from our backgrounds. The complaints from some about how difficult life is on a mere £81,932 a year plus benefits sound out of touch to you and me, but very much in touch with their peers and family networks. Forty-one per cent of Conservative MPs went to independent schools, as opposed to 14% of Labour MPs (and 7% of the population as a whole). The newer intake of MPs, younger and from more working-class areas, are underrepresented in the second-jobs market, which is dominated by older men, and where the highest earners were all former cabinet ministers. For many Conservative MPs, extraparliamentary activities are simply factored in when choosing to go into politics, as these cushion the income they lose by not working in the private sector. Second jobs are also an insurance policy. By keeping one foot in the door, MPs are able to build or maintain connections, in the hope that they will embrace them when their tour in politics is done. When asked about his £150,000-a-year second job with JP Morgan, Sajid Javid said: “It’s good to have experience that is not all about politics.” The follow-up question to that statement is, of course: good for who? Not making these connections – between the type of people who become Conservative MPs, their political beliefs and their desire for and need of private incomes – situates the problem in a general political system of naughty MPs. One in which MPs will either inevitably stick their hands in the honeypot or drop out of politics altogether. And so we look for “realistic” solutions to these “complicated” situations, including suggestions that we pay MPs more so they aren’t forced to look elsewhere for income to meet their lifestyle needs. We end up solving for the sin, rather than condemning it. We resign ourselves to the flawed nature of a political class that is in fact a conservative class. The second-jobs blight is the natural outcome of a conservative philosophy towards political office – a place from which to wield power for the benefit of yourself and your connections, rather than to serve. The solution, however, is simple: restate what being an MP is all about – serving your constituents – and ban anything that gets in the way of this. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist This article was amended on 23 November 2021 to make clear, for avoidance of doubt, that a reference to opposition MPs with second jobs meant MPs of the official (Labour) opposition. A link to research by nationalworld.com was also added, to show the source of MP job numbers mentioned in the piece.Social media platforms will be urged to protect minorities and help prevent ethnic violence by hiring non-English language moderators and conducting safety tests on their algorithms, under proposals for a UN global code of conduct. A British trio whose work has influenced the regulatory framework behind the online safety bill in the UK has sent a detailed plan for tackling toxic content on social media and video platforms to a UN official drawing up anti-online hate guidelines. Last month, a Facebook whistleblower claimed her former employer was “literally fanning ethnic violence” in countries including Ethiopia because the company was not policing its service adequately outside the US. In testimony to US lawmakers, Frances Haugen said that although only 9% of Facebook users speak English, 87% of the platform’s misinformation spending is devoted to English speakers. “Frances Haugen has raised the issue of weak systems and processes at social media companies causing harm,” said William Perrin, a trustee of the Carnegie UK Trust charity and co-author of the proposals. “This guidance provides a way of strengthening this process and reducing harm around the world. We have particularly picked up Haugen’s point about linguistic capacity: there should be adequate numbers of people at these companies who understand what is actually happening on these platforms in order to prevent hate speech harming minorities.” The proposals are being considered by the UN’s special rapporteur on minority issues, Fernand de Varennes, who is drafting guidelines on combating hate speech on social media that targets minorities. The guidelines will be submitted to the UN human rights council. The Carnegie UK Trust submission states: “Social media service providers should have in place sufficient numbers of moderators, proportionate to the service provider size and growth and to the risk of harm, who are able to review harmful and illegal hate speech and who are themselves appropriately supported and safeguarded.” It adds that moderators should be “trained in their specialist subjects and on related language and cultural context considerations”. Facebook says it has strict rules against hate speech, has 15,000 people reviewing content in more than 70 languages across the world and has taken action to improve its content moderation in Myanmar, where the company admitted the platform had hosted hate speech directed at the Rohingya, the country’s Muslim minority. Earlier this month, Facebook removed a post by Ethiopia’s prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, for “inciting and supporting violence”. The other Carnegie proposals include: asking chief executives to make public statements committing their organisations to combating hate speech against minorities; companies conducting safety tests for algorithms that check how they impact different markets, cultures and languages; having a point of contact with local law enforcement agencies in order to report illegal content; and, using one of the key features of the online safety bill, asking tech firms to draw up risk assessments showing how their platforms could contribute to distributing hate speech. Discussing the necessity of risk assessments, Lorna Woods, another co-author and a professor at the school of law and human rights centre at the University of Essex, said: “Look for the problems – don’t just assume that it’s alright.”On the evening of 23 November, the moon will have a close encounter with the star Pollux, the brightest star in the constellation Gemini, the twins. Pollux marks the head of one twin. The other twin is marked by the star Castor. Although Pollux is the brighter star, it was Castor that was given the designation alpha Geminorum by German astronomer Johann Bayer in his 1603 star atlas Uranometria, which was the first to chart the entire celestial globe. Although Bayer mostly designated stars in brightness order, by giving Pollux the beta Geminorum designation we can see that this was not a hard and fast rule. The chart shows the view looking east from London at midnight as 23 becomes 24 November. The moon will be in a waning gibbous phase, with almost 83% of its visible surface illuminated. In Greek and Roman myth, Pollux is the son of Leda and the divine Zeus, who seduced Leda in the guise of a swan, while Castor’s father is the mortal king of Sparta. Leda just happened to carry the two boys at the same time, hence twins. From the southern hemisphere, the view will be similar. From Sydney, Australia, look north-east after midnight.The owner of John Lewis and Waitrose will on Monday launch a £1m fund that will channel cash into projects with the potential to end the high street’s “throwaway” culture. The John Lewis Partnership is inviting academics, charities and start-ups that have ideas with the potential to reduce the environmental impact of the food, clothing and gadgets we buy, to pitch for a share of the money. The fund is aimed at identifying “innovators” that are challenging the industry’s outdated “make … use … throw away” model. Marija Rompani, the group’s director of ethics and sustainability, said that tackling the climate crisis, biodiversity loss, waste and pollution required a “different kind of thinking”. “We live in a world of finite materials and we need to start protecting them before it’s too late,” she said. “This is why we’re particularly looking for projects that are regenerative and can eliminate waste or pollution from the design stage.” The Circular Future Fund is focused on food, textiles and household products. Winning ideas could have the answer to food waste in the supply chain or consumers’ homes, or, with the fashion industry a big polluter, a more sustainable production method or material. John Lewis, which raised the £1m from the sale of 10p plastic bags in stores, said it hoped to unearth “scalable” ideas that could be shared and in doing so accelerate the transition towards a more circular economy. High street retailers have already begun adapting their traditional models. Ikea, the UK’s biggest furniture retailer, now has a scheme to buy back unwanted items to resell as part of its efforts to shift towards a circular model. Marks &amp; Spencer disclosed last week that a small selection of its clothes could now be hired from the rental website Hirestreet. Applications for the John Lewis fund, which will be divvied out in grants of £150,000 to £300,000, will close on 9 January 2022. Bids are being invited from academia, charities, social enterprises and businesses that are less than five years old. An independent panel will review them in March with the grants awarded the following month.‘In Africa, when a baby is born, you dance. When you reach puberty, you dance.” Genny Jones grew up in Sierra Leone, and her childhood was full of “reasons to dance”. At 15 she moved to the UK and still, she says, “Dance was always at the back of my mind.” This year, shortly after her 60th birthday, Jones qualified as a teacher of African dance. “My plan is to be a mobile Genny, going different places, stopping, dancing … I want to give back to the community, to lift people up through dancing and laughter,” she says. She already has the wheels, a Suzuki Liana she calls Good Vibes, and has added rainbows to the black paintwork. It took Jones three attempts to pass the theory exam with the African dance company Kukuwa fitness. Since qualifying as a certified instructor in July, she has taught at community venues in north Kent. “When people come to the class, I say, ‘Just wear what you want. If you’ve got a big belly, a big bum, it doesn’t matter. We’re going to shake it. Not in that provocative way,” she adds. “In a more elegant, classical way.” Jones’s signature dance is “Move your boombsey … I’m doing it now”, she says, jiggling in her chair in the accountancy office in Dartford where she works three days a week. She likes this dance because, “You’re shaking yourself free of all your problems.” When Jones came to Britain, she found it hard to adjust. She and her mother shared a one-bedroom flat: “I felt as though I was in a cage.” At school, she was bullied. “Even though I spoke English, it was a different type of English. People couldn’t understand me. They called me names.” In fifth year at school, she had a breakthrough. “The only way I could escape, I realised, was dance.” She danced in the playground. Then a girl from Nigeria joined her, followed by two more girls. Sometimes they practised at Jones’s home. “It was something I owned. These were my dances, my culture, and I was teaching them. It was therapeutic.” In Sierra Leone, Jones was known as Sunshine, a happy child. But in 2003, her marriage broke down, when her sons were aged three and five, and she became depressed. Then she was made redundant. “I had family I could speak to, but I refused. I felt I had failed.” Sometimes she would dance at the kitchen sink, but otherwise suffered in silence and cried herself to sleep. “One day in the supermarket I saw a magazine article about a lady whose life had changed. She became a life coach.” After reading it, Jones enrolled on a similar course herself and “started to reframe” her experience. She told herself, “‘Look at your children, and have hope that the future will be brighter.’ I looked at them, and thought, ‘The future is brighter. Because they are here.’” Jones came across Gingerbread, the charity for single parents, which sent her and her sons “on a holiday in Sandwich, Kent, for a whole weekend, free of charge”. Parents at the boys’ football club also helped. In 2012, in the ultimate turnaround, Jones sang If You’re Happy and You Know It on Britain’s Got Talent. “Sometimes life gives us something really bad,” she says, “but out of bad can come good. I came out of those five years when I was really depressed thinking there must be other people needing help.” Now her sons are 20 and 22, and Jones’s thoughts have turned to “empty nest syndrome … Reaching 60, what I’m finding out is, there’s really just me. I want to find myself and do something I always wanted to do.” At her taster sessions, her staple song is Ambo Shekushe – “a bit like Head, Shoulders, Knees and Toes”. There are always some people present who know the song. “In Sierra Leone we sang it in childhood. I thought it was our song,” she says. But, as Jones knows, song and dance belong to those who know the moves. Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?It’s a weird experience, meeting two of your closest friends for the very first time – even if it is over Zoom. Perhaps that sentence only makes sense to you if you’ve spent countless happy hours in the company of Adam Buxton and Joe Cornish, who have built, through their cult Channel 4 programme The Adam and Joe Show and various radio shows and podcasts ever since, a devoted fanbase, who consider themselves personally acquainted with the pair. That must be a weird experience. “Every now and again I’ll get a sense of people saying: ‘I don’t think you should have said that to Joe’ or ‘Joe was a bit mean to you there’ and I find that a little bit odd,” muses Buxton. “On the other hand, I get it. They feel as if they know us – and I think they do. They have probably spent more time with me than members of my family or friends.” “They still don’t know the real you,” replies Cornish. “They know the special public face of Mount Buxton, not the unclimbable face that’s battered by winds and hounded by yetis.” “And the really rotten part under the sea,” agrees Buxton. Today, Buxton, in his house in Norfolk (specifically, a study stuffed with pop culture curios), and Cornish, from his home in Stockwell, south London, are reflecting on their eponymous hit show 25 years after it started. Yet the roots of the pair’s double-act can be traced back at least another decade. In his recent memoir, Ramble Book, Buxton pinpoints 1984 as “the year I really fell in love with Joe”, after the pair bonded over Not the Nine O’Clock News, Monty Python and the Thompson Twins as young teens at Westminster school. They soon embarked on their own creative endeavours: comics, plays, videos. Cornish, now known primarily as the director of films including Attack the Block, describes them as “camcorder friends”. Cornish went on to film school and Buxton to art college, but they reunited in their 20s when Buxton landed a job on Takeover TV, a Channel 4 showcase for homemade films sent in by viewers – including a young Edgar Wright and Graham Norton. Buxton’s videos impressed producers so much he was given a job as a researcher, then presenter, and soon recruited his best friend to help. When that programme ended, the pair were offered their own show. Decades on, it is difficult to sum up what The Adam and Joe Show actually was. Its major theme was pop-cultural commentary, but there was much that fell outside that remit. It had to-camera links, a homely set and no laugh track. When it first aired, the Independent described it as “Wayne’s World without the budget”. It was genuinely DIY: the pair filmed it all themselves, making their spectacular “toy movies”, which recreated Trainspotting and American Beauty using childhood toys. It involved friends and family: their schoolmate Louis Theroux suggested a feature known as BaaadDad, which involved Buxton’s father critiquing pop music in a cantankerous manner. It was giddy, densely packed and determined to burst its own bubble at every opportunity. It seems incredible now, but the pair were given no brief. “We were allowed to do whatever we wanted,” says Buxton. It was helmed – for not hugely clear reasons – by Channel 4’s religion department, and the only guidance that commissioner Peter Grimsdale provided was that the show should be “an expression of how you really feel and your friendship”. The thing was, Buxton and Cornish weren’t comedians – at least not in the conventional sense. “We had no experience, we hadn’t trained as standups,” says Cornish. “Whenever we did anything live it was excruciating – we’d get so nervous.” Promoting the show on other programmes such as The Big Breakfast was an ordeal. “That was terrifying. I didn’t sleep a wink – I can remember going into that studio having not slept for 24 hours, with that horrible white hot feeling of exhaustion and anxiety. It was more traumatic than A-levels.” The fact the pair were not seasoned entertainers was key to their appeal: it was as if your friends had made a TV show. Unlike other alternative-ish comedy-entertainment of the 90s – Stewart Lee and Richard Herring’s Fist of Fun, Baddiel and Skinner’s Fantasy Football League – The Adam and Joe Show had no studio audience. As a result, the overriding air is one of intimacy and insularity. Cornish claims that “anybody could easily do what we did: make a stupid song, parody a movie with puppets”, but that’s patently untrue. The songs were witty and musically brilliant; the toy movies were crammed with gags. “We were desperate to not be lazy and to make the most of the opportunity,” concedes Cornish. “I suppose we were insecure that it wasn’t good enough, and we thought the more work we put into it the more likely it was to be good.” Not everything was quite as heartfelt – the pair have since distanced themselves from the show’s occasional pranks, which they blame Louis Theroux (again) for. The pair were “scrabbling around for ideas for the first series”, when Theroux suggested they do a skit where they go into a shop and try to consume the “10% free” parts of products. “That went down very well so we just thought: ‘OK, we will do more of those things,’” says Cornish, in a robot voice. The show felt very British, but actually drew most of its inspiration from across the pond. Alternative 90s US culture such as the Beastie Boys’ magazine Grand Royal, Squirt TV (the “super lo-fi” public-access show made by a 14-year-old New Yorker) and Todd Haynes’s Superstar: The Karen Carpenter Story, which recounted the singer’s life using Barbie dolls, all helped shape the show’s aesthetic. Plus, they were actively chafing against British pop culture, especially the era’s new lad movement and “the lairier aspects of Britpop”, says Buxton. “We felt completely alienated by that,” Cornish agrees. “We never liked football or clubbing – we just watched television and went to films and talked about things.” Not that they were saintly. “We tried to get involved,” winces Cornish. “I recently read an interview we did [at the time] and it was grim – we’re swearing, talking about wanking. I had to put it in the recycling so my daughter never sees it. I could really feel us trying to fit in.” Still, this un-blokey attitude was always very obvious – see their fantastically catchy Footie Song, an ode to the deadly serious complexities of the beautiful game (sample lyric: “foot, kick, kick, kick, foot / Foot, kick, ball, goal!”). One of the most striking things about rewatching The Adam and Joe Show is how well most of it has aged (there are notable exceptions, including a debate about the relative merits of vinyl versus CDs). That’s partly because – comfortingly or depressingly, depending on how you look at it – mainstream entertainment hasn’t actually changed that much. The subjects of their parodies – Star Wars, Friends, Loose Women – remain ubiquitous. People Place, their very funny pastiche of daytime TV programmes that “take on these really massive subjects but do them in a huge hurry, and involve members of the public and just rush them all the time”, as Cornish puts it, remains painfully spot-on. “There’s a bit of one where we’re talking about quick-growing plants and, weirdly, I switched on This Morning the other day and there was a woman saying exactly the same thing but with a straight face. I thought: ‘Jesus Christ. Nothing’s changed!’” The other reason it hasn’t dated a huge amount is because of its prescience. Their 1980s House sketches, in which a family relive the decade in cliche-ridden style, is a concept that has since been adopted seriously by the BBC in various guises. BaaadDad’s later-series dispatches from Ibiza and LA are an early example of the comedian-parent generation-gap travelogue, now a well-established genre thanks to Jack Whitehall, Russell Howard and Romesh Ranganathan. Look under clips of the show posted online and you’ll find commenters claiming the pair were proto-YouTubers. “I suppose the format of the show – two people making their own television – anticipated what has happened with the democratisation of technology,” observes Cornish. Buxton feels a kinship with YouTuber-turned-comedian Bo Burnham – “a kind of arty, deconstructive take on making comedy that isn’t just straight standup or straight TV” – but says: “Most stuff I see is people just churning it out regularly to try to build up an audience – get on board with this, get my numbers up. That’s totally antithetical to having fun and being irreverent and taking the piss.” In 2001, after four series, the show was cancelled in a way that clearly stung. “We had a meeting where Kevin Lygo, the head of entertainment at the time, said the show had run its course – I’ll never forget that phrase. It was a very weird, traumatic end to it,” recalls Cornish. Buxton remembers bumping into Noel Gallagher’s girlfriend, Sara, and her telling him, “Noel hates [the show]. He says it’s so cringey and studenty. And I thought, ‘Yeah of course he does.’ And I think that’s what Channel 4 thought at a certain point.” Cast out into the wilderness, they eventually took a job providing holiday cover for Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant’s Xfm show. It was a move that ultimately set them on a far more fruitful and enjoyable path, landing their own slot on the station and eventually moving to BBC 6 Music, where they would become early podcast success stories. Initially, says Buxton, the move felt “like a step down. There’s that hierarchy of film at the top, TV in the middle and then audio down at the bottom.” “I feel that at the moment,” nods Cornish, mock-seriously. “Film is very much at the top and podcasting way, way down at the bottom.” “Well, I’ve got bad news for you,” replies Buxton, who has a long-running hit podcast, “because I was going to say that hierarchy has now totally flipped around. Sorry about that!” The freewheeling radio chat helped patch up their friendship, which “was often put under strain when we were doing the TV show, because the pressure was enormous,” says Buxton. The casual approach, thinks Cornish, was preferable for the audience too. “We realised that was maybe more relaxing to listen to than two desperately overambitious, tortured idiots trying to make television.” They are in no way sentimental about leaving TV behind. “I used to torture myself just about what I looked like, regardless of the content of the sketch,” says Cornish. “It was just, my god, look at my fucking face. That was so exhausting.” Watching the show back now is not the painful experience making it was. Buxton has recently been showing it to his teenage children. “My son Nat is 17 and quite difficult to please in some ways, so I was surprised to find him laughing. He’s into good comedy, so I took that as a big compliment.” Cornish, meanwhile, regularly posts old Adam and Joe Show clips on his Instagram account. Like Buxton, he is clearly proud of what his sweaty, tortured former self managed to produce. “I like it,” he grins. “I’m one of our biggest fans!”The Royal College of Midwives is calling for members to be given the same support as doctors when they struggle with drug and alcohol problems. Research shared with the Guardian – the first of its kind into substance abuse among midwives – has revealed that significant numbers of midwives have problems with drugs or alcohol. It found that 28% said they had problems and 16% said they worked while under the influence of various substances. Dr Sally Pezaro, the author of the research, found that along with alcohol, midwives used cannabis, cocaine, heroin and sedatives. She said reasons given include work-related stress and anxiety, bullying, traumatic clinical incidents and to maintain overall functioning. Pezaro, a midwife and fellow of the Royal College of Midwives, said there was no dedicated support programme available for midwives, while doctors struggling with substance abuse can get support from the NHS practitioner health programme. The incidence of substance abuse among midwives, based on the survey of 623 people, appears higher than among doctors – 8%-15% of whom have been found to have substance abuse problems. Pezaro is calling for more support for midwives. “If midwives seek help they lose their licence to practise. Doctors are treated less harshly by their regulator, the General Medical Council, than we are by ours – the Nursing and Midwifery Council,” she said. Between 2014 and 2016 26% of 1,298 fitness to practise cases that came before the Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) involved drugs or alcohol. A Royal College of Midwives spokesperson said: “It is a brave decision to step forward and say you have a problem and are grappling with substance misuse, which blights the lives of people and their families. For anyone who does this, including healthcare professionals, there should be a compassionate approach. “This should be matched with understanding, help and support from employers and wider society for people struggling with these serious issues, and who want to tackle their problem and overcome it. All health professionals should also receive the same treatment and support from their employer, irrespective of their role.” One survey respondent said of a fellow midwife: “Rather than helping her, she got sacked, named and shamed … this sends a very powerful message to others … We need help? We get destroyed! No wonder we soldier on in silence!” Pezaro, a researcher in the Centre for Arts, Memory and Communities (CAMC) at Coventry University, wants to work with NHS and government policy decision-makers to tackle the problem. She said barriers to seeking help included fear of repercussions, shame, stigma, practicalities, and a perceived lack of support. “This data should make people stand up and listen to the plight of midwives. We hope it will be a catalyst for change and reduce stigma. Many midwives engaged in problematic substance use feel unable to seek help.”How, I wonder, is Brooke Shields so sorted? She has survived a childhood with an alcoholic mother, some disturbing early films, a nation’s creepy obsession with her, a divorce and severe postnatal depression. She even came through the 90s’ overplucked-eyebrow trend unharmed. And here she is, radiant through my laptop screen, in her beautiful New York townhouse kitchen, with a dog at her feet, husband milling about in the background, one teenage daughter upstairs, another successfully packed off to college, and her sense of humour very much intact. She has, she says with a smile, when I point out how together she seems, “been going to therapy for 35 years”. Shields is in a Christmas romcom, for Netflix, which is the gift you didn’t know you wanted. “There’s dogs, castles, knitters, pubs!” she says, laughing. I don’t need convincing. The plot of A Castle for Christmas may be as predictable as gift-wrapped socks, but sometimes you just need preposterous cosy escapism. Shields is great as bestselling American author Sophie Brown, who, suffering with writer’s block, escapes to Scotland to trace her roots and ends up acquiring a stately home. And, despite the film’s many conventions, a middle-aged romcom still feels quite radical. There are lots of women in their 50s like Sophie, she says, “who are taking their life in their own hands. They’ve raised kids, they’re moving on to this next phase and there’s a lot of power that comes with that.” Shields has seen it in her friends, and in herself. “There’s a level of confidence, a level of ‘I don’t give a shit’. My friends are moms who are starting new careers, who are empty nesters, and who are saying: ‘I’m this age but there’s so much more for me to do. And I’m capable of it, and I’m independent.’ We love the men in our lives, but we’re not reliant on them. We’re not defined by this, this or this – and that includes motherhood. And I think that’s very appealing.” Shields recently launched her own company, Beginning Is Now, an online platform for women, which came out of this newfound confidence. “I feel stronger, I feel sexier, I feel less burdened by: ‘Oh, what do they think of me?’ I’m not encumbered in the same way that I spent a great deal of my youth in. I still care about people, but I don’t put myself in this position to feel ‘less than’. And all of a sudden, I was like: ‘Why am I not represented?’ Why am I told: ‘You’re over because you’re not in your 20s’? I’m 56 and I feel more empowered now than I ever did.” Shields has been famous almost all her life. She appeared in a soap advert when she was 11 months old, and famously as a prostituted child in the film Pretty Baby at age 11. As a teenager in the 80s, she was everywhere. There were the blatant cash-generators – there was a Brooke Shields doll and she put her name to a range of hairdryers – and also highly sexualised adverts for Calvin Klein, and the film Blue Lagoon, in which, not yet 16, she spent most of the time naked. Then Shields escaped it all and took up a place at Princeton University, which she says now perhaps wasn’t the best timing in terms of her career, but probably saved her sanity. Hollywood is littered with the broken careers, and lives, of child stars. “I don’t know why I didn’t,” she says when I ask why she never hurtled down that path. “I talk about it a lot in therapy, but I think because I was so …” She pauses. “I had to keep my mother alive. The focal point for me was keeping her alive, because it was the two of us alone in the world, in my opinion.” Shields’s mother, Teri, was a working-class girl from New Jersey who, through her wit, beauty and force of personality, had turned herself into a Manhattan socialite. She had become pregnant with Brooke after a brief relationship with a man from a wealthy New York family; they divorced when Shields was five months old. Shields then spent a strange childhood shuttling between her father’s affluent Long Island life and her mother’s penniless bohemia. Shields was then – as now – beautiful, and Teri recognised this, shepherding her daughter’s career. “She had this baby that looked this way, and that’s how we survived,” says Shields. “My looking a certain way paid the bills.” Did that feel like a big responsibility? “I just loved the approval. And I loved working and I loved being on a set. We had fun, we travelled everywhere. So it wasn’t as if I felt the responsibility as much as: ‘Oh my God, we get to get a car. Oh, we bought a house. We bought another house.’ Like, if I do this, we get this. That’s the way it went for decades.” There was never a plan, she says, and she stresses Teri wasn’t pushy. “As long as I was happy, we kept doing it. I never did something I didn’t want to do.” But some of the things Teri consented to on her daughter’s behalf – or even set up herself – seem so damaging. When Shields was 10, Teri commissioned a photographer, Gary Gross, to take nude photographs of her for the Playboy publication Sugar’n’Spice (later, Tate Modern removed an artwork based on the photograph, made by the artist Richard Prince, from an exhibition). When Shields, then 11, appeared in Louis Malle’s film Pretty Baby, playing a child who grows up in a brothel and is then auctioned off to the highest bidder, she was filmed naked. Teri got a storm of criticism for allowing her daughter to be in the film – and for Blue Lagoon a few years later, in which Shields and her co-star Chris Atkins are marooned on an island as children, go through puberty and develop a sexual relationship. Shields had a body double for the sex scenes, but the whole thing is uncomfortable (off-screen, Shield wrote in her memoir, she and Atkins were being encouraged to fall in love for real; she was 14, he was 18). There is a misogynistic inevitability to the extent to which her mother was blamed, rather than the men who actually made these films, but still, you have to wonder what Teri was thinking. Would Shields have let her daughters do a film like Pretty Baby? “In 1977, probably,” she says. “Now, I don’t know if I would. It was a different era.” Does she look at the film with different eyes now? Shields, who wrote a thesis on Malle’s work at college, is proud of the film (through her mother, she grew up with an appreciation for European arthouse films). She talks for a while about its “cinematic portrayal”, but acknowledges: “I just don’t know if you could make that movie today. I guess you’d have to have an actress who was older, playing younger.” She adds: “I’m not quite sure what the rules are now”, as if it’s an HR issue, rather than a societal one. “But I also wasn’t personally scathed by it.” Did she not feel it was damaging even being exposed to those themes? “Not when you grow up in New York. I mean, it just takes five minutes to see – on the old 42nd Street – what prostitution was. And also I was very sequestered from all of it in my real life. I was a virgin till I was 22, so it was all pretend in my mind. I was an actress. I didn’t suffer privately about it.” But more widely, does she look back – at the films, the photos, the ads – and think how damaging it is, as a culture, to sexualise young girls like that? “I think it’s been done since the dawn of time, and I think it’s going to keep going on,” she says. She seems a little detached and academic about it, saying: “There’s something incredibly seductive about youth … I think it just has different forms and it’s how you survive it, and whether you choose to be victimised by it. It’s not in my nature to be a victim.” If Teri was controlling, an upshot was that it was protective. Shields never “had a #MeToo moment”, she points out. Her mother would even come with her to nights out at Studio 54. “I could just dance and have a really good time, and she would make sure I got home,” says Shields. “I had school the next day. She protected me, like, nobody got near me.” For all their unusual situation, Teri tried to maintain a degree of normality for her daughter – they stayed in New York, rather than moving to Hollywood, and Shields attended normal schools – which probably explains why she seems grounded today. Teri, says Shields, “had her issues, but I felt loved by her”. She thinks her mother’s alcoholism – in her memoir she writes painfully about Teri’s erratic behaviour – probably steered her away from drink or drugs, inadvertently rather than consciously. “I think that it seemed like a waste of time. Being not present, to me, seemed like a waste; she missed out on a lot.” Shields writes in her book that her career would have gone differently – or at least there would have been a solid plan – had she had a proper agent, rather than her mother’s scattergun, moneymaking approach (at one point Meryl Streep’s agent wanted to take Shields on, so long as she left Teri and committed to being an actor, rather than a celebrity; Teri refused to let her do it). “I think my talent would have been more forward than my fame,” she says now. Then again, she adds brightly, “the fame trajectory” – the one that relied on the products, and magazine covers, and gossip about dating Michael Jackson – perhaps explains her longevity. “So on the one hand, I think it would have gone differently, but I’m not sure I would still be here, or relevant or working.” It must be so strange to have never really known anonymity. Did she feel able to become her own person? “I don’t think I became my own person until I got pregnant with my first kid,” says Shields. That was in 2003. “I finally now am my own person. It’s taken this many years, because if you grow up being accountable to a persona, accountable to the public, there’s so many different things that we are encapsulated in. And then I had my first kid, and no one could tell me really how to do it. Like, I’m responsible for that person. I’m doing this with this kid, and you just hope you don’t fuck them up.” She laughs. It is also about getting older, she says. “For the past almost 20 years, I’ve been coming more into my own. I don’t spend time with people I don’t want to spend time with any more. I don’t spend time doing things I don’t want to do. I don’t make movies that don’t make me happy.” How much of it was breaking away from her mother? “I was like a summer away from being Grey Gardens with my mom,” says Shields of the 1975 documentary about a reclusive mother and daughter, both named Edie, who lived together. She says her first husband, the tennis player Andre Agassi, who she got together with in 1993, “really helped me sort of individuate from my mother and take ownership of my career in a proactive way. I think that that started me understanding that I could take control of my career, that I could focus on things that I wanted to do. So the individuation process from my mom was a lot later than most.” Her marriage to Agassi broke up in 1999. In 2001, Shields married the screenwriter and producer Chris Henchy, with whom she has had two daughters. In her career, she found a home in comedy; her starring role in the sitcom Suddenly Susan brought her two Golden Globe nominations. Her ability to send herself up is obvious on her social media accounts, and A Castle for Christmas would probably have been awful without Shields’s comic charm. Comedy, she says, “is where I am the happiest”. Was it a reaction against the teen sex-symbol image? She insists not, more that she’s part of a long tradition. “The visual of a pretty girl falling on her face somehow is really appealing. That’s been in comedy for a long time; Lucille Ball was a beauty queen. My image went through so many different machinations. I mean, it was like, I was the Lolita, then I was the most famous virgin. Whatever anybody wanted to label me as, they did. Now I’m the depression person, because I spoke about postpartum depression.” Shields wrote a book, Down Came the Rain, about her experience of depression following the birth of her first daughter, at a time when few women, particularly movie stars, spoke about it. “I just set out to be honest, because I was suffering and I saw other people suffer, and nobody was talking about it, and that angered me,” says Shields. “I was like: why should I be made to feel like I’m not a good mom when no one told me about this? So I decided to be accountable and talk about it, because the shame surrounding it is really unfortunate. And it did help, which I’m told quite frequently. I wish that there had been something that I could have read. I wanted to give people forgiveness from it, I needed to be let off my own hook.” In a career that has spanned more than 55 years, Shields – grounded, sensible and with a willingness to see the ridiculous in things – takes the long view. She realises that to try to keep her teen success going would have been a huge pressure as well as impossible, and that careers, if you’re lucky enough to have a long one, go up and down. “Nobody really can maintain it, but I learned that at a young age,” she says. “I’m not chasing it.” • A Castle for Christmas is on Netflix from 26 NovemberNew Zealand will adopt a new system of living with coronavirus from 3 December, ending tough coronavirus measures and allowing businesses to operate in its biggest city, prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said. New Zealand has been unable to beat an outbreak of the highly infectious Delta variant of Covid-19 centred in Auckland, forcing Ardern to abandon her acclaimed elimination strategy and switch to a system of treating the virus as endemic. The country’s biggest city, Auckland, has been in lockdown for more than 90 days. “Delta is here,” Ardern said on Monday. “I know that there will be some who may have some anxiety about these changes, but I can assure you we will continue to operate in the cautious and careful way that has served us so well … we are fast approaching the next phase in our Covid response that delivers more freedoms.” “The number one thing every New Zealander can do to prepare for the new system is to get vaccinated,” she said. Under the new rules, most freedoms will be available to those who are vaccinated – including visiting restaurants, bars, hairdressers and gyms, even at the highest alert levels. The system is expected to put an end to lockdowns, and schools will remain open. For the unvaccinated, however, the changes will usher in an increasing divide – those without vaccine passes will face restrictions on gathering sizes, and will not be able to enter most hospitality businesses at higher alert levels. Vaccine mandates will affect about 40% of the total workforce. According to the Ministry of Health, 91% of eligible New Zealanders (those aged 12 and over) have had at least one dose of the vaccine, and 83% are fully vaccinated. The ministry uses data of those engaged with health services, which is a slight undercount of New Zealand’s population – so true rates are likely a few percentage points behind that. According to Stats NZ population data, 76% of the full population including children have had at least one dose, and 69% are fully vaccinated. Vaccination rates for eligible Māori, the country’s indigenous people, are well behind the rest of the population, currently sitting at 79% first doses and 64% fully vaccinated. Experts have raised ongoing concerns that as the outbreak spreads, Māori and pacific populations will bear the brunt. In the new “traffic light” system, regions will be put into a red, orange or green setting depending on their level of exposure to Covid-19 and vaccination rates. Auckland will start at red. New Zealand enforced some of the tightest pandemic restrictions among OECD nations that has helped limit the spread of Covid-19 so far and helped the economy bounce back faster than many of its peers. The country has so far reported about 7,000 cases in all and 39 deaths. Its international borders still remain shut to the rest of the world.Energy giant Royal Dutch Shell has expanded its presence in Australia’s electricity market, buying retailer Powershop from NZ’s Meridian Group as part of a $729m deal that may irk some customers who have tried to avoid fossil fuel companies. Infrastructure Capital Group will take the non-retailing arm of Meridian’s Australian operations, which includes the Mount Mercer and Mount Millar windfarms, and hydro power plants attached to the major dams of Hume, Burrinjuck and Keepit. Neal Barclay, Meridian’s chief executive, said the sale offered an “exciting opportunity” for the Australian assets and their employees given Shell’s and ICG’s plans to develop their respective renewable energy and retail presences in Australia. “With emissions the problem, and renewable energy the solution, the buyers are readying to invest heavily in a cleaner future. The Meridian Australia team will be at the heart of a transformation that is not only good for Australia, but also the planet,” Barclay said in a statement to the NZ stock exchange. Powershop, with about 185,000 customers, has touted its clean energy credentials, including its Climate Active certification from the Australian government that recognises its net zero emissions status. The retail arm sells electricity to customers in Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia and south-east Queensland as well as selling gas in Victoria. A Meridian spokesperson defended the sale of the retailing arm to one of the world’s biggest fossil fuel companies, saying the company’s commitment “to do good by our customers and the planet is stronger than ever”. “We consider this sale as a positive for both, knowing customers will get the same great service and knowing Shell Energy and its partner ICG’s vision is to significantly invest in a transition to a cleaner energy future,” the spokesperson said. “We are proud of that.” However, Market Forces executive director Julien Vincent said his own operations would be switching power providers “as soon as possible”, following Shell’s takeover of Powershop. “Tens of thousands of people have switched to Powershop, lured by its claims of being a progressive company, disrupting the traditional power retailers and promoting renewable energy,” Vincent said. “For Powershop to be in the hands of Shell, a company still fighting against a court ruling that it must reduce greenhouse gas emissions in line with the Paris Agreement, and with a history of tax avoidance in Australia, will turn the stomachs of many customers,” he said. “[T]his is undermining the concept of community power, making Powershop’s revenue available to the old fossil fuel establishment.” Don Gocher, director of climate and environment at the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility, though, said more competition in the power sector was good, and the sale would “put a heap of pressure on Origin and AGL to decarbonise more quickly”. For its part, Shell said the purchase extended the firm’s reach into households as customers, and included offtake agreements for Meridian’s hydro and wind plants that are being sold to ICG, an Australian asset manager. “[W]e are well-placed to manage complexity for customers so that we deliver simple, cleaner energy solutions,” said Elisabeth Brinton, Shell’s executive vice-president of renewables and energy solutions. The companies did not disclose the price paid for the different components. Other non-fossil fuel assets owned by Shell in Australia include the 120-megawatt Gangarri solar plant being built in Queensland; Sonnen Australia, a home battery energy storage systems provider; and the 49% share in Australian solar developer, ESCO Pacific. Shell last year bought Select Carbon, a firm specialising in carbon farming.Along for the Ride With David O’Doherty 10pm, Channel 4 Sometimes a format as simple as two comedians going on a bike ride together makes for good television. Away from stage comedy, David O’Doherty earns his primetime slot with another obsession: cycling. Taking Richard Ayoade on a two-day trip along the Kent coast, they observe, reflect and talk utter nonsense. Bliss. Later in the series, Grayson Perry and Mel Giedroyc saddle up. Hollie Richardson The Outlaws 9pm, BBC One Richard E Grant guest stars in the penultimate episode of this crime-comedy series, very on-brand as Gabby’s aristocratic dad. Elsewhere, Rani has a risky plan to rectify things with Christian – but can she convince the rest of the community service clan to help her pull it off? HR Guy’s Garage 9pm, Channel 4 Guy Martin previously tricked out a Transit van to break a lap record round the Nürburgring racetrack. This new series sees the mutton-chopped speed demon turn other unassuming cars into overclocked racers. In episode one, he and his droll sidekick Cammy attempt to upgrade a humble Volvo into something that can survive full-contact Swedish rallycross. Graeme Virtue Succession 9pm, Sky Atlantic The Roys’ (un)civil war rumbles on, as they attend a conservative political conference to “pick the next president”. Roman learns big news about their mother, Greg and Tom ponder prison together, and Shiv receives a surprise offer. Meanwhile, Kendall’s erratic behaviour continues and he questions Lisa’s legal advice. HR Curb Your Enthusiasm 9pm, Sky Comedy Season 11 has started strongly, with blackmail, a classic dinner party and a torrent of big guest stars – most recently Woody Harrelson – adding to Larry David’s fundamental genius for giving offence. Tonight, there’s a run of some of the season’s best lines so far: the takes on traffic jams and (not) praying for a sick acquaintance are Larry in excelsis. Jack Seale Royal Bastards: Rise of the Tudors 9pm, Sky History Paternal ambiguity is only partly an explanation for the title of this new docu-drama series, which implies that most of the Tudor family were bastards in every sense. We begin with Lady Margaret Beaufort, who changed British history by manoeuvring her son towards the throne. Phil Harrison Film choice Mad Max (George Miller, 1979), 9pm, ITV4 Although the second in the series has the edge in terms of junkyard vehicle design and carnage, George Miller’s 1979 original (at that time, the most profitable film ever made) set the template – and provided Mel Gibson with his star-making break. In a near-future Australia where society is on the verge of collapse, Gibson’s leather-clad cop pursues a murderous biker gang through the outback, at great personal cost. The Australian new wave would produce better films but none with such enduring global impact. The first two sequels follow on Tuesday and Wednesday. Simon WardellTop story: ‘Protections must be put in place’ Hello, I’m Warren Murray and this is the briefing, all of a Monday morning. More than 5,000 new homes in flood-risk areas of England have been granted planning permission so far this year. Insurers said they were concerned about the numbers of homes being built where owners were at risk of experiencing “traumatic and devastating losses”. But builders say the housing shortage means even flood-risk areas have to be used – and the climate crisis means more defences and mitigation measures need to be put in place. An investigation by Greenpeace this year found that one-third of England’s most important flood defences were in private hands, with more than 1,000 in a poor state of repair. The government said it was investing over £5.2bn in flood and coastal defences in England, which would improve protection for more than 336,000 properties. “Our national planning policy is clear that floodplain development should be avoided wherever possible, and protections must be put in place when building in these areas is necessary – we expect local planning authorities to follow this guidance.” * * * Car ploughs into Christmas parade – At least five people have been killed after a vehicle was driven at speed through a Christmas parade in a town in Wisconsin, police have confirmed. A red sport utility vehicle ploughed into marchers in Waukesha about 20 miles west of Milwaukee on Sunday afternoon, also injuring more than 40 people. Police had opened fire on the vehicle in order to try to stop it, said the town’s police chief, Dan Thompson. One person of interest was in custody, he said, and the vehicle involved had been recovered. * * * Johnson, Starmer woo CBI – Boris Johnson is to announce that all new buildings in England will have to install electric vehicle charge points from 2022. In a speech to the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) today, the PM is due to say that the government expects it to lead to 145,000 new charging points each year. The government will also support a loan programme worth £150m to help British small and medium enterprises, including green businesses, commercialise their research. Keir Starmer will tell the CBI a Labour government would not “throw cash at” the country’s problems. Starmer will aim to woo a sector that Labour believes has been alienated by Johnson’s government. Labour has attacked the government for wasting billions of pounds on “crony Covid contracts”. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, has said Labour would set up an “office for value for money”. Labour has made significant spending pledges, though, including £28bn of green investment each year until the end of the decade. * * * Isis suspects buy freedom – Suspected Isis members are buying their way out jail in north-east Syria for the equivalent of £6,000 each, according to interviews with two freed men and official documents. As part of the deal, they sign a declaration promising not to rejoin any armed organisations and to leave the parts of north and east Syria under control of the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). About 10,000 such men are held in three overcrowded SDF-administered prisons in north-east Syria. Separately, Bethany Haines – whose father, David Haines was captured by Isis in Syria and beheaded – has described watching the video of his murder and looking an alleged Islamic State killer in the eye in court. In the programme The Isis ‘Beatles’: Blood On Their Hands, to be broadcast on ITV today, Bethany tells of flying out to see El Shafee Elsheikh appear in court. He is charged over the beheading of four US hostages but not her father’s murder. “He just stared right into my eyes and I stared back. I’m not going to be intimidated by him. I’m not going to look away.” * * * Crossrail at turning point – Hopes that Crossrail will open in central London in early 2022 – this time on schedule – have been boosted as the troubled £19bn scheme moved into its final phase of testing at the weekend. The trial operations phase will comprise more than 150 exercises over three to six months, involving thousands of volunteer passengers, to ensure that the Elizabeth line, as Crossrail will be known, is ready for full passenger service and can cope with emergency situations. TfL bosses have committed to open the line in full in the first half of next year. Initially, passengers will need to change trains between the new central underground section and the services already running from Reading in the west and Shenfield in the east, but TfL hopes some trains could run from suburbs across the city centre by next autumn, ahead of a May 2023 deadline. * * * A dill – A “mortified” Australian TV reporter has tried to explain how he bungled an exclusive interview with Adele about her new album, 30, because he hadn’t actually listened to it. Matt Doran and a crew flew to London for the chat, which reportedly cost A$1m to secure and would have been Adele’s only Australian interview. After Doran conceded during the interview that he had only heard one track from her latest work, 30, the interview was canned. Doran said he missed the email that contained a preview of the album. Sony refused to release the footage of the interview. Today in Focus podcast: Huma Abedin on being herself As Hillary Clinton’s most trusted aide, it was her job to stay out of view. Even when her husband Anthony Weiner’s scandalous behaviour dragged her into the spotlight, she mostly stayed silent. In this interview, Huma Abedin explains why she is ready to tell her own story, in a memoir that sheds remarkable light on what it cost her to become a public figure against her will. Lunchtime read: Brooke Shields as you’ve never seen her before From Hollywood movies to naked photoshoots, Brooke Shields spent much of her youth in projects that now look more than a little creepy. She talks about her alcoholic mother, her new romcom and the happiness she has found in her 50s. Sport Manchester United are considering candidates including Zinedine Zidane, Mauricio Pochettino, Erik ten Hag, Luis Enrique and Brendan Rodgers to take charge from next summer after sacking Ole Gunnar Solskjær. Twenty races into a gruelling Formula One season, Lewis Hamilton remains relentless and unbowed in his determination to take the title fight to the wire after a dominant victory over rival Max Verstappen at the debut Qatar Grand Prix. Vivianne Miedema became the first player in WSL history to score against every team they have faced as the striker broke the deadlock in Arsenal’s 2-0 win over Manchester United. Eddie Jones could face a challenge bringing Owen Farrell back into England’s team after Henry Slade’s finest display in the win over South Africa. Abby Dow led the way for England Women as they scored 15 tries in an 89-0 rout of USA at Sixways to equal the men’s team’s record of 18 successive Test wins. Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai said she was safe and well in a video call on Sunday, the International Olympic Committee has said, amid growing international demands for assurances that she is free and not under threat. The head of the WTA said the video did not alleviate his concerns for Peng’s wellbeing. World No 1 Gerwyn Price defeated Peter Wright 16-8 to claim the Grand Slam of Darts trophy for a third time and lay down a marker ahead of December’s World Championship. Alexander Zverev beat the top two players in consecutive matches to earn his second title at the ATP Finals. Tiger Woods posted a short video showing him hitting golf balls on a driving range on Sunday, nine months after the 15-time major champion suffered serious leg injuries in a car crash. And Tim Paine has returned to the field for the first time since quitting as Australia’s Test skipper amid a sexting scandal and remains firmly committed to playing in the Ashes. Business CBI chief Tony Danker will tell the government today that levelling up cannot be left to the free market, with decades of “benign neglect” leaving the country with a “branch-line economy” where too many companies are centred on London and the south-east. But he says the UK has a “shot at redemption” if high-quality jobs green jobs are created in former industrial heartlands. The FTSE100 looks like lifting 0.3% this morning, while the pound is on $1.344 and €1.192. The papers The Guardian print edition leads this morning with “Don’t take us for granted, Tories warn PM amid social care revolt”. Boris Johnson faces a backbench rebellion with MPs due to vote this evening on plans to scale back the social care cap. The Department of Health and Social Care said it would calculate the £85,000 cap on lifetime care costs in a way that could leave tens of thousands of England’s poorest pensioners paying the same as wealthier people. Also on the front: “Protests against Covid curbs spread in Europe”, and “£1m a day: cost of test and trace consultants”. The Telegraph says there is “Rage across Europe” with those opposed to Covid restrictions rioting just as a fresh wave of the virus spreads “at lightning speed”. The Times has “MPs may be avoiding big tax bills on second jobs” – our take here on that Times investigation. “PM’s mask slips again” – the Metro has Johnson not wearing one on a train. The Mirror takes us to Finland, where it exposes the “torment of animals on cruel fur farms” and says caged, maimed Arctic foxes are “Fashion victims” – with “top British stores” and their customers’ tastes complicit. “Sex killer set free to target teenage girls” – the Daily Mail says the double child killer Colin Pitchfork has been put back in jail after approaching young women in the street. The i has “Booster jabs on way for all adults to beat winter wave”. For that story the Express rolls out another of its “save Christmas” headlines. And a frightening lead story in the Financial Times: “China missile fired during flight by hypersonic weapon confounds US”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe winding coastal pathway promised to be sublime: a gorse-lined trail atop a sweep of airy crags that fell away to reveal a nesting ground for kittiwakes, razorbills and rare black guillemots. The weather, a mix of smoking fog, brutal winds and lashing rain, was another matter. Talk about blowing the cobwebs off. “Take a bracing walk along the clifftops,” read the info board near the trailhead at Whitehaven harbour, where I began. “The outlook is great for sea watching.” On the morning I set off, storm watching Shackleton-style was more apt. The forecast wasn’t part of the plan for my three-day hike along Cumbria’s cove-nibbled coastline. I’d travelled by train from Carlisle in search of a new 40-mile section along the England Coast Path, a journey first conceived to stitch together existing byways and clifftop footpaths around the entire coastline into a 2,795-mile trail, but more relevant than ever given our new, pandemic-driven love of the countryside. The stage from Whitehaven to Silecroft also represents a radical change of focus for a region so dependent on the Lake District. Many areas of the national park have been overwhelmed by a surge of domestic visitors because of Covid (and tourist cars could even be banned from certain places next summer). But farther west, away from the mountain lakes and myth-inspiring fells, lies a different portal to adventure: empty beaches, the soft crunch of boot on sand, the fall of seabirds on the breeze. Arriving early on the trail meant I had a full day’s walk ahead. After a snoop around the Beacon Museum, where vestiges of north-west England’s maritime history are on display, I walked along quaysides once filled with 200 tall ships laden with sugar, rum and textiles and on to the route proper. A Candlestick chimney and miners’ lodge, where once charcoal-blackened Cumbrians slept before taking a shaft down to a seam five miles under the sea, were a reminder of altogether different times. The industrial landscape began to fade and sodden sheep appeared in fields verging on the sheer drops of high sandstone sea cliffs. Most Cumbrians need no introduction to St Bees Head, the RSPB reserve that curves south of Whitehaven, where peregrine falcons ride the thermals. Here there is an enormous colony of cormorants, fulmars and puffins, and the viewpoint across the Irish Sea towards the Isle of Man and south-west Scotland at times puts a carousel of dolphin pods and harbour porpoises on show. I made do with a glimpse of Galloway through the smirr while gulls dived for cover. Along the tapered trail, off in the distance and almost built on to the shoreline, the scene changed from fudge-brown beaches to a salvo of chimneys, fuel storage ponds, waste facilities and gridlocked power lines. This complex concrete geography was Sellafield, with about 1,300 buildings and by orders of magnitude the largest decommissioned nuclear site in Europe. I walked its boundary and was struck not by its horrible history – the Manhattan Project, the development of atomic bombs, had links with west Cumbria – but by the perverse industrial beauty of a power plant abutting England’s most stunning national park. In the rain, it looked like a Hollywood set. About six miles farther along the shoreline, helped along by England Coast Path waymarking, I crossed from sea-hugging country lanes under the coastal railway and out through marram grass on to wild dunes for my first glimpse of the Esk estuary. By now, the moshing sea had abated and the dunescapes around Seascale and Drigg began to take on a half-hearted glow. Summer was trying to break through. That day ended with another first: a night of drying my clothes on the radiators inside the Maid of Kent, one of two retrofitted Pullman coaches that can now be booked for self-catering stays beside Ravenglass train station. Built in 1917 and used on the frontline in France and Belgium during the first world war as part of the London and North Western Railway’s “Continental Ambulance” train, the historic carriage had seen far worse than my pink gooseflesh and claggy underwear. As the trailhead for the next stage, Ravenglass is also a gateway to some other fabulous distractions. First, a tootle along the lilliputian Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway, billed on nostalgic posters as “the smallest railway in the world”; in reality, today’s travellers chug into one of the Lake District’s prettiest sections aboard a toytown train. After that, the raw beauty of Eskmeals Dunes nature reserve at low tide, then dinner (fish and chips, of course) at the Pennington Hotel, the closest Cumbria gets to the Côte d’Azur. Ease of access is what the England Coast Path is all about, even if it remains a work in progress. Some sections around the coastal margins require a brief detour or single-station hop and this sees me catch a train on day three to Hycemoor to continue my hike south. As the miles passed, strata of communities revealed themselves, and it became clear that all English life can be found along the coast. Caravan clubs, farms, golf courses, country pubs, industrial lots, a string of fishing cabins, a prison, then, finally, a Ministry of Defence base used for large-calibre ammunition trials. It was all here. Amid this scene, I reached Silecroft with sea salt in my lungs, walking what must be one of the loveliest beaches in England, at least for the rewarding natural high of getting there with my own two feet. Dog walkers were out with their hoods up. An elderly couple sat under a blanket on a bench, eating sandwiches. A father and son struggled to hang on to their kite in the wind. And from a sheen of silvery sand cluttered with tidal pools, I walked inland to the station for the last train home. Only then, did the sun finally come out. • The trip was provided by Visit Lake District. For further details on walking the coast, visit westernlakedistrict.com. Self-catering in the four-bed Maid of Kent carriage at Ravenglass from £381 for three nights. For more information on the England Coast Path, visit nationaltrail.co.uk • The footnote on this article was amended on 25 November 2021. The writer was a guest of Visit Lake District, not Visit Cumbria as earlier stated.Australia’s drugs regulator has fined four individuals and companies more than $170,000 for unlawfully advertising or importing vaping products, with one company hit with more than $100,000 in infringement notices. In October, laws came into effect that prevent nicotine-containing vaping products from being obtained without a prescription. Doctors are only supposed to prescribe them as a last resort when more proven quit treatments fail. The law changes were prompted by concerns about the health impacts of vaping, and data showing children are increasingly using the products. Since the new laws kicked in, websites have emerged offering to link vapers to a health practitioner authorised to prescribe the products. But the new laws only allow pharmacies and pharmacy-marketing groups to advertise in a very limited way. Non-pharmacy websites which advertise vaping products, or advertise links to online suppliers, are likely to be non-compliant with the nicotine advertising permissions. The latest company to be fined by the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) for breaching the guidelines is Sydney-based company Mason Online. Its largest shareholder is Bunleng Chhun, who is registered as the owner of what claims to be the largest vaping shop in Australia. The website is registered to a New Zealand email address. In a statement, the TGA alleged Mason Online is responsible for a number of vaping websites, one of which promoted the use and supply of nicotine vaping products in a way non-compliant way. Under the Therapeutic Goods Act 1989, vaping products that contain nicotine are prescription-only medicines and cannot be advertised to the public. The TGA issued eight infringement notices totalling $106,560 to Mason Online after the company allegedly did not respond to multiple warnings about their advertising. “Where the TGA requests a person to review their website and remove all non-compliant advertising, it is not enough for the website to be redirected to an overseas domain or for references to a locally based bricks and mortar store to be removed from the website,” a statement from the regulator said. “The TGA reminds advertisers of the recent warning not to engage in deceptive conduct.” Earlier in November, the TGA issued three infringement notices, totalling $7,992, to a Melbourne-based individual for alleged importation breaches involving nicotine vaping products. There are currently no TGA-approved nicotine vaping products registered in the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods. Medicines that are not in the register are known as unapproved medicines. In the past month the TGA also issued three infringement notices totalling $39,960 to Sydney-based company RV Global Ecommerce for alleged unlawful advertising of nicotine vaping products, and eleven infringement notices totalling $18,648 to a Melbourne-based individual responsible for the Vapespot website for the same offence. The chief executive of the Australian Council on Smoking and Health [Acosh], Maurice Swanson, said he was pleased to see the TGA acting swiftly following the introduction of the laws. “We welcome the strong monitoring of illegal advertising which doesn’t meet the guidance provided by the TGA,” he said. “The TGA’s advertising guidelines have been well-known and well-promoted, so companies can’t claim not to have known about it.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Swanson said Acosh is now part of a group monitoring access to vaping products particularly by children as part of research to uncover whether and how nicotine vaping products are being obtained unlawfully. “As part of that we’re meeting with the regional commanders of border force to build a bridge to those good people who are trying to stop the stuff coming in,” he said. “If they open up a parcel coming in and they can’t find a valid, genuine prescription accompanying the product, then they alert the TGA. But they can’t get to every parcel.” Swanson said he hoped the nicotine vaping product legislation would stop vaping becoming normalised in public for children and teenagers. “Young people are already being exposed to a plethora of vaping promotions on various social media platforms, like TikTok,” he said. “They’re all about glamorising vaping and showing off the different vaping products. There is good evidence that some of that glamorisation and promotion is sponsored by the tobacco industry who pay the influencers to do them. We are now in the process of monitoring dodgy websites offering these products.”It was August 2020, and Luca Manuel, 13, was starting eighth grade the following day in Redding, California. He was excited to see his friends; his mother had bought him a stash of masks and school supplies for his first in-person school day in six months. But the week earlier, he’d gotten a root canal, and his mouth still hurt. He sent a message on Snapchat to find marijuana for the pain. Instead, the dealer said he had something better: Percocet. Luca didn’t know that the pill, which had been pressed to look like the real pain medication, was actually a counterfeit laced with fentanyl, a substance 30 times more potent than heroin. He died of drug poisoning that afternoon, a video game looping like a ghost across the screen in front of him. More than 100,000 people died from overdoses in the US in a 12-month period ending in April, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It’s the biggest increase ever seen in the US – and it’s only rising each month, drug researchers say. Fentanyl is driving the majority of these deaths, associated with at least 60% of the fatal overdoses – a 50% increase in a single year, Nora Volkow, director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, told the Guardian. “It’s devastating,” she said. “It’s an epidemic within the pandemic.” Deaths from fentanyl were already on the rise across the country, but the pandemic supercharged their speed and intensity. It’s not unusual to see people turn to drugs or alcohol during times of crisis, Volkow said. “But what we didn’t expect was that during that period, there will be a massive increase in the entry of these illicit substances into the country.” Dramatically more fentanyl is coming into the US, making the drug supply increasingly dangerous. “The trajectory is up, with no leveling off,” Daniel Ciccarone, the Justine Miner endowed professor of addiction medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, said. “There’s nothing that says it’s slowing down.” A “triple wave” of opioids, from pain pills to heroin to fentanyl, is wreaking havoc, he said. “Fentanyl is an extraordinarily potent drug. It was manufactured specifically to be much more potent than morphine,” Volkow said. It’s also incredibly profitable, she said. “If someone is a drug dealer, they make much more money by selling fentanyl than by selling heroin or selling cocaine.” Another alarming trend is arising with the dominance of fentanyl. People who have never used opioids before are dying from a single fatal encounter with fentanyl. “They are not opioid users, and they don’t know that these drug are contaminated and they die with one single exposure,” Volkow said. Even for those who are accustomed to taking opioids, it can be difficult to judge a safe dosage of fentanyl. Most experienced drug users don’t prefer it, but as prescription pills and heroin became harder to get, dealers have increasingly begun mixing fentanyl into the supply. Experts and grieving families are seeing alarming numbers of people, even children, taking what they think are legitimate Percocet or Xanax pills with friends. “Counterfeit pills are a big part of the story,” Ciccarone said. High-quality pill presses can make the substance look like a legitimate medication. “They look for all the world like the real thing.” Fentanyl has circulated along the east coast for about a decade, but it’s now moving out west, where “people are not accustomed to it, and don’t know how to use it”, he said. While fentanyl overdoses were first concentrated primarily among white populations, communities of color are now being hit harder than before. “It’s going into new groups and causing devastation,” Ciccarone said. There are some solutions, however. A medication, buprenorphine, can help those who are addicted to opioids and help prevent overdoses, and inexpensive test strips can detect the presence of fentanyl in other drugs. Housing stability can also help prevent substance use. Fentanyl overdoses are reversible with the quick use of a medication called naloxone – but the price of naloxone has increased dramatically this year, creating a shortage for many of those who need the medication the most. “We just need more of it,” Ciccarone said. The Biden administration recently announced harm reduction policies in order to stem the wave of overdoses, an encouraging move, Ciccarone said. It’s also important to address the fundamental inequalities frequently driving the overdose crisis, Ciccarone said. “We’ll continue to have wave over wave over wave of drug overdoses unless we address the inequities in our society. It’s a wake-up call, and civilizations do fall if they don’t address the instabilities in their population.” Amanda Faith Eubanks, Luca’s mother, remembers her son as a kind, sweet, trusting kid. On the morning of his last day, she shopped for groceries because he had asked to cook meals for a nearby homeless camp. “He thrived in service for others,” she told the Guardian. “He was just the kid that you could go to on any bad day. He had a heart of gold.” “Fentanyl is unlike anything anybody’s seen before,” Eubanks said. “It’s a public safety crisis.” Detectives in Luca’s case have charged the dealer with murder; his preliminary hearing will begin later this month. And Eubanks has begun speaking up, creating a support group for families grieving loved ones lost to fentanyl poisoning. “I just don’t want more people dying from this,” she said. “I didn’t want any more moms to ever feel this.”First-time buyers have seen the gap between their wages and house prices grow in the vast majority of councils in England and Wales, casting doubt on Boris Johnson’s promise to “turn generation rent into generation buy”. Just over a year ago, the prime minister said he wanted to give people “the fundamental life-affirming power of home ownership” and “spread that opportunity to every part of the country”. Guardian analysis of prices paid by first-time buyers, however, shows that the affordability gap has grown in 98% of England’s local authorities since 2015, and in every part of Wales. The traditional benchmark for mortgage affordability is that the amount required from a lender – the property price minus a 10% deposit – should not exceed 4.5 times the buyer’s wage or the combined wage of a couple. But that target is unachievable for single first-time buyers – who are typically aged 32 – in 95% of local authorities in England, based on the median earnings for people in their 30s. Single first-time buyers in Wales would not be able to afford a home in 86% of local authorities in the country. Although couples fare better, they would struggle to stay within 4.5 times their wage in almost a third (31%) of council areas in England. The analysis looked at what has happened to affordability in the six years since the Conservatives won a majority government. The party’s 2015 manifesto said “everyone who works hard should be able to own a home of their own” and outlined schemes for cut-price starter homes and a help-to-buy Isa. In the run-up to the 2019 election, the party said: “For the UK to unleash its potential, young people need the security of knowing that home ownership is within their reach.” Since then the help-to-buy loan scheme has been extended, and this year a scheme to guarantee 95% mortgages was introduced. But the analysis shows homes have become less affordable over that period. “Home ownership is now almost completely out of reach for most people on average or low incomes – with house prices continuing to soar, most people can’t scrape together a sky-high deposit to buy and so are stuck paying extortionate private rents,” Polly Neate, the chief executive of Shelter, said. “The government has ploughed money into a series of expensive home ownership schemes that most people can never hope to benefit from, as they still require a sizeable deposit when most renters don’t have any savings.” House prices increased by the largest proportion in Salford, in the north-west of England, where the average house price for a first-time buyer increased by 58% over the six-year period. This is despite the fact that Salford is within the top 20 most deprived local authorities in England in terms of deprivation. In 2015, a single first-time buyer would have needed 4.4 times an individual’s wage to afford a typical mortgage, within the affordability criteria generally sought by lenders. Today, a buyer on the median wage for a person in their 30s in the region would require 6.4 times the average salary. In Bristol, while a property was affordable for couples seeking to get on the property ladder in 2015, the increase in prices has not kept pace with wages, rising from four times their joint wage in 2015 to 5.1 times their combined salary in 2021. Two-thirds of London boroughs remain outside the reach of couples seeking to buy their first property in the capital. In Wales, the biggest proportional increase in house prices between 2015 and 2021 was in Blaenau Gwent, where prices rose by 52.7% across that period, but the area remains affordable for a buyer in their 30s earning the local median wage. Conversely, while prices haven’t risen as fast, the gap between a first-time buyer’s wage and the average property price was within the 4.5 times limit in 2015 but has since risen to beyond 5.5 times the average salary in Caerphilly, Torfaen and Carmarthenshire. The analysis is based on Office for National Statistics data showing the median gross annual wage for the 30-39 age group for 2015 and 2020 at regional level compared with house price data for August 2015 and August 2021 as recorded by the Land Registry. Affordability is defined as 4.5 times a person’s salary or couple’s combined salary compared with a typical mortgage required for a first-time buyer in each council area. Because the typical deposit is 10% of the house price, this calculation was based on 90% of the average property listed by the Land Registry. Dan Wilson Craw, the deputy director of the campaign group Generation Rent, said: “It is already a struggle to save the deposit to buy your first home, and as prices have shot up home ownership has become even harder … The government has intervened to encourage banks to lend at higher loan-to-value ratios, so buyers don’t need as much in savings. But ultimately if you’re borrowing that much, your monthly repayments will be huge.” “Ultimately, the only sustainable way the government can help people buy a home is to throw everything they have at reducing rents. That means building more homes where people want to live, and more council homes.” A government spokesperson said: “Our economy is on track to reach pre-pandemic levels around the turn of the year and wages are rising in real terms. “We know how important it is for people to own their own home, which is why we have supported over 700,000 households into ownership through shared ownership and help to buy since 2010, and our new First Homes scheme will provide homes at a discount of at least 30% for local first-time buyers. “We’re also investing over £12bn in affordable homes over the next five years –the largest investment in affordable housing in a decade, alongside increasing skills funding and the national living wage.” • This article was amended on 22 November 2021. The gap between first-time buyers’ wages and house prices has grown in 98% of council areas in England and Wales since 2015, not by 98% across England and Wales as stated in a previous heading on the maps graphic. Also, Boris Johnson’s quote was from just over a year ago, not just over a decade ago.At McQueens flower school, I’m trying to get my head in the game. I lack the visual flair for this. Whenever I make a bouquet, it always looks as if it’s been plucked from the central reservation of a dual carriageway. Senior tutor Christophe Berreterot, by contrast, worked on the flowers for Meghan and Prince Harry’s wedding, and now demonstrates a flawless hand-tied bouquet with Secret Garden roses, blue eucalyptus and cotoneaster. “Flower arranging is a reflection of personality,” he murmurs. I’ve been watching a lot of classic Match of the Day, which I do not think is the required personality. We learn to spiral stems, rather than jamming them in a fist in a criss-cross mish-mash. That’s helpful. Think about visual weight, balance and colour, Berreterot advises. Anna, assisting today, lays flowers on our individual tables and we set to work. I throw in leaves, Christmas berries, some stuff that looks like Elmo the muppet’s fingers. This is the 4-4-2 of flower arranging, I think. Couple of big lads sitting in midfield to hold up the ball, shuttle some long boys down the wings, a bit of wispy stuff up top for the highlights reel. Sorted. From installations and flower walls to event dressing and fashion shoots, floristry is arguably the art of the Instagram age, even more than short poems, or sticking your bum out. Extravagance and evanescence make flowers a luxury currency. McQueens, which has outlets in Mayfair, New York and Seoul, always champions seasonal flowers. They are cheaper and last longer, while also reducing air miles. They are also a reminder that this was originally a domestic practice that anyone can try. “If you don’t know what’s in season, look at front gardens,” advises tutor Sophie Powell. My asymmetric bouquet is wild and loose, but bursting with joy, like a punk wedding. Even Berreterot is impressed. I’ve taken control of the game, on my debut! Everyone’s bouquets, using the same flowers, look notably different. Our class includes a super-yacht stewardess, someone taking a break from a career in finance, and an intensive care nurse taking a break from … well, you know. Directly in my eyeline, I catch sight of a living Ambrosius Bosschaert masterpiece, already finished and hand-tied by ribbon. It belongs to white-haired retiree Gus, clearly an active floristry ringer. I feel deflated. In the afternoon, vase work. We ball chicken wire into pots so the mesh will hold our stems. Powell demonstrates a sculptural “crescent moon” arrangement. The others imitate dutifully: using foliage to build shape, avoiding “bald spots” or sudden dips in height. I’m expanding the form, attempting a purple and a green side. “You’re working with groupings, almost a two-tone composition?” Powell asks. More of a game of two halves, I think, but do not say aloud. I have to admit it looks rubbish. Powell deftly transforms things, teasing out packed ranunculus, putting air between them, softening the effect with lisianthus. “Think about negative space,” she advises, sounding like Arsene Wenger. I love working with flowers. The material in my hands can cost several pounds a stem. How do you get into flower arranging without getting into bankruptcy? At the florist, Powell advises, choose a focal flower that captivates you. Choose filler flowers to go around it that complement its shape and colours. Foliage is sold by weight – far cheaper than flowers, and good for volume. Bear in mind that a filler can be a focal – it’s all relative to what else you are working with. Flowers traditionally thought of as less pretty, she adds, can be the heart of the most striking arrangements. I like this attitude. The flowers are working on me, too. I whisper their names as I slot them in place, scent winding in my nose. Amaranthus Velvet Red. Astrantia Roma. Peach Ranunculus. Delphinium. Sounds of ancient magic. I think of my father’s garden. I think of my mother walking me around Kew and the Natural History Museum, pointing to botanist’s parchments. I loved those delicate old sketches, the fruit of long-dead scientists holding pencil and pastels. Bear’s breeches, Milkvetch, Aster, Solidaster. Anna lays out a wand of blue trumpets. “Oxypetalum,” she says, sounding like Harry Potter. It strikes me that flower arranging is, by any other name, spellbinding. I’d be subbed off though, having undone Powell’s good work. My vase looks like it has antlers. My mesh is overcrowded and there are so many leaves below the waterline I can see Charlie Sheen wading through them with a knife between his teeth. It’s a recipe for bacterial infection. These are fundamentals, and I’ve messed them up. “How pretty! So that’s how you do groupings,” beams Gus the ringer, looking over. This is worse than I thought. Still, it has been a perfume advert of a day. I’m no Constance Spry, but my eyes are open. I’m taking home flowers, and a new language. I’m excited about being able to walk into a florist and see possibility, rather than buying off-the-rack bouquets. To some, flowers will never be more than insect porn, or a first-thought gift. But there’s musicality in this orchestration of colour, shape and scent. And philosophy. We’re flowers too, born to fade away. There’s a beauty and a lesson in our brevity. Rather than war of the roses, I feel a sense of beauty and peace. Cheap at any price. Some things are perennial I look at the front gardens near my home to see what’s in season. Mattresses, odd socks and fox poo. That’s a hell of a bouquet. Smugness points Stem subjects really are fundamental. 4/5You recently featured a case of a reader whom TSB had refused to refund after £1,000 was taken from his account by fraudsters using gambling sites. I find myself in an even worse position. TSB has refused to refund me for 70 transactions totalling £4,150, all made over 10 days to a betting company. I most certainly did not make these payments, and feel very let down. TSB did not flag the unusual spending patterns to me. I have had the same bank account since 1997 and have never made any payments to a gambling company, let alone 70 transactions over such a short space of time. As with your previous victim of fraud, initially payments of £30 were taken. However, they then grew in size, including three of £300 and four of £250 in one day. TSB has similarly refused to refund me because of its “zero policy” on gambling and fraud. During the call, there was even an insinuation from TSB staff that, because I hadn’t spotted it earlier, it was my fault. Does the bank expect me to monitor my account 24 hours a day? JM, London TSB can have a zero policy of repaying fraud on gambling sites all it likes but the rules are straightforward: it must refund fraudulent payments that were not authorised by the account holder, whether to a gambling site or anywhere else. The Financial Conduct Authority says if you have reported an unauthorised payment a bank “must refund the payment without unnecessary delay”, unless it has reasonable grounds to suspect that you acted “fraudulently”. I asked TSB to take a second look at this. It told me that cases such as this can be complex and often require staff to speak to the betting company to find out more about what has occurred. However, it has now agreed to refund you in full. “We’ve apologised to the customer for the experience she has had,” it says. “She’s been fully refunded and has been offered compensation for the inconvenience caused.” In the meantime, it is worth noting that many banks offer customers the chance to block payments to gambling sites, although this doesn’t currently include TSB, the bank with the zero policy. This is designed to help problem gamblers, but there is nothing to stop anyone else doing it. Fraudsters are clearly targeting these sites as a way to launder cash stolen from account holders. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsCheck you are getting a genuine bargain Do not assume everything that purports to be an offer is as special as the retailer wants you to believe. Every year the consumer group Which? looks at the truth behind the advertised bargains, and it generally finds that only a small number of products were at their cheapest on Black Friday. In 2019, for example, only 1% of the items it price-checked were genuinely on offer; everything else was available at a lower price in the six months before or after. “Time and time again, we’ve found that Black Friday isn’t necessarily the best time to pick up a genuinely good discount,” says the organisation’s home products and services editor, Lisa Barber. However, she adds: “Those prepared to bide their time and do a bit of research should be able to cut through the hype and find a good deal.” The Chartered Trading Standards Institute says sellers sometimes raise prices before a sales period to make it look as if they are offering a great deal on the day. It suggests using a price-checker website to see what something you want to buy has cost in the past. One is CamelCamelCamel, which shows the highest, lowest and average price for items selling on Amazon. Another that covers other online retailers too is Pricespy; as well as showing historic prices it compares current offers on a range of websites. If you plan to visit a shop to seek out a specific item, do some checks before you go. Retailers are not obliged to tell you how much things have cost previously, so it is down to you to make your own comparison. Be wise to marketing tricks Retailers have a number of ways to make you spend in haste that may leave you repenting at leisure; knowing what they are can help you avoid falling into the traps. One commonly used trick is creating a sense of urgency. “This is when we will encounter lines like ‘10 more to go’ or ‘hurry up while supply lasts’ and can occur online or in physical stores,” says the marketing agency Sortlist. “Most consumers would unwittingly choose such items because they believe it is now or never.” Another trick to make you feel like you need to make a quick purchase is a message telling you how many people are looking at the item you are browsing. This makes you think that it is highly prized and may be about to run out – remind yourself that many of them are unlikely to go on and buy it. Have a list of things you want You may need new clothes, or have things that you know you want to buy other people as gifts. Write a list you can stick to, and do some research before the sales start. For instance, says Sarah Pennells, a consumer finance specialist at the finance firm Royal London, if you want a TV, make sure you know what features you want it to have. “Some shops use Black Friday as a chance to offload old or unpopular stock,” she says. You are less likely to get caught up in the moment and buy something that isn’t quite right if you have a clear idea of what you are looking for when you start shopping. As well as having a clear list, Pennells advises having – and keeping to – a budget “whether you’re paying now or later”. If you are using “buy now, pay later” at the checkout she says: “Don’t get too optimistic about what you might be able to afford to pay: Christmas is expensive, and something could go wrong – your boiler might break down in January, say, and you will have less money than you expect.” Ask yourself if you need it “Don’t buy something because it’s cheap,” Pennells says. “If you don’t need it, don’t really want it or you can’t afford it, it’s just a waste of money.” If in doubt, she suggests that you think of things in terms of how long it will take you to pay for them: if the cost is equal to two days’ work rather than two hours’ work, that might make the decision about whether you need something a lot clearer. Read the small print about returns Some retailers have been cracking down on serial returners and have introduced charges for sending things back, so do not assume you will not end up out of pocket if you get buyer’s remorse and decide to send things back. The risk of getting things wrong could be fees to cover the p&amp;p for the return. For example, Uniqlo charges £2.95 on return shipping, while if you want to send something back to Cath Kidston you will need to pay the going rate for the delivery method you choose. Most items are returnable and you will get back the full cost: retailers have to provide a 14-day cooling off period during which you can cancel a purchase and get a refund. But there are some things that are not covered by this rule, including perishable or customised items. So think twice before you order a monogrammed Christmas cake. Unsubscribe to emails now If you have ever signed up to a retailer’s mailing list you have probably already received at least one email telling you about its Black Friday sale. Few of the deals being plugged are likely to be for things you want but the cleverly written marketing blurb and the headline savings shouted from the subject line could easily lure you into having a look just in case there is something you want to buy. Put temptation out of your way by deleting it and unsubscribing to the list. Avoid scammers Purchase scams – where people pay for items or services that never arrive and probably never existed – are a growth industry at the moment, with several big banks reporting double-digit increases in the number of their customers falling victim. According to Lloyds, the average sum lost is £190. Make sure that your Black Friday bargain is not an illusion by using trusted retailers and visiting their sites directly – rather than through unsolicited links. Think twice if a seller asks you to pay by a bank transfer. Using a credit or debit card or PayPal will give you extra protection if something does go wrong. Don’t buy anything Of course the way to really be sure that you do not waste any money is to not spend any. As well as those who simply ignore all the hype, there are people in 50 countries who actively mark Buy Nothing Day each year. This year the UK campaign group has produced posters urging people to resist shopping. The aim of the campaign is to encourage people to think about the downsides of consumption, and promote ethical and sustainable shopping choices. “The message has always been simple, ‘Shop Less, Live More,’” the UK website says. “Twenty-one years on, the message couldn’t be any simpler: we need to consume less! Recycling is good – reducing is better!”In a new book, the former Trump White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany repeats her famous insistence that she never lied to reporters, in part because her education at “Oxford, Harvard and Georgetown” meant she always relied on “truthful, well-sourced, well-researched information”. But McEnany – who also studied law at the University of Miami – makes claims in her book which do not stand up to such assurances, for instance about Donald Trump’s support among the US military and about the severity of Covid cases among White House staff. McEnany was Trump’s fourth press secretary, after Sean Spicer, Sarah Sanders and Stephanie Grisham. With the arrival of For Such a Time as This: My Faith Journey Through the White House and Beyond, all four have written memoirs. Grisham, who published a gossip-filled book in October, is the only one to have turned on Trump. McEnany’s book will be published on 7 December by Post Hill Press, a conservative outlet. The Guardian obtained a copy. McEnany gave her first briefing as White House press secretary on 1 May 2020, restarting sessions abandoned by Sanders and Grisham. A reporter asked: “Will you pledge to never lie to us from that podium?” McEnany replied: “I will never lie to you. You have my word on that.” As the Guardian wrote then, “even on what proved an assured debut” McEnany “skated close to peddling dodgy information about Trump’s responses to the coronavirus pandemic (‘This president has always sided on the side of data’) and to allegations of sexual misconduct (‘He has always told the truth’)”. McEnany now works for Fox News. She has restated her claim, telling a conservative audience this June: “And then there was the question, ‘Will you ever lie to us?’, and I said without hesitation, ‘No’, and I never did, as a woman of faith. “As a mother of baby Blake, as a person who meticulously prepared at some of the world’s hardest institutions, I never lied. I sourced my information, but that will never stop the press from calling you a liar.” On the page, however, McEnany often relies on single sources, anecdotes and conservative talking points. As a result she is at least, in the famous words of Alan Clark, a former British minister, “economical with the actualité”. For instance, McEnany claims “it was no secret that the military supported Trump, overwhelmingly”, adding: “It was the job of the deep state to change that, and the press would willingly assist. They tried, but they failed.” According to conservative conspiracy theorists, the deep state is a body of bureaucrats and intelligence agents who worked to thwart Trump in office. Steve Bannon, once a senior Trump aide, did much to popularise the theory. He has said it is for “nut cases”. As evidence of press support for the deep state, McEnany cites a bombshell Atlantic report from September 2020 which said Trump spoke dismissively of veterans, including the late senator John McCain, and those killed in US wars, such as the son of his second chief of staff, John Kelly. McEnany writes: “As Forbes wrote just after the story published, ‘Military Households Still Back Trump Over Biden, Despite Bombshell Atlantic Report’.” The poll reported by Forbes showed Trump leading Joe Biden 52%-42% among military households. But it was taken in September 2020, two months before the presidential election. As reported by Military Times in November, exit polls showed a closer split, Trump up 52-45 overall but Biden leading 51-40 among younger veterans. The outlet noted that in 2016, exit polls showed Trump beating Hillary Clinton 60-34. McEnany also cites a conversation with “a US ranger” she says drove her home from the White House in September 2020. “President Trump loves our troops,” she told him. “That [Atlantic] story is completely false.” “You don’t have to tell me that ma’am,” she says the driver responded “confidently”, adding: “I know it. He was our savior after Obama.” McEnany also writes about how Covid-19 spread through a White House that showed scant regard for social distancing and masking. “Thankfully,” she writes, “everyone in the White House made a full and complete recovery, including me.” Trump also contracted Covid-19, spending time in hospital. McEnany does not mention the case of Crede Bailey, head of the White House security office. Bailey’s case was widely reported in December 2020. His family, Bloomberg News said, “asked the White House not to publicise his condition, and … Trump has never publicly acknowledged his illness”. McEnany was asked about Bailey at a White House briefing. She said: “Our heart goes out to his family. They have asked for privacy. And he is recovering, from what I understand. We are very pleased to see that. But he and his family will be in our prayers.” On a GoFundMe page set up to help pay for Bailey’s treatment, however, a friend wrote: “Crede beat Covid-19 but it came at a significant cost: his big toe on his left foot as well as his right foot and lower leg had to be amputated.” In January, Bailey’s friend gave an update on his condition. “For now,” she wrote, “Crede is wheelchair bound with the occasional use of crutches. He will eventually get a prosthetic limb but that takes time and money as each prosthetic is individualised to the recipient. Once he receives the prosthetic there will be LOTS of rehabilitation physicians, physical therapists and occupational therapists in his future as he works to regain his independence and mobility. “… Crede’s medical team has said that he will never regain full lung capacity and it may lead to long-term breathing problems. He has suffered lasting damage to his heart and now has increased risk of heart failure or other complications and Covid-19 caused him to develop blood clots and weakened his blood vessels which contributes to long-lasting problems with the liver and kidneys. But enough of the negative!”Q I am a junior doctor working in the NHS and earning about £40,000 a year. I have managed to save about £50,000 after several years of working while living at home. I currently have a student loan of about £80,000 at 6.6% interest a year, amounting to £4,500 extra a year. I am currently paying the minimum, and am keen to pay off the loan soon. I would like to use my savings to buy a buy-to-let property and use the rental income to pay off my student loans. However, this will be my first property, and I am anxious about whether this will affect any future mortgages towards my own home, and whether it will even be worth the hassle in the long run. I would be very grateful for your opinion. AH A Judging by your question – as well as those from several other readers – it seems that investing in a buy-to-let property has become the universal answer to any financial woe, but it’s not. Investing in a buy-to-let property certainly isn’t the answer to paying off your student loan. Some of the rental income will be used to cover the buy-to-let mortgage repayments so it’s wishful thinking to hope that there would be enough left over to repay your student loans as well. That’s just one reason why a buy-to-let is not for you, another is that you are right to be anxious about the effect it will have on buying a home in the future. Already having property would mean missing out on the concessions for first-time buyers such as no stamp duty land tax (SDLT) on the first £300,000 of the value of a property costing no more than £500,000 and access to the government’s help-to-buy scheme which gives financial help to first-time buyers wanting a new-build home. What really puzzled me about your question was why you are so keen to pay off your student loan. I can see why you would want to if it was a commercial loan from a bank, for example, and you really are being charged 6.6% (which is actually a cost of £5,280 a year rather than £4,500). But if the £80,000 is the amount that’s outstanding at the Student Loan Company, I think you would be ill-advised to pay it off early and Martin Lewis of MoneySavingExpert agrees with me . A loan from the Student Loan Company is not like commercial debt. It doesn’t appear on your credit file, the sum you repay is based on your earnings rather than on the interest rate charged and if you are still paying it off 30 years after you started making repayments, the loan is written off.Almost half of Malawi’s district hospitals have closed their operating theatres due to a dire shortage of anaesthetics. Maternity care has been affected by a lack of drugs, said doctors. Surgery, including caesareans, has been cancelled and patients needing emergency care have been moved hundreds of miles around the country. The Anaesthesia Association of Malawi called the situation “an emergency” and said 11 of the country’s 28 districts had run out of drugs. The association demanded answers from the Ministry of Health and a meeting with the Central Medical Stores Trust (CMST), which buys and supplies drugs to all public hospitals. Joel Moyo, president of the association, said the safety of pregnant women faced with complications during their labour was a big concern. “One of the drugs that is not available is thiopentone, which we use in surgery, especially for women who are convulsing during delivery and also those who have high blood pressure,” said Moyo. “This [drug] has not been in the country for a year. We asked [the CMST officials] why it has not been available and it was attributed to logistical issues,” he said, adding that they had been improvising by using second-line drugs, although that was not recommended. “We thought, ‘maybe next month things will change’, but this has been going on for a year now. But when members said that they don’t have suxamethonium, that’s when we raised a red flag. That drug is supposed to be in a [operating] theatre all the time. “Without it, then the theatres have to be closed. You can lack some drugs, but when we don’t have this, then there is no theatre.” Moyo said he had received worrying reports that some pregnant women who required emergency surgery were at risk as district hospitals had to refer them to central hospitals where the necessary drugs might be available. Malawi’s health system faces immense challenges, from lack of equipment to a severe shortage of qualified staff. Poor working conditions, including low salaries, have led to health workers seeking better-paid jobs outside the country or with non-governmental organisations. People, including pregnant women, have to travel long distances to reach their nearest clinic or hospital. Patrick Chithumba, 72, in Mulanje, southern Malawi, has been waiting several years for treatment for a painful bladder condition. When he was finally given a date for surgery earlier this month, his siblings and six children pooled their savings to pay for his transport to the hospital 140 miles (225km) away. But when he arrived, he found the surgery had been cancelled due to a lack of anaesthetics. “I am much traumatised with this,” Chithumba said. “Apart from the money that we’ve spent, I am in pain and my children have to take me to the local community clinic to be checked, but the help is not enough.” New private clinics have sprung up across Malawi, profiting from the shortages by catering to those who can afford their prices. Dr Victor Mithi, president of Malawi’s Society of Medical Doctors, said the lack of anaesthetics was the “tip of the iceberg”. “It is very concerning because you can’t do an operation without these drugs and the fact that we don’t have them speaks a lot as to how our healthcare system is organised and governed. Some of the procedures are a matter of life and death,” he said. “For instance, if you have a pregnant woman who you need to operate on and you don’t have these drugs, you can either lose the woman or lose the baby, and the decisions are made in haste. This is why we’re worried and we hope the government will be able to chip in and help us as fast as possible.” “These are not the only drugs not available in hospitals,” Mithi added. Medical centres had been running out of supplies in many areas, he said. “People don’t really speak about this,” he said. “Sometimes patients accuse us of not properly attending to them. But this is because we’re not supplied with the proper working materials.” Herbert Chandilanga, a CMST spokesperson, said suppliers were struggling to secure stock from India and China amid “a logistics scramble worldwide”. Malawi’s minister of health, Khumbize Chiponda, said the government planned to improve funding of the Central Medical Stores, which she said owed medical suppliers more than 19bn Malawian kwacha (£17.2m). She said the CMST had out-of-date drugs worth more than 2bn kwacha that “may have been procured by the previous administration”.When you consider the cornucopia of subcultures that have been fictionalised in film, it is criminal that the golden age of UK garage hasn’t yet had the cinematic treatment. This was a hyper-vibrant, multicultural scene, born and bred in mid-90s London during a brief economic boom, where jewel-toned satin shirts and rhinestone cowgirl hats ruled the dancefloor and rounds of “champers” were racked up at the bar. Its soundtrack – a form of US house music sped up with a twitchy restlessness – was a ruffneck-yet-futuristic, soulful-yet-boisterous blend that encapsulated the push and pull of the new millennium, before grime twisted MC-led music into tougher shapes. Bold, brash songs such as Sticky’s Booo!, featuring Ms Dynamite, and So Solid Crew’s Oh No were surely destined for big-screen drama. Reggie Yates recognised all this, which is why he has put UK garage (including both those songs) at the heart of his big-screen directorial debut, Pirates. The comedy caper, for which Yates also wrote the screenplay, follows three teenage friends as they try to get into the ultimate Y2K New Year’s Eve party hosted by the seminal club night Twice As Nice, with garage dons Heartless Crew, DJ Spoony and Pied Piper among the cameos. “I’d never seen garage music in anything connected to film before,” says the broadcaster, actor and now director. “It breaks my heart that it’s just not been celebrated in the way that ska has been, or grime, or punk.” Pirates corrects that, down to the decade-specific slang (“These are Twisted Levi’s, you chief!”) and designer shops (notably Proibito, which once stood in Soho). It is in this not-too-distant London that former schoolmates Cappo (Elliot Edusah), Two Tonne (Jordan Peters) and Kidda (Reda Elazouar) have ambitions of making it as a garage crew. They broadcast their DJ sets from their bedrooms and drive a banana-yellow Peugeot 205 – a “clubhouse on wheels!” laughs Yates – with garage’s biggest hits blasting from the stereo. The film’s paciness evokes an unguarded bombast and earnest eagerness – a little bit like The Inbetweeners by way of Human Traffic – that feels all but forgotten now. “It’s pre-internet,” says Yates, “so there’s a certain energy that only comes from people power.” He wanted to emphasise “the importance of the record shop, of where you got your ticket from and how you got it. There was no paying via your smartphone.” Gen-Xers may remember such scenarios with misty eyes, millennials may snort at Two Tonne’s sincere come-on, “I’m wearing Lynx Africa”, with a cringe of familiarity, while Gen-Zers will no doubt find it hilarious that teenagers used to entertain themselves by playing Snake on their Nokia 3210s. The young cast were particularly flabbergasted at the loud fashions back then, considering the uniform of choice today tends towards black trackies. In UK garage clubs, the men were the peacocks in two-piece Moschino suits, heavy Avirex motorcycle jackets and Gucci loafers. “What you wore was really important,” says Yates, who was 17 at the turn of the millennium. “People used to wear the tags still on their clothes to show that they were new. I remember I used to take the tag off, wash my clothing, and then put the tag back on before I wore it out again. If you had some Versace shades, you would wear them in the club, even though you couldn’t see a flippin’ thing. It was about looking the part.” Now 38, Yates is in a more muted pastel pink cardigan today, sipping mint tea. He is almost unnervingly zen, a mode he has perfected during his years on television and which helped him cope when the Pirates shoot went awry. Production was shut down 10 days early last March because of the pandemic, and he was uncertain whether he’d have to abandon ship completely. But some extra money was found and precautions put in place so they could finish the shoot. It helps that he’s hardly a Werner Herzog on set. “Directing teaches you to find your inner calm because there is so much to get annoyed about,” he reasons. “But if you are frustrated, you lose people.” It may be a surprise to some that Yates is flexing his comedy muscle. Since his Radio 1 and Top of the Pops days, he’s become best known for his “extreme” documentaries, where he’s reckoned with race riots and rightwingers. Even his friend Michaela Coel told him recently of when they first met: “I didn’t realise you were a clown.” Yates says: “I’m quite protective of who I really am. I’m as professional as I can be, all the time.” He doesn’t drink, smoke or do drugs, he says – still the “swot” from school, always looking for the next challenge. That restlessness means that in recent years he has increasingly moved into fictional film-making, first with some shorts and then last year a BBC TV film, Make Me Famous, which he wrote (but didn’t direct) about mental health and reality TV. Surprisingly, given Pirates is opposite in tone, Yates cites cult 90s French film La Haine, notable for its graphic scenes of youth violence and police brutality, as an influence. “That is one of the most influential films for me as a writer,” says Yates, “because at 14 years old I realised that stories about kids from council blocks could be on the big screen.” He made a firm decision to avoid stereotypical representations of Black British boys in trouble. Instead, he made the movie he never saw growing up. “This film, a coming-of-age comedy about three young men of colour, didn’t exist when I was a teenager,” he says. “We’ve had the trauma stories about the darker side of growing up in the inner city. But there are still lots of young men who are filled with joy, who just want to have fun, get the girl and listen to some banging music while they do it.” Yates grew up on an estate in north London when UK garage was flipping from tape packs to the pop charts, then moved south aged 14. He got his musical start on pirate radio stations on both sides of the river, at the same time as attending acting auditions, and MCing under the name No-Bizzi until he was recruited by BBC Radio 1Xtra. Like Coel, he wanted to evoke the multicultural London he knew from his youth. “I had an incredible time growing up, and I circumvented the madness,” he says. “I was around a lot of that craziness, but it never defined me – and I know I’m not alone. All we have to do is watch Chewing Gum, and go: ‘Oh, council estates can look like that? You mean that people from different immigrant and white working-class backgrounds all get along like a family?’ That was the estate I grew up on.” Strip away the setting and the soundtrack, however, and Pirates is about young male friendship on the brink of change (this being the 90s, the women are merely love interests, although they get some of the best lines, about the best garage DJs: “If the world’s gonna end, I might as well be dancing to EZ when it does”). Cappa, Two Tonne and Kidda aren’t only navigating girls, their brotherhood is tested as their lives head in different directions. “I wanted to show what it looks like to have that level of a friendship between three young men of colour, which isn’t based on anything other than love and joy – Black joy,” says Yates. Pirates unashamedly has the feelgood factor. Yates wrote much of it in a cottage belonging to Love Actually director Richard Curtis, though he says he doesn’t aspire to make a comparable British romcom one day. “I don’t want to do the next anything,” he says. “I just want to be the first me, and I’d love everything that I do to reflect my perspective.” But there’ll be no more launching himself into war zones for the time being – “I’ve exhausted that muscle: I spent 10 years making documentaries”. He wants to tell stories in another way. “I’ve had so many beautiful conversations with people saying: ‘I’ve been waiting for this film, because in that trailer I saw me and my mates,’” Yates says. “Not everybody was running from a gang. Some people were running to the party.” • Pirates is out in cinemas on 26 November.Like the star footballer who continues to play for his home town when bigger names come calling, there’s something pleasing about the author who, despite great success, sticks with their original publisher. Graeme Macrae Burnet’s second novel, His Bloody Project, was a runaway hit, shortlisted for the Booker prize and translated into 20 languages. His publisher, Saraband, is a small but brilliant independent press and has done a fine job with the elegant hardback of his fourth novel, Case Study. It is ostensibly the biography – written by Macrae Burnet – of a (fictional) radical psychoanalyst in the mould of RD Laing, Collins Braithwaite. Braithwaite, who called himself an “untherapist”, was known as “Britain’s most dangerous man” in the 1960s, but his ideas faded until he was “barely a footnote in psychiatric history”. At the beginning of Case Study, Macrae Burnet tells us that he has come into possession of a series of notebooks written in the 60s by a patient of Braithwaite – a young woman, Veronica – who believes that the psychoanalyst has driven her sister to suicide. Roberto Bolaño said that all novels are at their core detective novels. Macrae Burnet expands upon this, suggesting that the reader and the psychoanalyst – such intimate bedfellows – are both detectives gathering clues in pursuit of a final judgment that lies always just out of sight. In her journal, Veronica tells us that she has gone to Braithwaite under a pseudonym, Rebecca Smyth, in the hope of understanding what happened to her sister, who threw herself from an overpass. “Suicide makes Miss Marples of us all,” she says. She endows Smyth with a character that is rakish, confident, provocative – quite the opposite to her own mousily downtrodden nature. Braithwaite analyses her – this fictitious self – as she attempts to winkle out revelations from him. These texts are intercut with selections from Braithwaite’s notebooks, from Macrae Burnet’s convincingly earnest biographical study of Braithwaite. It’s a book that is enormous fun to read, a mystery and a psychological drama wrapped up in one. Buoyed by the evident pleasure Macrae Burnet takes in spinning such a tightly knit tale – the author’s note at the end is magnificent – Case Study is a triumph, and ought to give Saraband another success story. • Case Study by Graeme Macrae Burnet is published by Saraband (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyGlass is Sky’s new voice-controlled streaming television – an ambitious attempt to ditch the satellite dish and provide pay TV straight to the screen, with no set top box required. The television comes in three sizes starting at £649 for a 43in screen, or £13 a month over four years, which works out at £25 cheaper too. Sky’s service costs from £25 a month on top. Monolithic looks in your choice of colour Glass is a heavy beast, the 55in version weighs 28kg with its stand – about 10kg more than a standard 55in TV – but hides its bulk well from the front. The body is aluminium in a choice of five colours, and houses the built-in soundbar below the screen, making it look a bit like Apple’s iMac. The 4K LCD screen ticks most of the specifications boxes. It has “quantum dot” technology with a local dimming LED backlight, which is found in many of the best mid- to high-range TVs. It supports the HDR10, HLG and Dolby Vision high-dynamic range (HDR) standards, which covers the most popular formats used for 4K content. The automatic brightness makes the picture look a little dim and grey except in very bright rooms, particularly with skin tones, and the backlight is uneven around the screen’s edges. Disable auto-brightness for a better picture that looks decent for normal HD and sharp for 4K content. But you’ll also see blacks turning a bit grey and a bit of blooming, where the backlight shines like a halo around dark edges. Following an update the HDR performance is reasonable, but lacks a bit of peak brightness to really make the picture pop. Overall the screen rivals lower mid-range TVs costing about £500. There are ethernet and three HDMI 2.1 ports on the back. But all you need is power and wifi to get up and running, making it a one-cable solution, which is extremely rare in the world of televisions. Rare too is a TV that actually sounds good. Glass supports Dolby Atmos virtual surround sound with its six built-in speakers. It won’t beat something like the Sonos Arc, but does a decent job of delivering punchy, full audio. Its vocal clarity is particularly impressive and you don’t have to deal with any lip-sync issues. It is slightly weaker for music, lacking a bit of balance and detail at times compared to a dedicated speaker. Sky over broadband Everything Glass does can be delivered via any broadband provider; no satellite connection or Sky broadband is required. The interface looks like an evolution of Sky Q. The top of the home screen features “top picks for you” recommendations and recently viewed channels, apps or HDMI inputs. Below that you can browse by content type, such as TV, movies or sport, or check out the regular TV guide. There is no one-button option for going immediately to live TV and when hopping between channels it takes two to three seconds before the picture appears. Recommendations are pulled from all the services and apps including Sky, BBC iPlayer ITV Hub, All4, Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, Disney+ and others. The unified voice or text search makes finding shows across multiple services quick and easy. Playlist Things get more interesting when you reach the “playlist” section about halfway down the home screen. Glass cannot record programmes in the traditional sense. Instead you add shows and movies to your playlist with the “+” button on your remote. When a new episode is available it appears in the “play now” panel, along with the rest of your playlist and others things you’ve watched. The logic is sound, but the execution is mixed. It works great with content hosted on Sky’s platform, including UKTV and Syfy. New shows turn up, you press watch and it streams immediately. For content from the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and some others, the tile in the playlist is only a link to the on-demand app. Go to watch a BBC show and it opens the programme’s homepage or an individual episode in iPlayer. The same thing occurs with ITV Hub and All4. How far you got in a show is stored separately in the on-demand app and the Sky home screen, meaning they don’t always match. And you need to log into each app with your individual accounts. Jumping through these multiple hoops feels more like using a smart TV or streaming stick than a premium pay-TV service. You are at the mercy of content rights and availability too. Not everything is available for on-demand viewing and some things only for a short period if they are, with no way to tell up front from the TV guide. It is not as good as having the content recorded and ready to watch, even weeks later. The play now section also filled up with things I didn’t want to see. Movies I had watched and then removed from my playlist lingered for weeks, while shows I had tried once and hated stuck around like a bad smell. Unlike on the various on demand apps there are no separate user profiles on the main Sky interface, which means recommendations are the same for everyone in your home. Most major on-demand video services are supported, as well as Spotify and YouTube, with Britbox being the only notable exception. But Glass does not support Chromecast or AirPlay from your phone. Hello, Sky!? Glass has hands-free voice control, similar to Google or Amazon smart displays. Mics in the TV listen out for your commands after the wake words “Hello Sky” or “Hi Sky” (but not “Hey Sky”) or there’s a push-button mic on the remote. You can ask for a channel, app, show or movie, search by actor, genre or other bits, access custom recommendations or control volume and playback. Simple word searches work if you’re clear enough, but it doesn’t always wake up on your first “Hello Sky” attempt, and often misheard me. When I say “show me the guide” it can hear “how many died”. Your commands have to be far more precise than with Alexa, Google Assistant or Siri, too. Asking it to “turn it down a bit” or “set to 30% volume” doesn’t work, instead you need to say “set the volume to 30%”. Pausing or skipping via voice doesn’t work in on-demand apps. And it doesn’t understand when you ask what’s the weather or when a TV show will next be broadcast. The TV can detect motion to wake up when you enter the room and turn off when you leave. But it has only worked a handful of times in the three weeks I have been testing it and has turned on when no one is anywhere near it. If I don’t touch the remote for an hour, it asks me to pick it up to avoid the TV turning off too. Sky says it is working on updates to try to fix motion detection. Sustainability The television is generally repairable by Sky in the UK. Repair tools and parts will be made available to third parties within the next two years. It is designed to last a minimum of seven years. The company does not operate trade-in schemes. It will recycle old Sky equipment but not third-party devices. The TV and remote do not contain any recycled materials, but Sky is offsetting the carbon for the TV making it “CarbonNeutral” rated by Natural Capital Partners. The TV is also shipped in plastic-free, fully recyclable packaging including a well designed box. The company publishes its sustainability commitments, including a net zero by 2030 pledge. Observations The screen does not support 120Hz or the variable refresh rate (VRR) used by the latest games consoles and PCs, and has no game mode for lower latency as is common on competitors. There’s no way to use headphones, wired or otherwise. There’s a standard aerial socket on the back intended as a backup if your internet goes down - otherwise the TV is useless without broadband. You can’t add to your playlist from within on-demand apps, only the main Sky interface. The motion of football on BBC was a bit blurry but not on Sky Sports. The minimum broadband speed for HD content is 10Mbps and 25Mbps for 4K. Price Sky Glass costs £649 for the 43in version, £849 for the 55in and £1,049 for the 65in when bought outright. It can bought via 24- or 48-month interest-free credit costing from £13 a month. The Sky Ultimate TV service (Sky Entertainment and Netflix) costs £26 a month in HD. The UltraHD HDR and Dolby Atmos package costs an additional £5 a month. For additional channels, Sky Kids costs £5, Cinema costs £11, Sports costs £25 and BT Sport costs £30. After 12 months the ability to skip ads in on-demand content will cost £5 per month. The TV can be used in limited capacity without a Sky subscription with third-party on-demand apps and the backup Freeview tuner. Verdict Sky Glass is all about convenience. Its streaming system and built-in soundbar removes bundles of cables, boxes and the dish. But while its software and service show lots of promise, it is has bugs and small annoyances, most on-demand apps are slow and clunky, and there are extra hoops that must be jumped through to get to content that make it less convenient to use. I have no doubt updates will fix many of the issues. But the reliance on terrestrial catchup services and their limitations may always be worse than old-school recordings. If you only ever watch live TV or content hosted directly on Sky’s platform or Netflix, Glass is great. The screen is decent but not spectacular, competing best with lower priced mid-range sets. The sound is great unless you want a real cinema experience, and the remote is great too. The price is tempting when bought monthly, although you must add the cost of the Sky service on top. Glass is a work in progress with an enormous potential yet to be realised. Pros: no satellite or box needed, great sound for a TV, responsive and logical interface, good remote, voice search is fast, unified search helps you find content across a range of services, support for most UK streaming services, long service life and software support. Cons: no local recording, reliance on terrestrial catchup services disappointing, some things only available live, bugs, motion sensing doesn’t work, voice control unreliable, uneven backlighting, auto-brightness is poor, no game or low lag mode, no Chromecast or AirPlay. Other reviews Best UK streaming and pay-TV services 2021: Sky, Virgin, Netflix and Amazon Prime compared and ranked Sky Q 2019 review: premium TV at a premium price Virgin V6 TV review: jack of all trades, master of none What’s on Netflix and Amazon this month • This article was amended on 23 August 2021 to clarify that the play now section includes things you have watched or added to your playlist.Channel 7 reporter Matt Doran made headlines over the weekend for a car crash interview with British singer Adele during which he revealed he had not listened to her highly anticipated new album, 30. The “mortified” journalist has since explained he had been “totally unaware” he had been sent a preview of her album. Doran and a crew were flown to London specifically for the interview, which was reportedly part of a $1 million deal. Doran has faced significant backlash from a host of media commentators for the bungle, but he isn’t the first reporter to get into strife over an on-camera stuff-up. Guardian Australia staff share the most epic interview fails they’ve witnessed over the years: ‘The Dalai Lama walks into a pizza shop’ It seems unbelievable it’s now a decade since Today show host Karl Stefanovic attempted a dad joke with the Dalai Lama that proved to be horribly lost in translation. “The Dalai Lama walks into a pizza shop and says, can you make me ‘one with everything’… do you know what I mean?” Stefanovic opens, leaning close to a bemused Dalai Lama. Clutching his hands together as if in prayer, he repeats “one with everything”, waving said prayer hands before chuckling and conceding “I knew that wouldn’t work.” It’s one of Stefanovic’s most infamous moments, and that’s saying something. Molly Meldrum’s royal stuff-up Who could forget former Countdown host Molly Meldrum’s uncomfortable interview with Prince Charles, which began with Meldrum lamenting “I’m sweating like a pig” and only got worse from there? The train-wreck 1977 interview has since been roasted by His Royal Highness himself. On the 40th anniversary of the program, Prince Charles released a video, saying deadpan: “there is an old show business saying which warns never to work with animals or children but nobody prepared me for Molly Meldrum”. “Was it really 40 years ago? It seems like yesterday … I wish it were tomorrow, I’d cancel it.” ‘I don’t know Jeff’ In what has gone down in history as one of the most innocently charming moments in sports broadcasting, Sky Sports football reporter Chris Kamara was possibly one of the only journalists told to “get your fingers out” live on air after missing a red card on the pitch. In a memorable Soccer Saturday report, Kamara was crossed to for an update on a Portsmouth v Blackburn game, where he somehow completely missed Anthony Vanden Borre’s second yellow card and subsequent dismissal. “We’re off to Fratton Park where there’s been a red card, but for who Kamara?” reporter Jeff Stelling opens. “I don’t know Jeff, has there?” he blunders bemusedly. “I must have missed that … I saw him go off but I thought they were bringing a sub on, Jeff.” ‘How will she fit into the office lift?’ Other mistakes aren’t so harmless. Australian website Mamamia was forced to issue an apology to US author Roxanne Gay after releasing a podcast interview which included text questioning whether she would “fit into the office lift”. A description posted to Mamamia’s No Filter podcast detailed the extensive preparations the website claimed to have made to accommodate the author, including: “will she fit into the office lift? How many steps will she have to take to get to the interview? Is there a comfortable chair that will accommodate her six-foot-three, ‘super-morbidly obese’ frame?” Gay, who at the time was promoting her book Hunger: A Memoir of (My) Body, said she was “appalled” after the interview she gave with the site’s co-founder Mia Freedman. “It was a shit show. I can walk a fucking mile,” she said. “‘Can she fit into the lift?’ Shame on you Mamamia.” From job interview to live TV In a true comedy of errors, unemployed computer technician Guy Goma was surprised to find himself live on-air after arriving for a job interview at the BBC. Goma was mistaken for music industry expert Guy “Kewney” at reception, and somehow wound up all the way to the broadcasting studio. The moment he realises the mistake (0.25 seconds in) is truly unforgettable, but, like a champion, Goma goes on to answer the questions as if an expert, even making his own predictions as to how people’s online listening habits will evolve. Sadly, Goma did not get the job, but he did win our hearts. ‘Smitten’ with Jacinda Ardern Some of the worst stuff-ups are the ones in which the journalist appears to lack any self-awareness for them. A 60 Minutes interview with the prime minister of New Zealand, Jacinda Ardern, and her partner was labelled “sexist” and “creepy” after veteran reporter Charles Wooley said he was “smitten” with the “attractive” prime minister and then proceeded to speculate on the date her baby was conceived. “It’s interesting how much people have been counting back … to … the conception as it were,” he says to the visibly uncomfortable couple. “Why shouldn’t a child be conceived during an election campaign?” ‘You’re the entertainment reporter?’ You would think having a reasonable grasp on who it is you’re interviewing is relatively straightforward, but not so for US entertainment reporter Sam Rubin. Rubin was subject to a Samuel L Jackson blast when he confused Jackson, who was promoting his latest film Robocop, with the actor Laurence Fishburne live on-air. “The Superbowl commercial, did you get a lot of reaction for that Superbowl commercial?” Rubin asks eagerly. “What Superbowl commercial?” Jackson replies, to Rubin’s visibly shocked face. “You’re as crazy as the people on Twitter … I’m not Laurence Fishburne. We don’t all look alike. We might be black and famous, but we don’t all look alike. You’re the entertainment reporter?” Jackson cries. “There must be a very short line for your job out there.” Ireland’s currency ‘too confusing’ There is perhaps nothing more charming than watching IDA Ireland CEO Martin Shanahan patiently explain his nation’s currency to a completely flummoxed desk of Americans. Asked by a CNBC reporter what the weaker euro has meant for tourism, Shanahan begins to answer the question before another reporter interjects: “you have pounds anyway, don’t you still?”. “We have euros,” he replies, to which the reporter follows up: “why would you have euros in Ireland?” Shanahan attempts to explain that, despite Ireland’s proximity to the UK, they are not, in fact, the same country, until the journalist sighs “that’s just too confusing.” ‘Wrap it up!’ In what has been hailed by many as the most cringe-worthy interview of all time, BBC journalist Michael Parkinson this year offered an apology for a deeply awkward 2003 exchange with actor Meg Ryan. The interview, which dives into an increasingly uncomfortable line of questioning, sees Parkinson question Ryan’s career choice and draw attention to the actor’s discomfort with being interviewed. “You’re wary of me, you’re wary of the interview, you don’t like being interviewed,” he says to Ryan, who studied journalism before becoming an actor. “If you were me, what would you do now?” he says, to which she frostily replies: “I’d just wrap it up”. Parkinson later said he wished he hadn’t lost his temper and had dealt with Ryan in a “more courteous manner”.Japan’s government is hoping that children’s fascination with bodily functions will help them appreciate the importance of paying taxes when they reach adulthood. Years after he fuelled huge sales of school textbooks, Unko-sensei [Professor Poo] has been enlisted by the finance ministry’s tax agency to appear in a brochure as part of a campaign to engender an appreciation of the role of the treasury among the nation’s youngest citizens. The character, who is shaped like the eponymous emoji and sports a handlebar moustache and round spectacles, explores topics such as the consumption tax – a 10% levy on goods and services children pay every time they buy a bag of sweets. One of the questions he poses to children in the brochure is: what do poo and tax have in common? The answer: fertiliser, since both are used to grow things. The character behind the brochure, which is to be distributed to primary schools across Japan, will be familiar to millions of children who have him to thank for their ability to memorise hundreds of kanji characters. A series of kanji study books featuring Unko-sensei became a hit when they were released in 2017 by the Bunkyosha publishing company. The books have sold around 5 million copies, according to the publisher, meaning that two in every three Japanese primary schoolchildren own a copy. The scatology-inspired Unko Doriru (poo drills) exercise books proved so popular that officials in the rarefied corridors of the finance ministry were reportedly receptive when Bunkyosha’s founder, former Lehman Brothers employee Shuji Yamamoto, approached them with the idea. Now they are banking on Unko-sensei doing for tax what he has already done for kanji components and stroke orders. “We hope the drills prompt elementary school students to take an early interest in taxes,” a ministry official told the Mainichi Shimbun newspaper.That’s where we will leave the live blog for Monday. Amy Remeikis will be back again with you tomorrow morning for day two of this last sitting fortnight for 2021. Here’s some of what made the news today: Air New Zealand has cancelled about 1,000 flights between New Zealand and Australia, citing “continued border uncertainty” between the two countries. Fully-vaccinated eligible visa holders will be able to enter Australia from 1 December without needing to apply for a travel exemption, along with fully-vaccinated citizens from Japan and South Korea. Speaker Tony Smith had his last day in the job today, and will serve out the remainder of his term as a backbencher. The lockdown in Katharine in the NT was extended for two days, as chief minister Michael Gunner revealed around 400 public servants had left their jobs due to the vaccine mandate (98% have been vaccinated). One Nation leader Pauline Hanson’s bill aimed at stopping vaccine requirements in the states failed when it came to a vote in the Senate, despite five Coalition senators crossing the floor to vote for it. The debate prompted a fiery speech from independent senator Jacqui Lambie, who accused One Nation of pushing the bill to boost their electoral prospects and get more donations. Victoria recorded 1,029 new Covid-19 cases and eight deaths, while NSW recorded 180 new cases and one death. New Zealand recorded 205 cases of Covid-19. The South Australian deputy premier (and attorney general) Vickie Chapman announced she will step down from her ministerial roles after a vote of no confidence from the SA parliament late last week. Until tomorrow. The Morrison government’s political campaigner bill has passed the lower house. The bill lowers the threshold for “political campaigners”, such as charities, to declare their campaign spending from $500,000 to $100,000. Earlier on Monday the government made substantial amendments to the bill – including stating that foreign donors are unable to provide gifts for the purposes of incurring electoral expenditure or creating or communicating electoral matter. The crossbench was not happy about the changes, MP Helen Haines moved a second reading amendment complaining the government had “broken with convention and introduced a significant addition to this bill, tripling it in size within a matter of hours, and preventing the crossbench from having an opportunity to review, contemplate or be briefed on the amended bill”. Labor’s Andrew Giles accused the Coalition of being “contemptuous of democracy”: The bill is off to the Senate – where much of the government’s agenda is imperilled by their own members (Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic) threatening to withhold their votes – although some in the charities sector believe the government has mustered enough crossbench votes to get it through despite Labor and Greens opposition. In flood watch news for NSW. South Australia’s health authorities have issued an alert for a meningococcal case in Adelaide. Just circling back on the Air New Zealand announcement on cancelled flights between Australia and New Zealand owing to ongoing uncertainty around borders, Air New Zealand’s chief customer and sales officer Leanne Geraghty said the following: We’re acting now to give customers as much certainty as possible, so they can make alternative plans. We appreciate this latest news means some customers will have to wait longer before reuniting with loved ones. We’re continuing to do everything we can to get them home safely as quickly as possible. The airline said it would continue to operate a reduced schedule of flights into Sydney and Melbourne and “red flights” from Australia into New Zealand for those with MIQ spots. Just circling back on Senator Jacqui Lambie’s earlier speech on the motivations behind the anti-vaccine mandate legislation this morning. Pork barrelling isn’t nearly as useful as politicians tend to think. That’s the finding of a study co-authored by a Labor MP into federal sports grants worth $100m. AAP reports the paper with the Australian National University found the program, funnelled into Coalition and marginal seats, had virtually no electoral effect. “Contrary to our expectations, we find virtually no electoral impact of the grants,” ANU political science professor Ian McAllister and Labor frontbencher Andrew Leigh said in the peer-reviewed paper published in the journal Political Studies. “Those electorates that received more sporting grant funding were no more likely to swing in favour of the government in the 2019 election than electorates that received no funding. “A straw poll of members of the House of Representatives suggests one possible explanation as to why pork-barrelling persists: parliamentarians tend to overestimate its electoral impact.” The auditor general last year found the so-called sports rorts saga favoured Coalition and marginal seats. It prompted sports minister Bridget McKenzie to quit cabinet. She spent nearly 18 months on the backbench before returning under Nationals leader Barnaby Joyce. The sports rorts saga has helped fuel calls for a national anti-corruption body with teeth. The government has promised to legislate a Commonwealth Integrity Commission this term, but early drafts have been criticised for being too soft. (Quick last one from me before Josh takes the blog) Here was Anthony Albanese talking about the text message Scott Morrison brought up (and then had to correct) during question time on Sky News this afternoon: Q: Before you go, you took exception to something the prime minister said today in relation to his holiday to Hawaii. He then followed up your comments by saying that you’ve chosen to politicise the message he sent you and you’ve done so ever since. What do you say in response to that? Albanese: What nonsense. Here’s what happened today. The prime minister stood up in the parliament and he said, to quote him directly, word for word, he said that he texted me from the plane, ‘When I was going on that leave and told him where I was going. And he was fully aware of where I was travelling with my family’. That’s not true. He did send me a text message. It was a private text message from him to me. It didn’t say where he was going. I did not know where he was going. During that week, you’d be aware that the prime minister’s office briefed out and said it was wrong that the prime minister was overseas. And they wouldn’t even confirm that Michael McCormack was the acting prime minister during that period. Q: Did he tell you he was going on leave overseas? Albanese: No, he didn’t. Q: You didn’t divulge that to anyone that he was going on leave regardless? Albanese: No, I didn’t. Because if you sent me a private message, it stays private. And we know that this prime minister divulges text messages from world leaders. I have a view that if someone sends me a private text message, then it’s private. But I couldn’t allow it to stand that was the case, because he did say he was going on leave, he didn’t say he was going overseas, he didn’t say where he was going. And frankly, that was a matter for him. But I did find it extraordinary that it wasn’t divulged in a normal way that he was on leave. That’s where this problem comes from. And today, after he did that, and I gave my personal explanation, the prime minister stood up and doubled down and said, ‘Oh, no, I was talking about not where I was going’, and tried to pretend he was talking about something else. And then after the Speaker’s tributes that were made, he stood up and again corrected the record in the parliament. The problem for this prime minister is that he has this character trait whereby he says whatever is convenient at the time, regardless of what the facts are. And it is just extraordinary that he has been prepared to do that. That has been quite the re-introduction to parliament after a three week break, so it’s time for me to go stare at a wall and think about the choices I have made in life which have led me to this moment. Josh Taylor will take you through the evening, because he is an absolute trooper. We have seven more days of parliament left in this year though – so seven more hours of question time, at least. Tomorrow, a new speaker will be elected. Will it be Kevin Andrews? Nola Marino? Who can say for sure. The government has the numbers on it, so it is up to them – but I don’t think we are going to see an uncontested speaker this time around (Labor supported Tony Smith’s election to the role). No one knows how long they will sit in the chair either – if the election is called for March, then it is just this sitting. Fun fact – they get paid as the speaker until the new parliament sits, so that will be a nice pay bump for whomever is elected to the role, even if it is just seven days in the actual chair. They will also get a portrait. Such are the traditions of our democracy. Tomorrow is party room meeting day, where the Coalition will pretend all is just fine and dandy within its ranks, even though members are threatening to either cross the floor, or withhold votes, or continue to speak out at anti-vax rallies. Labor and the Greens will also meet, but the action is all with the government at the moment as it seeks to re-centre itself as the, well, sensible centre. So far – it’s going great (this is sarcasm). I’ll be back early tomorrow morning, with Mike Bowers, Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Daniel Hurst and Paul Karp to cover all the parliament *gestures* whatever. A very big thank you to those who joined along today. You make it all worthwhile. I hope you know that. Please, as always – take care of you. Air New Zealand has canceled about 1,000 flights between New Zealand and Australia, citing “continued border uncertainty” between the two countries. The announcement will scuttle the plans of some New Zealanders and Australians who had hoped to be reunited for Christmas. The airline said around 20,000 customers would be affected. The flights cancelled fall between now and the end of December – while the airline’s flight schedule beyond then remains in place, it’s not clear whether more flights may be cancelled down the line. This will be particularly tough news for families and friends who were hoping to catch up over Christmas ... But our hands are tied until border restrictions ease, and we receive further clarity from the New Zealand Government,” chief customer &amp; sales officer Leanne Geraghty said in a written statement. We’re acting now to give customers as much certainty as possible, so they can make alternative plans,” Geraghty said. We appreciate this latest news means some customers will have to wait longer before reuniting with loved ones. We’re continuing to do everything we can to get them home safely as quickly as possible.” The airline said it would continue to operate a reduced schedule of flights into Sydney and Melbourne and ‘red flights’ from Australia into New Zealand for those with MIQ spots. Why does condemnation of the far-right elements of the protests matter? Here is Mehreen Faruqi: In other moments Mike Bowers captured this afternoon: From Mike Bowers to you: [Continued from previous post] Senior lawyer with the Human Rights Law Centre Scott Cosgriff said the government’s announcement “will bring joy and relief to many, including hundreds of thousands of people on temporary visas who have been barred from entering or leaving the country”. Many of these people, whose lives are in Australia, have been separated from their loved ones, their jobs and their homes for more than 18 months.” Cosgriff said the lifting of restrictions was a positive step for refugees whose resettlement in Australia had been postponed by the pandemic. It is vital that the Morrison government restart Australia’s refugee resettlement program and actively facilitate travel for nearly 10,000 people who have been granted humanitarian visas but have been forced to wait overseas in precarious situations.” The HRLC released a paper, Still Left Behind, last week, detailing the impact of Australia’s long-running border closures and urging the Morrison government to lift international travel restrictions. Greens senator Nick McKim said the resumption of travel for temporary visa holders was cause for celebration – for children who can again see their parents, for couples who will be reunited, and for “all of the people that will be able to return to their jobs, homes, communities and lives in Australia”. While this announcement is long overdue, and nothing can erase the immense pain and trauma that the border closure has caused, this news will be celebrated by many thousands of people who hold visas for Australia. We also welcome the new temporary visa holders who will now be able to come to Australia and start a new chapter in their lives. McKim said the Greens had introduced legislation in October to restore and extend visas which had lapsed during the border closure period and the party would continue to advocate for those visas to be reinstated. The Guardian wrote last week about the plight of humanitarian visa holders, fleeing persecution and accepted to resettle in Australia, but who have been unable to come to Australia since borders were shut because of the pandemic. We spoke with one Sydney family who have been waiting more than 20 months to be reunited with loved ones who fled Syria, and have been waiting, in northern Iraq, for Australia’s borders to finally open. There has been widespread celebration at the news travel restrictions would be lifted for temporary visa holders to enter Australia. Chief executive of the Refugee Council of Australia, Paul Power, said the government’s announcement Monday would be “life-changing” for more than 9,500 humanitarian visa holders waiting to enter Australia. This news will be particularly welcome for the many families in Australia with relatives who have waiting for up to two years in host countries badly hit by economic crises worsened by the Covid pandemic. The situation has been even worse in host countries such as Lebanon, Sudan and Ethiopia where internal chaos and conflict has made life even tougher. Power said when Australia’s borders were closed early last year, more than 4,000 refugees were in the final stages of arranging their travel to Australia for permanent resettlement. While the Australian government has slowed the number of refugee visas being issued since then, the number of refugees waiting to enter Australia has grown by at least 5,500. Power said the Australian government should work with visa holders currently overseas and trying to get to Australia to ensure they had sufficient vaccinations to be able to enter the country. [Continued in next post] Right. So the prime minister immediately went on the personal attack in question time, accusing Anthony Albanese of knowing where he went on holiday during the 2019 bushfires, because he had told him in a text message he sent the opposition leader at the time. (This was in response to a question about why Morrison’s office had misled journalists who were asking about where the prime minister was back in 2019. Michael McCormack was acting in the prime minister’s role, but wouldn’t say if he was acting prime minister or where the prime minister was, which was a whole thing in December 2019 because half the country was on fire.) During question time, Morrison says he sent Albanese a text message saying: As the leader of the opposition will know, because I texted him from the plane when I was going on that leave, and told him where I was going and he was fully aware of where I was travelling with my family. Albanese says no, I received a text message saying the prime minister was going on leave, but not the destination. And I didn’t make it public, because it was a private message. (Scott Morrison made the text message public on Sydney radio 2GB when he was found out as being in Hawaii. Morrison then claimed he was coming back home early – he arrived home a day earlier than scheduled.) Morrison jumps in on that explanation, where Albanese says he didn’t know a destination, and says: Where I was going was on leave, Mr Speaker, and that was the important thing I sent to the leader of the opposition. He knew I was taking leave, Mr Speaker. I told him I was taking leave. And Mr Speaker, he chose to politicise that and has done so ever since. Called out for misleading again, Morrison makes a third attempt (in just over an hour) to explain what he meant when he said: As the leader of the opposition will know, because I texted him from the plane when I was going on that leave, and told him where I was going and he was fully aware of where I was travelling with my family. In that third attempt, Morrison says that what he meant by Albanese being “fully aware of where I was travelling with my family” he meant, that Albanese was “fully aware” he was on leave AND travelling with his family. When I was referring to he knew where I was going and was fully aware I was travelling with my family what I meant was, that we were going on leave together. So Morrison went on the attack, said something which wasn’t true, then changed the meaning of what he said when confronted with what had actually occurred. All in the space of an hour. Scott Morrison has “added to an answer” from question time, explaining what he meant when he said he told Anthony Albanese where he was going in a text message he sent the opposition leader before going on leave to Hawaii. During question time he said: I can only speak to what I have said. As the leader of the opposition will know, because I texted him from the plane when I was going on that leave, and told him where I was going and he was fully aware of where I was travelling with my family. Now he says (just a little over an hour later): I want to confirm what the leader of the opposition said that in that text. I did not tell him the destination of where I was going on leave with my family. I simply communicated to him that I was taking leave. When I was referring to he knew where I was going and was fully aware I was traveling with my family what I meant was, that we were going on leave together. I know I didn’t tell him where we were going, because Mr. Speaker, that is a private matter where members take leave and I know I didn’t tell him the destination, nor would I. Nor would he expects me to have told told him where he was going. I simply confirmed to him that I was taking leave with my family, and he was aware of that, at that time. Here is the entire personal explanation from Anthony Albanese about the text message Scott Morrison raised during question time, and Morrison’s immediate response. Morrison, in response to a question about his office misleading journalists about his whereabouts in Hawaii during the 2019/2020 bushfires, immediately attacked Albanese, who he said he had messaged at the time, saying he was going on leave with his family, and where he was going. Morrison during QT: I texted him from the plane when I was going on that leave and told him where I was going. When it is pointed out that Morrison did not tell Albanese where he was going in that text message, Morrison immediately changes what he meant by his answer: Albanese: Mr Speaker, in question time today the prime minister said that, to quote him, ‘I texted him from the plane when I was going on that leave and told him where I was going’. Mr Speaker, that is not true. On the 15th of December, 2019, at 9:44pm, the prime minister did text me saying he was going on leave. He did not tell me where he was going. He said he was going with his family. I kept that text message confidential, as you do with private text messages between private phones. And on the Friday ... he disclosed in an interview with 2GB that he had texted me. And that was the first time that that became public. But at no stage did he tell me where he was going. Morrison: Where I was going was on leave, Mr Speaker, and that was the important thing. I sent to the leader of the opposition. He knew I was taking leave, Mr Speaker. I told him I was taking leave. And Mr Speaker, he chose to politicise that and has done so ever since. As the speeches go on, here is Tony Smith in his own words, saying goodbye from the Speaker’s chair: NT chief minister Michael Gunner has a furious message for anti vaxxers, as his territory deals with an outbreak of Covid in Indigenous communities: Anthony Albanese is also thanking Tony Smith for the role he has played, and thanking him for his diligence in acting “with integrity and without partisanship”. He also includes this tidbit: The first speaker Frederick Holder actually died in the chamber, making an excerpt worthy Heart of Darkness as he added his final words, “dreadful, dreadful”. The Canberra Times called it Australia’s shortest prominent political speech. So there are worse ways to leave than the way that you are Mr Speaker. Tony Smith thanks his staff and says he will be heading to the governor to hand in his resignation. “See you on the floor tomorrow,” he finishes. Scott Morrison is now paying homage to the job Smith has done: You are the longest-serving speaker of my generation. And I suspect we have seen the finest speaker that this place has had the great opportunity to witness in action. That may be a contested proposition, I suspect it will be, but it’s certainly my view. Tony Smith is now thanking the chamber for its support during his time as Speaker. It is not a valedictory – that won’t come until he leaves the parliament, but he is saying his thank yous for those who have helped. He gives a special thank you to Richard Marles: We’ve always been opponents, but we’ve always been mates. Can I say to all of you, being a friend with someone who holds a different political view does not mean you dilute your views or your values. And to Tony Burke: He’s been the one constant over the six years and three months. We got to know each other really well and worked on a basis of trust and I want to thank him for the role he played in ensuring the cooperation and the procedures and processes that were helped put in place, the bipartisan nature to ensure that we’re able to keep sitting through Covid. He is also thanking his colleagues. Anthony Albanese is now giving a personal explanation about the text message Scott Morrison referenced in his question time answer about his trip to Hawaii. I kept that text message confidential, as you do with private text messages between private phones. And on the Friday, on the Friday, he disclosed in [an] interview with 2GB that he had texted me and that was the first time that that became public, but at no stage he told me where he was going. Scott Morrison jumps up: I was taking leave Mr Speaker, and I told him the same thing and Mr Speaker he chose to politicise that and has done so ever since. Here is what Anthony Albanese had to say about that earlier this month, when it came up again: When, in 2019, the prime minister sent me a private text message that he was going on leave and that the then deputy prime minister would be acting. That was on Sunday night. You might be aware, for a number of days, the prime minister’s office couldn’t confirm whether he was on leave or not. The acting prime minister couldn’t confirm that he was the acting prime minister. I didn’t know where Scott Morrison travelled. I wasn’t critical of him travelling. I didn’t go out and breach that private message when Scott Morrison was on holiday. And then on Friday, on the Friday of that week, Scott Morrison gave an interview on 2GB from Hawaii, in which he said, ‘Oh, I messaged Anthony Albanese, I told him what was happening’. As if I knew that he was in Hawaii. But I kept his confidence. I kept his confidence. Because that’s what people of integrity do. They have relations between people. And this prime minister, on a range of issues, has ducked questions, has not given straight answers, has pretended that things that were a changed position for him were positions that he had all the way along, and always seeks to blame someone else, always seeks to defer responsibility. Tanya Plibersek to Michael Sukkar: “Why did the assistant treasurer say the minister for women’s economic security, Senator Hume, was being ‘indulgent and quite frankly bizarre’ when she wrote about the difficulties of juggling work and motherhood?” Sukkar: Can I thank the member for her question. I unreservedly apologised to Senator Hume. Both privately and publicly in relation to private messages that were made public. Senator Hume and I have worked very closely together for many years. We’ve worked very closely together as members of the treasury team, very cooperatively. She’s an outstanding minister, as I’ve relayed publicly on many occasions. And, as I said, I made very clearly my regret for those comments being made public. They were incorrect. They were incorrect. I don’t think that’s surprising. They were incorrect. It was unfair. And Senator Hume is an outstanding minister. And I’ve apologised to her privately and publicly. Now Scott Morrison is in a mood. Tony Burke to Scott Morrison: “My question is to the prime minister. This morning five members of the government voted for Senator Pauline Hanson’s extreme bill to abolish public health orders on vaccine certificates that keep people safe and keep businesses open. Didn’t the prime minister allow this to happen because the prime minister failed to show leadership and gave comfort to extremists instead of backing the 90% of Australians who have done the right thing and got vaccinated?” Morrison: No. Back to the question on the PMO lying about where Scott Morrison was during the bushfires in December 2019 – it was reported that Morrison had messaged Antony Albanese to tell him he would be away for a week and Michael McCormack would be acting in the prime minister’s role (I can’t find if he said he was going to Hawaii though). That’s not under dispute. And it is precedent and tradition that opposition leaders don’t share the plans of prime ministers with the media – it’s part of the respect which is meant to exist between the two offices. The question was about what Morrison’s office told journalists who asked about the prime minister’s whereabouts. It was a question which was asked repeatedly at the time, and also a question McCormack was asked at the time, and refused to answer. It was eventually confirmed when a photo of Morrison in Hawaii was published. That Morrison went straight on the attack, turning fault on Albanese, who he relies on to keep certain things confidential as part of a tradition of respect between the offices, if not the people who head them, is very much in line with how he reacts when he feels personally under pressure. Just on the ‘changing technology’ Scott Morrison was talking about with electric vehicles, where he spoke about hydrogen and the changes in technology there, here is Labor MP Tim Watts in 2019, with a hydrogen vehicle. Fiona Phillips to Scott Morrison: When my electorate was burning, the prime minister’s office told journalists he was not on holiday in Hawaii. Why did the prime minister’s office say that when it wasn’t true? Tony Burke gets up to explain the precedent: Ministers have been asked a series about actions of their offices over the years. And this is a question where their office took an action in answering something about the prime minister himself. Tony Smith allows it. Then we get personal. Morrison: I can only speak to what I have said. As the leader of the opposition will know because I texted him from the plane when I was going on that leave, and told him where I was going and he was fully aware of where I was travelling with my family. Morrison and Anthony Albanese then start arguing with each other across the table. We seemed to have skipped a dixer, so it’s back to Labor. Madeleine King to Scott Morrison: “Why does the prime minister claim not to have supported Clive Palmer’s high court case to tear down state borders when we know he spent a million dollars doing just that?” Morrison: We pulled the case. We didn’t pursue the case. We didn’t support it, Mr Speaker. We didn’t support it and I didn’t support it based on the strong representation made to me by premier McGowan and I agreed with him. So supporting something, and then not supporting it (because of how badly it was playing politically in a state you need to hold seats in) is apparently now not having supported the case. Chris Bowen to Scott Morrison: “My question is to the prime minister. The prime minister claims he changed his mind on electric vehicles because of, and I quote, ‘massive changes to technology since 2019’. The CEO of the Electric Vehicle Council says he has no idea what the prime minister is talking about. Why did the prime minister make this claim when it simply isn’t true? Morrison: If the opposition spokesman thinks there hasn’t been advances in technology since 2019, he’s clearly not keeping up to pace. Our government will not put up pressure on petrol prices by changing emissions standards on fuels. We’re not going to do that. Mr Speaker, it’s important that the Labor party come clean on that. Otherwise that’s just another sneaky tactic... Tony Burke: On direct relevance. The only issue relevant in this question are the massive changes to technology since 2019 that the prime minister has claimed exist and he has to be relevant to that. It was very tight question. So the prime minister can’t talk about alternative policies. The prime minister has the call. Morrison: In particular, where I was on that day at Toyota, the advance in technology that has occurred with hydrogen-powered vehicles, Mr Speaker, particularly consumer vehicles, and in heavy industry, Mr Speak, in heavy vehicles, this has come forward in leaps and bounds. The leader of the opposition says hydrogen vehicles is not EV, Mr Speaker. I heard him say that just then. What does he think hydrogen does in an electric vehicle? It converts it into electricity and drives the battery. That’s what an electric vehicle is. It can be powered by a charger. It can be powered by hydrogen. The leader of the opposition has no clue what he’s talking about when it comes to these vehicles. Mr Speaker, this might become as a bit of a shock to the leader of the opposition, but in Australia there are very large distances over which Australians travel. And if he thinks you can have charging stations along the outback way, good luck to him. But what I know from talking to the transport industry, what I know about talking to the vehicle manufacturers is here in Australia and people like Dr Alan Finkel, is that hydrogen-powered electric vehicles is an Australian solution. It’s a solution for Australian transport. Now that might not go down so well in the cafes of Marrickville, Mr Speaker, that may not go down so well when he’s spinning the discs there pretending to be a DJ. There is an other interjection but Morrison continues: The CSIRO makes it very clear that hydrogen-powered vehicles power the electricity of those vehicles. Mr Speaker, if the leader of the opposition doesn’t agree with the former chief scientist, Dr Alan Finkel, Mr Speaker, I know there are electric vehicles that you use in inner suburban areas, Mr Speaker, and that’s very important. That’s fine when people want to make those choices. We’re not going to force people to buy those cars* Mr Speaker, by putting up petrol prices and by changing the fuel emissions standards which is nothing more than a sneaky tax on petrol. We’re not going to do that. We will ensure we’re supporting through the incentives and the initiatives we’re putting in place but one of the things we’re focusing on is hydrogen-powered electric vehicles because those are the things that can transport heavy vehicles and consumer vehicles over long distances which is what Australia needs. Our approach is following the Australian way. *No one was forcing anyone to buy electric vehicles. We slide from that to a dixer to the defence minister Peter Dutton who is back on his old ‘how safe are you’ bandwagon. As always with this trope, you are as safe as you can be while the Coalition is in power, but WHO KNOWS what could happen if Labor wins. So that is the prime minister outright lying about his previous ridiculing of electric vehicles, which is on tape, while accusing the opposition of being “sneaky”. Here was Scott Morrison on electric vehicles at the last election campaign: “[An electric vehicle] won’t tow your trailer. It’s not going to tow your boat. It’s not going to get you out to your favourite camping spot with your family.” Asked about that statement, and how it was ridiculing electric vehicles, Morrison says: As I’ve made clear on numerous occasions now, whether here in this place or other places, what I opposed at the last election was the Labor party’s policy. That’s what I opposed, Mr Speaker. We had our own policy on electric vehicles. Most recently I’ve announced our policy, Mr Speaker, as part of our broader lower-emissions technology and future fuels program, Mr Speaker, to ensure we meet the commitment that ... we’ve set out most recently at Cop26. We know what our targets are. We know what our plans to achieve those targets are, Mr Speaker. I mean, when we were last in this place a few weeks ago, the leader of the opposition thought the election was going to be on 11 December. In fact, he told everybody in his backbench that that’s when it was gonna be, Mr Speaker. But yet he still can’t even tell them what their 2030 target is, Mr Speaker. He still can’t tell them what all the sneaky taxes are that they’re going to put on the Australian people, Mr Speaker. He thought the election was about to happen and he still couldn’t tell anybody what was gonna be going on. You know, Mr Speaker. There’s one thing that’s pretty bad, and that’s when Labor tells you what they are gonna do. What’s even worse is when they don’t tell you. It is all about the recast and rewrite today. Scott Morrison takes a question about his repeated claims “Australia was at the front of the vaccine queue” when it wasn’t, which then meant a mad scramble to source vaccines as NSW and Victoria experienced new waves of Covid outbreaks, which led to long lockdowns, and turns it into an answer on the economy. Scott Morrison’s Facebook post on what he said about the protests only includes what he said about the frustrations protesters were feeling – NOT his condemnation at the beginning? Why? Because the people he is speaking to mostly get their news from sites like Facebook and he knows it. Josh Burns to Scott Morrison: “Why did the prime minister, when posting a video of his media conference to Facebook, delete any criticism of the Melbourne protests and only include the sections where he criticised vaccine mandates? Why did the prime minister claim he had denounced the violent protests when, in fact, he was determined to give comfort to extremists?” Morrison: Mr Speaker, I completely reject that assertion, Mr Speaker. I completely reject that assertion, Mr Speaker. At the first opportunity when I appeared before the press, I denounced those things, Mr Speaker, very clearly. Very clearly, Mr Speaker, denounced that violence. I said it had no place in Australia. And it does have no place in Australia, Mr Speaker. And that is something there should be bipartisan support for. The opposition said the same thing, Mr Speaker, but they choose to try and play some political games with violent protests, Mr Speaker. Tony Burke: “On direct relevance. The prime minister needs to explain why he deleted the sections that were critical of the protests.” Morrison: Mr Speaker, I have been very clear in denouncing those things. Very clear in denouncing those things. And the suggestion I haven’t, Mr Speaker, is a complete falsehood. And I know the leader of the opposition was desperately trying to make this point this morning. Rather than us be on a unity ticket that we denounce violence, Mr Speaker, he seeks to play politics with violent protests in Victoria, Mr Speaker. And I find that absolutely appalling. Now, Mr Speaker, we have the very strong view that violence of that nature, the intimidating threats that were made as part of any protest, on whatever topic it might be, Mr Speaker, is deplorable and should not be done in this country. I could not be more clear than that, Mr Speaker. My government, Mr Speaker, stands for the national plan that we took forward and we need to ensure that all Australians, Mr Speaker, can look forward with confidence. And that’s what we’re focusing on – the positives of the future, Mr Speaker. About where we’re heading as a country. So, we can ensure that as a result of the outstanding work done by Australians right across the country, but particularly in Victoria, who have had to put up with more on their daily lives, Mr Speaker, than any other people in this country during the course of this pandemic, they have had to put up with more lockdowns, Mr Speaker, more deaths, and more impact than any other part of this country, Mr Speaker. The longest lockdown of any city in the world. Victorians have put up with a lot, Mr Speaker, and they have pushed through. And I commend them for the outstanding work that they have done. And, Mr Speaker, what is important is that we now harness that and ensure, Mr Speaker, that they can look forward to the Boxing Day Test, Mr Speaker, and coming together around the Christmas table, because that is what has been made possible by them going forward and ensuring that they’ve got vaccines at record levels. That’s what our national plan provides for, Mr Speaker. The pathetic attempts by the Labor party to try and drive a wedge between Australians and suggest that there is no bipartisan support for denouncing violence in this country, I tell ya what, Mr Speaker, it’s been our government that has funded the Australian federal police to crack down on violent extremism, Mr Speaker. It’s our government, Mr Speaker, that have actually supported the federal police. When the Labor party was in power, they cut their funding, Mr Speaker. They didn’t give them the powers they needed, Mr Speaker. And even now, over the course of this parliament, the Labor party has had to be dragged kicking and screaming to this. This next question and answer is quite something. Get ready. This is Tony Smith’s last question time in the Speaker’s chair. He looks like he is counting each second. This is the third question in a row we have heard from Josh Frydenberg now, and the main takeaway is he still doesn’t know how to use a microphone. Jim Chalmers to Josh Frydenberg: “My question is to the treasurer: how can the treasurer make the sorts of claims he just did in that answer [that the Coalition has the lowest taxes] when the two highest-taxing governments of the last 30 years have both been Liberal governments, including his?” Frydenberg: I thank the member for Rankin, welcome him back to the parliament. The part-time shadow treasurer! Because that was a Dorothy Dixer, Mr Speaker. Because at the last election, we were proposing lower taxes for Australians, and Labor was proposing $387 billion of higher taxes! And do you know who said they were proud and pleased of the housing tax and the retirees’ tax? Who? Sneaky Jim! The member for Rankin! The member for Rankin! The co-architect with the member for McMahon (Chris Bohen). And you know what the member for McMahon told the Australian people about Labor’s high-taxing agenda? ‘If you don’t like it, don’t vote for it.’ If you don’t like it, don’t vote for it. So, the member for Rankin ... he took to the Australian people a superannuation tax. He took to the Australian people a higher tax on housing. He took to the Australian people a retirees’ tax. He took to the Australian people higher taxes on your income. And he took to the Australian people higher taxes on small business. Mr Speaker, a leopard doesn’t change their spots. They know what the member for Rankin is all about. Higher taxes on all Australians. Earlier today the Australian government signed an agreement with the US and the UK to allow the exchange of nuclear propulsion technology – a key plank of the Aukus submarines deal announced in September. That agreement has now been tabled in parliament. The joint standing committee on treaties will inquire into the document – it looks like a snap inquiry, given submissions are due by this Friday. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, said in a statement issued a short time ago: “This Agreement will support Australia in completing the 18 months of intensive and comprehensive examination of the requirements underpinning the delivery of nuclear-powered submarines. The United Kingdom and the United States will be able to share naval nuclear propulsion information with Australia, which they cannot with any other country, in the determination of the optimal pathway to acquire nuclear-powered submarines for operation by the Royal Australian Navy. “With access to the information this Agreement delivers, coupled with the decades of naval nuclear-powered experience our UK and US partners have, Australia will also be positioned to be responsible and reliable stewards of this technology.” The other message to come out of this question time so far – the government is trying to paint Labor as “sneaky”. That isn’t new, but it is more overt – and it is in direct response to Scott Morrison struggling with being labelled a “liar” and that trust deficit which is emerging in the polls. Here is Ben Morton with the actual answer: The government does not support the AEC playing a role in relation to political advertisements. Is stop and consider awareness campaign, which in the next election will be further implemented, as it has been implemented in the previous by-elections in Eden-Monaro and in Groom. Federal elections are a contest of ideas, Mr Speaker. The 2016 joint standing committee report into the 2016 election considered these provisions. They recommended that there be further amendments made to the authorisation provisions, and that has occurred, and this government has delivered upon them. So, voters can clearly identify who is the source of the political information that they are receiving in electoral context. Mr Speaker, those opposite, and the member for Warringah, want to pursue a piece of legislation that will politically involve the Australian Electoral Commission in being an arbiter in relation to electoral advertising. That is an inappropriate role for the Australian Electoral Commission and this government does not support that. Independent MP Zali Steggall has to repeat this question because of heckling from the government. Prime minister, in Australia, trust in government and politicians is at an all-time low. With a federal election now looming, voters will yet again be bombarded with fake news, misleading claims and outright lies. Will you prohibit misleading and deceptive political advertising by supporting the Electoral Legislation Amendment Stop the Lies bill before the next election? Scott Morrison: I will ask the special minister of state to add further to my answer. But I note the member’s preamble to the question about misleading, Mr Speaker, and deceptive information that comes forward in campaigns. And, Mr Speaker, I think she’s just given us a preview of the Labor party campaign at the next election, Mr Speaker. Because they have form. They have form, Mr Speaker. Remember the Mediscare misrepresentations and untruths, Mr Speaker? We remember the calls to pensioners in the night, Mr Speaker. Seeking to frighten people in the middle of the election campaign. We remember all of that. We know they’re doing it again, Mr Speaker, out there, trying to frighten pensioners and do that on a daily basis, trying to operate underneath the radar. It’s very sneaky, Mr Speaker. Very sneaky from Labor. That’s what we get used to. And we know, Mr Speaker, when the leader of the opposition can’t make the points himself, he gets other premiers to make them for him, Mr Speaker. That’s what he does. That’s what he does. Steggall interjects on relevance. But the preamble has given Morrison room. He continues: I’m very happy for the special minister of state to add further to that answer. But the preview that the member has offered in her question, Mr Speaker, of misrepresentations and deceit, that is of course a risk. And it comes from the Labor party, Mr Speaker. Would do it in every single election. He makes no mention of the death tax campaign which was seized upon by government candidates at the last election, or the Chisholm banners which mimicked AEC branding, you may note. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: “My question is to the prime minister, and I refer to his comments last week, where he said, people should be allowed to get a cup of coffee in Brisbane without showing their vaccination certificates, which are required by the Queensland health orders. “Is the prime minister aware that exactly the same health orders apply in Sydney? If people want to get a cup of coffee, they have to show their vaccination certificate. Does he also support that?” Morrison: Mr Speaker, I will refer the member to my previous answer I have set out the government’s policy very clearly. It applies right across the country. “How much clearer do I have to be,” he says as he sits down. The current deputy prime minister is attempting to form sentences. Moving on. Jim Chalmers to Scott Morrison: “My question is to the prime minister: why does the prime minister claim to oppose mandates on hospitality venues in Queensland but supports the exact same restrictions in New South Wales?” (At this stage, you can not get a coffee in NSW if you are not vaccinated – the same as Queensland.) Morrison: Mr Speaker, again, the member who puts the question is misrepresenting me. Once again. Mr Speaker, let me be very, very clear. The government supports mandatory vaccines of health workers, aged care workers, Mr Speaker, and disability workers. That’s what the government supports. For all other venues, Mr Speaker, and employers, well, you don’t like the answer... Anthony Albanese has a point of order: The question went to very clearly hospitality venues in Queensland. The prime minister says it’s a problem you can’t get a cup of coffee without showing your vaccination certificate in Brisbane. It’s the same in Sydney. Morrison continues: Mr Speaker, if venues, businesses, airlines, other places of work, Mr Speaker, seek to require of their employees to be vaccinated, they have that right under the law. They have that right under the law, Mr Speaker. But it is not the commonwealth government’s policy that they should be told to do that. Wherever that is in the country, Mr Speaker, that is not the government’s policy. So, we couldn’t be clearer, Mr Speaker. We couldn’t be clearer. We support mandatory vaccines for health workers, for aged care workers, for disability workers, Mr Speaker, those who are working with vulnerable people. But when it comes to what happens in somebody’s business, we believe business should make that decision and shouldn’t be told by the government what they should be doing. Before we get to the next question and answer here is what Scott Morrison said last week (it is relevant): We’re not in favour of mandatory vaccines imposed by the government. Businesses can make their own choices under the law, but we’re not about telling them what to do or telling Australians what to do. Vaccines only are mandatory in cases where you’ve got health workers that are working with vulnerable people. That’s what our medical advice has always been. And as we get above 80% in particular, which the scientific advice shows us and the research shows us, that means Australians can have their lives back. They should be able to go and get a cup of coffee in Brisbane when you’re over 80%, regardless of whether you’ve had the vaccines or not. It’s almost as though the prime minister has realised that the vast majority of Australians support vaccinations, do not support the protests and haven’t been too impressed with the flip flopping. The prime minister is motivated by politics and focus groups. If the message changes, it is because he has seen that it has been politically damaging – not because he has suddenly seen the light. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: “Why does the prime minister claim he’s opposed to mandatory vaccinations on aged care workers, Australians returning home, quarantine workers and even journalists attending his own press conferences?” Morrison: Mr Speaker, the leader of the opposition is wrong, Mr Speaker. He’s completely wrong. Mr Speaker, the government doesn’t oppose mandatory vaccinations, Mr Speaker, for health workers and aged care workers and disability workers. ... It was as prime minister I took the proposal, Mr Speaker, supported by the AHPPC, the medical expert panel, and the chief medical officer, that it was essential that we mandate vaccines for aged care workers. And, Mr Speaker, that was done in November and it was not done until the end of August, Mr Speaker, mid to late August, that all states and territories had followed through on the commitment to put that in place. Now, Mr Speaker, mandatory vaccines for health workers, for aged care workers, for those who are working with vulnerable people, was the clear medical advice, Mr Speaker, that was supported by the chief medical officer, and that’s what the government acted on. And, Mr Speaker, sought to have those arrangements put in place through the states, which they have done. Over the course of these past few years, Mr Speaker, it has been essential to take a series of decisions to protect Australians. But the national plan that was agreed, that was pulled together by the government, supported on two occasions by all premiers and chief ministers, provides the pathway forward to ensure that governments can step back and Australians can step forward, Mr Speaker. There is a time and a place for controls and restrictions to be in place, and there is a time for governments to step back, Mr Speaker. And the government has always been clear in acting on the advice and listening carefully to the advice of the medical experts that have informed the positions that the government has taken. Mr Speaker, the government has not supported the campaigns of anti-vaxers, Mr Speaker. We have supported the sensible, balanced approach, listening carefully to the medical advice, commissioning the Doherty Institute to provide the specific scientific hurdles for vaccination rates to be reached that would enable Australians to be given their life back, Mr Speaker, and those restrictions to be lifted. So, Mr Speaker, I won’t be verballed by the leader of the opposition. I won’t be verballed by him, Mr Speaker. If he doesn’t think Australians should have their lives back, Mr Speaker, he can make that case to them. OK, we are switching to the chamber now for the eighth-last QT for the year. The Group of Eight Universities are very pleased international students will be returning: “The Australian Government’s decision to allow fully vaccinated eligible visa holders including international students and skilled workers, to return to Australia from 1 December 2021, signals the beginning of an exciting new phase for Australia’s fourth largest export industry – international education,” said Go8 chief executive Vicki Thomson. “Go8 unis have been preparing to welcome back their international students and today’s announcement gives our higher education sector, our students and researchers much needed certainty. “The commitment demonstrated by international students to stick with Go8 universities throughout this difficult period is testament to our expert researchers, teaching staff and domestic students, all of whom contribute to the quality education and quality lifestyle we provide to our international student cohort. “Negotiating the return of international students has been a complex process and we are pleased to have worked closely with the Australian Government throughout, on issues such as vaccine recognition to ensure the safe return of students.” Nationals senator Perin Davey was apparently listening to a different message from the prime minister when he “condemned” the protests last week. Here is what she told the ABC about the criticism Scott Morrison received: I think that there was a lot of semantics going on around what the prime minister said. On the one hand, he said that violence can’t be condoned and then someone said, but he didn’t use the word ‘condemned’ so he doesn’t condemn it. I think that that is clutching at straws to try to make something out of what I thought ... was very clear. That violence should never be tolerated. In Australia, we have a right for peaceful protests, but peaceful protests is what it should stay as. Here is what Morrison actually said: Well, of course, those threats and intimidation has no place in Australia. We’re a civil, peaceful society. Where we have disagreements, we don’t handle them with violence and there can be no tolerance for that. And there should be no tolerance for that. No matter how frustrated people might be, that is never the answer. And there needs to be the respect shown in those, those debates that we have. There has to be an appropriate balance and civility. Of course, there are many people who are feeling frustrated. I mean, over the last couple of years, governments have been telling Australians what to do. Now, there’s been a need for that as we’ve gone through the pandemic. But the time is now to start rolling all of that back. Australians have kept their part of the deal. More than 80% of Australians are now double-dose vaccinated. We now have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. We’ve had one of the strongest economies to come through the pandemic, and we have one of the lowest fatality rates from Covid in the world. Australians have done an amazing job when it comes to leading us through this pandemic, but now it’s time for governments to step back. And for Australians to take their lives back. And for Australians to be able to move forward with the freedoms that should be theirs. That’s certainly what we’re doing as a federal government. That’s where we see it going. Our position on mandatory vaccines, for example, is in very specific circumstances. We’re not in favour of mandatory vaccines imposed by the government. Businesses can make their own choices under the law, but we’re not about telling them what to do or telling Australians what to do. Vaccines only are mandatory in cases where you’ve got health workers that are working with vulnerable people. That’s what our medical advice has always been. And as we get above 80% in particular, which the scientific advice shows us and the research shows us, that means Australians can have their lives back. They should be able to go and get a cup of coffee in Brisbane when you’re over 80%, regardless of whether you’ve had the vaccines or not. In the Senate a little earlier, Labor did not support this climate motion from the Greens: 1. Notes the Glasgow Climate Pact, agreed to by nearly 200 countries, including Australia, at the conclusion of COP26 in Glasgow on November 13 2021, 2. Recognises that the impacts of climate change will be much lower at the temperature increase of 1.5°C compared with 2°C and resolves to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C, and 3. Commits to: a) revisiting and strengthening the 2030 targets in our nationally determined contribution, as necessary to align with the Paris Agreement temperature goal by the end of 2022, taking into account different national circumstances; b) accelerating the development, deployment and dissemination of technologies, and the adoption of policies, to transition towards low-emission energy systems, including by rapidly scaling up the deployment of clean power generation and energy efficiency measures, including accelerating efforts towards the phase-down of unabated coal power and inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, recognizing the need for support towards a just transition; and c) further actions to reduce by 2030 non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gas emissions, including methane. It is the downhill slide to question time. There are eight left in the year. That’s eight too many. SA premier Steven Marshall has held a press conference, explaining why his deputy Vickie Chapman felt she needed to step down as deputy premier and step aside from her attorney general and planning portfolios: In this instance, because she is the attorney general and she has responsibility for the ombudsman, it was just felt this was the most appropriate. We consulted what had happened in the past. She has now stood aside and we will be swearing in Josh Teague tomorrow, as a cabinet minister, a full cabinet minister, and he will take on all of her responsibilities. Meanwhile, the government that wants to get out of people’s lives is also pushing ahead with legislation which no one outside of the government believes there is any reason for: For those who missed it, here was Jacqui Lambie absolutely blasting Pauline Hanson and supporters of the anti-vaccine mandate bill, which failed 5 votes (all from the Coalition) to 44. Michael Gunner is not too worried about the reduction in public service numbers, though – he says it will mean a better pay deal for those who have remained (which is 98% of the PS). Gunner: Following the deadline for the first jab, the public service vaccination rate is 98%. There are about 400 public servants whose employment is ending due to their vaccination status. A small number of these are frontline roles that will be filled with new hires, but overall there will be a reduction in the public service of about 300 positions. Because our vaccination rate is so high, there are no impacts to service delivery expected from these people leaving their employment. The reduction in public service staff numbers is a saving to the budget wage bill of about $30 million a year. This means that we can revise and improve the public service wages offer that’s currently on the table. This morning, I have written to all members of the public service with a new four-year wages policy. It is a $4,000 lump sum bonus in the first year and an annual $2,000 bonus for the remaining three years. The base rate remains unchanged. Because some public servants are leaving their jobs, we can now improve the pay deal for the public servants who keep working and this is no impact on the bottom line. Michael Gunner on Katharine, where the lockdown has been extended: For Katherine, unfortunately we are not in a position to lift the lockdown for Katherine today. It’s been extended for a further 48 [hours] to Wednesday 6pm. There are a few reasons for this. The first reason: there are more than 1,300 tests from Katherine and surrounding communities that we really want to get results back on and that won’t happen until later today. The second reason: the advice that there is still highly likely to be one or more positive cases in Katherine east that we have not yet found. There is persistent positive wastewater in that area. The experience shows that persistent positive wastewater is a potent for more positive cases. We’re still expecting more positive cases. I know that this is not the news that the people of Katherine wanted today. But I also know that you do not want to leave lockdown too soon only to go back into lockdown straight after. I want you to be able to get out of lockdown and stay out of lockdown. Which is why we need a few more days to get these results back and be more confident that the outbreak is safely contained so we can then transition to a lockout footing. Please stick with us, you are nearly there. I promise you, you are nearly there. Here is Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner on the NT outbreaks in Indigenous communities: We are now in a position to transition Robinson River from lockdown to lockout, effective immediately. A lockout means fully vaccinated residents are able to move about the community freely while wearing a mask and must stay within the Robinson River area, which includes the surrounding home lands. We expect a lockout for Robinson River will continue in some form until December 1, which covers a fortnight from the last positive case was in the community. Robinson River has shown all Territorians how a lockdown can be done and won in the remote community. A highly vaccinated community. A high rate of testing and responding rapidly to an outbreak. The vax rate in Robinson River has clearly made a massive difference. New Zealand today reported new 205 cases of Covid-19, and the death of a man in his forties who had the virus and died at Middlemore hospital. The virus has continued to spread around the country, with cases now in seven districts, including some in the South Island. According to the ministry of health data, 91% of eligible New Zealanders (those aged 12 and over) have had at least one dose of the vaccine, and 83% are fully vaccinated. The ministry uses HSU data to calculate that rate, which counts those engaged with health services and is a slight undercount of New Zealand’s population. According to Stats NZ population data, first-dose vaccination rates are around 89% of the eligible population and 76% of the full population, and those fully vaccinated are 81% of the eligible population, or 69% of the full population. Vaccination rates for eligible Māori are well behind the rest of the population, currently at 79% first doses and 64% second. A loosening of restrictions in Auckland and around the country was flagged by the government this month and is expected to be formalised next week. Not sure if anyone actually noticed, but here is part of the statement Eric Abetz has just made on why he abstained from voting on Pauline Hanson’s anti-vaccine mandate bill: The people of Tasmania are entitled to know why I abstained on a bill purporting to outlaw mandating Covid vaccination. The bill, which is a slightly amended version of a bill introduced into the House of Representatives, is right in principle but clumsy and unlawful in that it is unconstitutional. My view has always been that as soon as everyone who wants to be vaccinated has had a reasonable opportunity to be vaccinated. We should open up. If vaccination works, then we who are vaccinated have nothing to fear from the unvaccinated. For the record, I’m vaccinated and encourage people to be vaccinated. Also, for the record, I respect those who hold an alternate point of view. That’s how a civil liberal democratic society operates. As a representative who has consistently opposed vaccine passports and mandating vaccinations, I am overwhelmingly sympathetic to the bill. We are seeing good nurses, teachers, doctors, defence personnel and aged care workers being thrown out of work in circumstances where the loss of jobs and services to the public is highly disproportionate to the actual risk, at a time when we already have a shortage of personnel in these areas. The thought of a two-tiered society – the vaxed and the unvaxed - is to split and divide our community which is to weaken it. My view has consistently been that we should educate, not discriminate. We should convince, not coerce. The bill before the Senate would seek to override the states and stop funding to them if they mandate in any circumstance. Its constitutionality is highly questionable and the consequences highly disruptive. It would see the GST arrangements ripped up. It stands to reason that if today the federal government is clothed with the power to override the states on vaccine mandates, it would also have the power to impose such mandates on the states. This is a two-edged sword. We cannot stop living because we are scared of dying. The lockdowns and restrictions can’t and shouldn’t continue from general health, mental health and economic perspectives. We need to learn to live with Covid. Vaccine passports have failed elsewhere and they will fail here while costing huge sums to administer while restricting freedoms. Tasmanians can be assured I will continue to support their vaccination choices on the basis of the standard set by the Australian Immunisation Handbook, which declares valid legal consent is required and that means no “undue influence, manipulation or coercion”. Liberal National MP George Christensen - who is on his way out the door of the federal parliament - had some choice words for his own party’s state leadership at a function hosted by the rightwing Australian Conservative Political Action Conference. “I’m going to get in trouble for this, I don’t care,” Christensen said before launching a broadside at state opposition leader David Crisafulli and others. Where’s David Crisafulli on these pandemic restrictions? If I was the leader of the opposition, I would have been on the stage [on Saturday] supporting all of these people who are protesting. It’s great we’ve had ScoMo come out just this week saying that governments need to back off and we need our freedoms back. That should have been said long ago. But that’s being said now, that’s great – it needs to be followed up with action ... so people don’t go and vote for these minor parties. Christensen agreed with a question from the audience that conservatives needed to organise to prevent “ball-less dicks” from being preselected. There needs to be more of us [conservatives], so those other types don’t get in. Christensen said the government should stop sending vaccine data to the states and that the government (a party that he, of course, remains a part of) had “no cojones” to reform the ABC. AAP has an update on what is happening in the NT: Most unvaccinated travellers are now barred from entering the Northern Territory as authorities nervously wait to learn if a Covid-19 outbreak has spread to another Indigenous community. No new cases have been detected in the past 24 hours, but chief minister Michael Gunner has warned more are likely. The Aboriginal community of Binjari, about 330km south of Darwin, entered an extreme lockdown late on Saturday after nine residents were diagnosed with the virus. It brought the current cluster to 35 cases, with the lockdown extended to the neighbouring community of Rockhole due to its close ties with the people of Binjari. The nearby town of Katherine and the Aboriginal community of Robinson River, 800km to the east, also remain locked down. That is scheduled to end at 6pm on Monday. However, Gunner has said it could be extended for several more weeks if the situation deteriorates. He is expected to provide an update later on Monday. Residents in the districts surrounding Binjari and Katherine have been ordered to wear face masks in most public place. The Australian defence force has also been called in to help transfer positive cases and close contacts to the Centre of National Resilience at Howard Springs, just south of Darwin. Queensland has a new CHO. It is worth pointing out again how the prime minister has decided to seize on “binary” positions (obviously he wouldn’t feel the same about gender not being binary – there are still some issues the PM feels black-and-white about). But as he seeks to recast himself as the “sensible centre” – the latest incarnation of his “quiet Australian” appeal, you will be hearing more about the “binary” nature of other people’s positions, and how Morrison himself sits in the grey. Here he was on his “governments should get out of people’s lives” message, despite leading a government which is very big on intervention: So I don’t buy this binary proposition that somehow, you are either for or against this cycle. Times change over that circumstance and governments that are interested in balanced, practical, sensible decisions will make them. And here he is on how he views his own position – as he so often does, when asked to defend his 180 changes in positions, mistruths, lies or hypocrisies, Morrison pivots to recasting himself as the middle – where the “sensible” Australians sit. Since I became prime minister, and I have always made it clear, there are those who would drag me over here and there are those who want to drag me over there. I know where Australians are. They are not in the extremes, they want to make sensible assurances, weighing up all the best evidence and make sure we stay right there in the middle, where we are able to ensure that we can keep Australians safe and save lives and safe livelihoods. And I think that’s what they expect of a prime minister and government – not to be distracted and dragged from one side of the binary divide to the other. I don’t see it in those terms. You will be hearing a lot more about that between now and the election. It’s important to catch it when it happens. Labor is concentrating on IR issues today: Here is how the failed Phon bill against vaccine mandates played out. In the end, because neither Pauline Hanson nor Malcolm Roberts are in Canberra, the only votes recorded for the bill were the five LNP senators who crossed the floor. That was the first press conference Scott Morrison has held with the Canberra press gallery in about three weeks. It went for less than 30 minutes. Q: China and Taiwan have both gone to seek entry into the CPTPP [trade pact]. What are your thoughts on that? Scott Morrison: We will work with those issues, and we had quite a few discussions, quite a few, with Japan come their former prime minister and current. It sets a high benchmark people have to achieve, and it is important that those who are seeking to become part of an arrangement like that would want to have a track record of [not] coercing other trade partners. On his rogue senators who voted for a bill the government doesn’t support (Pauline Hanson’s), Scott Morrison says: The Liberal party and the National party, we do not run it as an autocracy. We don’t run people out of our party if we happen to disagree on an issue they feel strongly about. The government opposed the bill on Saturday and the bill has not been successful. We do not agree with the measures that were in the bill, which would indeed threaten funding for hospitals and schools to states; a bill that will seek to centralise power more in Canberra... I respect the fact that individual members will express a view and vote accordingly for those, [as] what happened today. We are the parties, we can deal with any differences and difficulties that occur from time to time. He then, as he so often does, makes it about himself. Scott Morrison: Since I became prime minister, I have always made it clear, there are those who would drag me over here and there are those who want to drag me over there. I know where Australians are. They are not in the extremes, they want to make sensible assurances, weighing up all the best evidence and make sure we stay right there in the middle, where we are able to ensure that we can keep Australia safe and save lives and safe livelihoods. And I think that’s what they expect of a prime minister and government – not to be distracted and dragged from one side of the binary divide to the other. I don’t see it in those terms. The questions continue. Q: [You say] people have had a gutful of governments telling them what to do .... Why didn’t you move on opening up to fully vaccinated visa holders a month ago, when the New South Wales government were hoping to take them in? Scott Morrison: Don’t confuse the issues. Our government has had to make decisions that have had to reach into people‘s lives and it was very necessary in the midst of that pandemic. I’m not speaking against those decisions whatsoever. What we’ve done is a government is we haven’t been driven by ideology, we’ve been driven by the practical situation in what the nation is faced. ... You’ve got a deal with the situation as you find it ... . As circumstances change, that is the time to ask [governments] to move back, which is what the national plan was designed to do. So I don’t buy this binary proposition that somehow, you’re either for or against this cycle. Times change over that circumstance and governments that are interested in balanced, practical, sensible decisions will make them. The official visa announcement is as follows: From 1 December 2021, fully vaccinated eligible visa holders can come to Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption. Eligible visa holders include skilled and student cohorts, as well as humanitarian, working holiday-maker and provisional family visa holders. Under these arrangements, travellers must: Be fully vaccinated with a completed dosage of a vaccine approved or recognised by Australia’s Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) Hold a valid visa for one of the eligible visa subclasses Provide proof of their vaccination status Present a negative Covid-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test taken within three days of departure. Travellers to Australia must comply with the quarantine requirements in the state or territory of their arrival, and any other state or territory to which they plan to travel. The return of skilled workers and international students to Australia will further cement our economic recovery, providing the valuable workers our economy needs and supporting our important education sector. From 1 December 2021, Australia will also welcome back fully vaccinated citizens from Japan and the Republic of Korea. Under these arrangements, citizens of Japan and the Republic of Korea who hold a valid Australian visa will be able to travel from their home country quarantine-free to participating states and territories, without needing to seek a travel exemption. Under these arrangements, travellers must: Depart from their home country Be fully vaccinated with a completed dosage of a vaccine approved or recognised by the TGA Hold a valid Australian visa Provide proof of their vaccination status Present a negative Covid-19 PCR test taken within three days of departure. Today’s announcement follows earlier changes which have seen us welcome home fully vaccinated Australians, permanent residents and their immediate family members since 1 November, and follows the commencement of the Singapore safe-travel zone yesterday. Will Australia take in tourists from Europe, given the new wave of Covid the continent is dealing with? It will be a “step by step” approach, says Scott Morrison. These are the visa classes included in the announcement: From 1 December 2021, fully vaccinated eligible visa holders can now travel to Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption. Eligible visa holders are people who hold the following visas: Visa Subclass 200 – Refugee visa Subclass 201 – In-country Special Humanitarian visa Subclass 202 – Global Special Humanitarian visa Subclass 203 – Emergency Rescue visa Subclass 204 – Woman at Risk visa Subclass 300 – Prospective Marriage visa Subclass 400 – Temporary Work (Short Stay Specialist) visa Subclass 403 – Temporary Work (International Relations) visa (other streams, including Australian Agriculture Visa stream) Subclass 407 – Training visa Subclass 408 – Temporary Activity visa Subclass 417 – Working Holiday visa Subclass 449 – Humanitarian Stay (Temporary) visa Subclass 457 – Temporary Work (Skilled) visa Subclass 461 – New Zealand Citizen Family Relationship visa Subclass 462 – Work and Holiday visa Subclass 476 – Skilled – Recognised Graduate visa Subclass 482 – Temporary Skill Shortage visa Subclass 485 – Temporary Graduate visa Subclass 489 – Skilled – Regional (Provisional) visa Subclass 491 – Skilled Work Regional (Provisional) visa Subclass 494 – Skilled Employer Sponsored Regional (Provisional) visa Subclass 500 – Student visa Subclass 580 – Student Guardian visa (closed to new applicants) Subclass 590 – Student Guardian visa Subclass 785 – Temporary Protection visa Subclass 790 – Safe Haven Enterprise visa Subclass 870 – Sponsored Parent (Temporary) visa Subclass 988 – Maritime Crew visa What does “fully vaccinated” mean, as a visa holder? The home affairs website lays it out as: Australia considers you to be fully vaccinated if you have completed a course of a Therapeutic Goods Administration-approved or recognised vaccine. This includes mixed doses. Current vaccines and dosages accepted for the purposes of travel are: Two doses at least 14 days apart of: AstraZeneca Vaxzevria AstraZeneca Covishield Pfizer/Biontech Comirnaty Moderna Spikevax Sinovac Coronavac Bharat Biotech Covaxin Sinopharm BBIBP-CorV (for 18-60-year-olds). Or one dose of: Johnson &amp; Johnson/Janssen-Cilag Covid vaccine. This press conference is about the changes to the international border restrictions. Here is the nub of that announcement: From the 1 December 2021, fully vaccinated eligible visa holders will be able to come to Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption. Eligible visa holders including skilled migrants and student visa holders as well as temporary working holiday makers and provisional family visa holidays. In addition to the introduction of the travel bubble from Singapore, which only started on the 21st, from the 1 December 2021 Australia will also welcome back fully vaccinated citizens from Japan and Korea. Under these arrangements, citizens of Japan and Korea who hold a valid visa will be able to travel from their home countries, quarantine-free, to participate in that program where stated ... without needing to seek a travel exemption. The return of skilled workers and students to Australia is a major milestone in our pathway back, it’s a major milestone about what Australians have been able to achieve and enable us to do... We’re looking forward to that occurring from 1 December. We have done this in an orderly way – at first we said, ‘let’s get Australians home for fully vaccinated’, and that’s been occurring for the first of this month. And so from the first of next month, we will come back to students, start looking back at the skilled visas that are needed to ensure we are able to take full advantage of the economic recovery that we are working to secure. And here is the campaign message in a nutshell from Scott Morrison: So this national plan enables governments to step back and Australians to step forward so they can look forward. As the rewriting of the narrative continues, Scott Morrison remembers there was a national plan he was championing not so long ago – but now it is all about getting government out of people’s lives: Our national plan, which I bought to the premiers and chief ministers back in June, was about opening safely so we can remain safely open. And we are making great progress on the plan. We have sensibly and safely taken governments to a position where they are getting out of people’s lives ... The national plan was not about entrenching government and people’s lives, it was about governing our people’s lives and that all we agreed to do, not just once but twice. And to keep going down that path... The whole point of the national plan was to move forward, to look forward and to ensure that the many sacrifices that Australians have to endure ... and now we have a more than 80% double dose vaccination, that is extraordinary. The prime minister opens by taking credit for Australia’s reopening (where much of the heavy lifting was done by the states) and with a new campaign message – “Australia is looking forward” (Josh Frydenberg tried this out this morning in his interviews). Australians are looking forward looking forward to Christmas, looking forward to being at the Ashes, looking forward to coming together, looking forward to 2022. Australians are looking forward and there is much that we’ve been through together as a nation over the recent years. There’s been much that Australians have had to sacrifice and has been many decisions that governments, including my own, have had to make over these past few years – necessary decisions with difficult ones. But together we’ve achieved something that few countries have, especially developing – we have one of the lowest fatality rates of Covid in the world. We have one of the strongest advanced economies going through Covid in the world. And now we have one of the highest vaccination rates of countries in the world. These are extraordinary achievements by Australians. For those who missed it, it is worth pointing out that the government allowed debate on Phon’s bill – which it was not going to support – at the expense of a private member’s bill from its own side which was seeking to give the Northern Territory the right to set its own euthanasia laws. One Nation’s vaccine mandate bill has just been rejected by the Senate, despite five government senators crossing the floor. Liberals Alex Antic, Gerard Rennick and Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, National Matt Canavan and Country Liberal Sam McMahon voted for One Nation’s bill, while the rest of the government, Labor, Greens and crossbench voted against. In one final twist, Pauline Hanson and Malcolm Roberts were unable to vote for their own bill because they are still in Queensland, attending parliament remotely. Hanson asked for leave to be granted to record that they were in support - and president Slade Brockman denied her that leave. The government leader in the Senate, Simon Birmingham, then explained that during remote participation senators can state their voting intention so it is recorded in Hansard, but “it doesn’t change the tally ... there is no process to change the tally of votes”. So in the end all Hanson got was a line or two in Hansard. Pauline Hanson not being in the chamber, and also being on the crossbench, means she can’t vote on her own bill, for those wondering. Jacqui Lambie is ABSOLUTELY ON FIRE in the Senate, speaking out in favour of vaccine mandates in a belter of a speech, laying out the “competing rights” argument that says people have the right to be safe. She is blasting the suggestion that people who are not vaccinated are discriminated against, saying people have choices, but those choices have consequences. Having the freedom to choose isn’t the same as having the freedom to avoid the consequences of that choice. You have freedom to make a choice. But if you make a choice, those choices have consequences. Lambie gives the example of a taxi driver who is expected to have a driver’s licence, or a police check for someone working with children as equivalent measures in society. You put others before ourselves. You can decide not to choose those checks, no one is forcing you, but if you don’t do them, you can’t work where you want to work, it is as simple as that. That is the way it is. If you want to work as a cabbie, you need to licence to drive a cab, people without a licence are not being discriminated against. If you want to work in aged care, you need to have a flu vaccine, that has always been in place since before Covid-19 was even a twinkle in a Chinese bat’s eye for goodness sake, that is the way it is. People have a right to choose, but you don’t have right to put vulnerable people’s lives at risk.”She also accuses One Nation of using the bill as a “fundraising exercise”. The problem is politicians like senator Hanson and senator Roberts are using people’s fear to boost their own election campaigns, and they are using fear to make money and that’s what this is about from One Nation. It’s all about cash, it’s all about power, it’s all about One Nation seats, and that is all this is. Gerard Rennick was elected from the third spot on the LNP ticket – where he had been regulated by his party during preselection as a slim chance. Then the Labor vote in Queensland collapsed and Labor only managed to elect one senator, clearing the way for the Rennick’s entry. Mike Bowers checked in on how the Senate was going this morning The prime minister will hold a press conference at 11.30am. That is where he will announce the visa changes (and also defend “both siding” the protests). Pauline Hanson isn’t actually in the Senate – she has stayed in Queensland Just a reminder vaccine mandates are not new – it was Scott Morrison who introduced “no jab, no play” rules for daycares while social services minister in 2015. Liberal senator Gerard Rennick has spoken in Senate debate on One Nation’s vaccination mandate bill. As Guardian Australia reported earlier in November, Rennick wants the indemnity scheme for people who experience adverse effects from vaccines to be improved, including by removing a $5,000 threshold for costs before patients can make a claim. In the Senate, Rennick added to the list, saying he wants: Compensation for loss of income Immediate compensation, without a waiting period of months “In the case of healthy people with no underlying conditions, the onus should be on the government to prove that the injury is not caused by the vaccine”; and The standard of proof should be that “on the balance of probabilities” the vaccine caused the adverse event, not the criminal standard Checking some facts here: the commonwealth has said people have to show evidence of an adverse effect, the nature of the injury and its “likely relationship to a Covid-19 vaccination”. So Rennick’s characterisation of having to prove “beyond a reasonable doubt” that link appears incorrect. Rennick made some unsubstantiated claims that people are getting exemptions from their doctor, but mandates are still requiring them to get a second vaccine despite having an adverse reaction to the first. He said: Politicians should not be holding people to ransom with their health ... They should not be held for ransom with their livelihoods, they should not be held to ransom by separating them from their children, they should not be held to ransom by discriminating against their children. This is all happening while jurisdictions, including Queensland, try to convince people to get vaccinated so they reach the targets set by national cabinet. And while the NT deals with an outbreak in Indigenous communities. Independent senator Jacqui Lambie has been stronger on the issue than government senators Back in the Senate: We have mentioned this before, but here was Scott Morrison in August speaking on vaccine passports with Sydney radio host Ray Hadley. Hadley: However, what I’ve tried to explain to people – including a bloke that’s giving me a hammering this morning about all of this – is if he wants to travel domestically, internationally, or go to the football or go to the races or go anywhere, there will be organisations – not because they’ve been told to do it – who’ll say: we want to see your vaccination passport. And I’ve now got it on my phone. Someone – in fact, my wife – showed me how to do it last night. So I’ve got my two jabs on my phone so I can show it to people if I need to. But I think people have got to understand that life will be different for them if they don’t get vaccinated. They’ve got to understand that – whether you make it mandatory or not, their life will be different. Morrison: Well, that is true, and living with the virus will be different. I mean, it’s not going anywhere. You can’t eradicate it. So it’s still going to be there, and vaccination and the booster shots – we’ve already, you know, ordered for next year – will be part of, a part of that life, because you make a very good point. A business under property law has the ability to say ‘no, you can’t come in’, and they can ask for that. That’s a legitimate thing for them to do. And they are doing that to protect their own workers, to protect their other clients. And it’s got nothing to do with ideology, and this, you know, these issues around liberty and so on. We all believe in freedom, but we also believe in people being healthy, and the sheer fact of it is, if you’re not vaccinated, you represent a greater public health risk to yourself, to your family, to your community and others about you. So it’s only sensible that people will do sensible things to protect their public health. Switching to the (less dramatic) developments in the lower house for a moment - and Rebekha Sharkie has introduced a bill “to ban the importation of goods that are produced in whole or part by forced labour”. It’s the same as the measure that passed the Senate a few of months ago (Rex Patrick was the one who introduced that bill in the Senate, but the government did not support it). It is driven by concerns about China’s actions in Xinjiang - but the bill itself is not country-specific. Groups supporting the bill have issued a statement today urging the government to get on board with the plan. Ramila Chanisheff, the president of the Australian Uyghur Tangritagh Womens’ Association, said: We urge the Australian Government to support this bill and take meaningful action against slavery. The industrial scale at which Uyghurs are being held in internment and labour camps means immediate action on this issue is needed. Michele O’Neil, the president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, said there was “no possible defence for standing in the way of this bill”. Freya Dinshaw, a senior lawyer at Human Rights Law Centre, added: The Australian government should take this opportunity to strengthen its modern slavery laws by introducing a robust and transparent forced-labour ban that places the onus back on to importers to show their goods are slavery-free. We should all have confidence the goods we purchase are not made at the expense of other peoples’ freedom. Carolyn Kitto, co-director of anti-slavery group Be Slavery Free, said the bill would “give consumers the confidence they are not supporting slavery and slavery-like conditions in the imported products they purchase”. The Queensland Nationals senator Matt Canavan is speaking in support of Pauline Hanson’s bill, saying vaccine mandates are “unfair, cruel and unnecessary”. He says: You should not need to undergo a medical procedure to earn a living. Everybody should have the right to work and provide for their family, and no government in this free country that I was born in, has the right to take away people’s right to work and provide for their family. Canavan then has a rant about the efficacy of vaccine passports, saying they don’t work to reduce transmission. (This is despite the scientific evidence making clear that vaccines reduce transmission rates, contagion and the severity of the disease, and vaccine passports ensure that high-risk settings are less risky, so that fewer people get sick, get admitted to hospital or die from Covid.) Canavan says he supports vaccination but does not believe they are going to prevent future waves of the virus. I encourage others to be vaccinated because I think it does protect oneself from the severe disease Covid can inflict, but these vaccines do not seem to be doing a good job at stopping transmission. He also says he supports mandates in “narrowly targeted” settings such as in aged care, which, along with frontline quarantine workers, are the two areas subject to commonwealth mandates. He says the “politics of fear” is dividing the country, and the Hanson bill will help restore unity. Labor senator Kristina Keneally is now speaking, saying the opposition supports mandatory vaccines when based on public health advice. She then turns on the government, saying the prime minister, Scott Morrison, is “pandering to these extremist elements” by allowing debate on Hanson’s bill. While we wait for more from the Senate, AAP has an update on the coming announcement for Australian visa holders: Visa holders, skilled migrants and international students will soon be allowed to return to Australia. Prime minister Scott Morrison will make an announcement on Monday confirming the arrangements. It has been nearly two years since these groups have been able to come to Australia without having to quarantine after international borders were closed due to Covid-19. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said allowing more people into Australia from overseas was the natural next step. He told Sky News: We want to allow skilled migrants to come to our country as well as international students sooner than later. International students are worth some $40 billion to our economy, and we know that there are workforce shortages out there and skilled workers can play a key part. It comes after Australia welcomed tourists from Singapore on Sunday, following the start of a quarantine-free travel bubble between the two nations. Matt Canavan, the LNP senator, is seconding Pauline Hanson’s bill: Pauline Hanson is introducing her vaccine discrimination bill in the Senate, which the government has allowed in place of the territory rights bill being sponsored by NT CLP senator Sam McMahon. The Covid-19 Vaccination Status (Prevention of Discrimination) Bill 2021 prohibits discrimination based on a person’s Covid-19 vaccination status by the commonwealth, state and territory governments, statutory authorities, local governments and private enterprises. In introducing the bill, Hanson said there was a “pandemic of discrimination” in Australia against people who have refused the vaccination”. One Nation would not stand by and witness the demise of Australian democracy and freedom without a fight, Hanson said. We don’t do this lightly. We do it with sincere regret that such legislation is even necessary. But make no mistake: it is not only necessary, but absolutely vital. Senators here are on notice if you don’t support my legislation, then you don’t support Australian democracy and freedom and you don’t support the right to choose. We are not here to wield power against the Australian people. We are here to wield the power of the Australian people. We have no right to take away their rights. She also accused the prime minister, Scott Morrison, of being “weak”, and said he could use the advice of the solicitor general to improve the bill if the government could not support it in its current form. And in the Senate: Anthony Albanese was also on ABC radio RN this morning, speaking about the prime minister’s rhetoric on the protests: I hold the prime minister responsible for failing to call out, unequivocally, the violent and extreme comments that are made, the taking of gallows, the threatening of Labor MPs and premiers and independents, the fact that so many MPs have to have security at the moment. And there is always a but, Fran. We heard it again from Simon Birmingham. Barnaby Joyce, this morning, we heard as well. The prime minister should be capable of just showing leadership, not being weak, and saying that these comments and this behaviour is unacceptable in Australia in 2021. That answer is followed up with this question: Q: Minister, do you believe some of your colleagues are a bit stupid for threatening to block certain bills over something the prime minister can’t control? Simon Birmingham: I’d never get the point of using that sort of description towards my colleagues. Simon Birmingham also did a quick doorstop interview this morning, where he was asked if he had spoken to his colleagues Gerard Rennick or Alex Antic about their threats to veto government legislation unless the prime minister stops vaccine mandates in the states: Well, I and other members of the government have had many discussions, as we always do with our colleagues. I respect the confidentiality of discussions with my colleagues. I understand that they have passionate views, and it’s why the Liberal and National parties allow our amendments without threat of expulsion, like the Labor party has to exercise their rights and their will. But equally I, along with every other Liberal senator, were elected by voters supporting the Liberal party, as a result of the hard work of Liberal party members and volunteers, and they want to make sure that I engage in support of the government as much as possible across all areas of our agenda. And I’m sure that holds true for what members expect of all our colleagues. The House is also sitting – Tony Smith is in the speaker’s chair, but not for too much longer. He announced in the last sitting he would be stepping down to ensure a smooth handover and so he could speak on his electorate again. Kevin Andrews is favourite at this stage to take over. And the Senate business agenda is out (a reminder: the government sets the agenda, although it can be changed by the Senate through motions, so when these agendas first come out, it is what the government wants to bring to the fore). Why the constant need for qualifications on this issue? Fran Kelly asks Simon Birmingham. The leader of the government in the Senate pivots to the question he wants to answer, saying: This is this is actually about making sure that we keep all Australians together through the process of finalising our responses to Covid-19. We’ve done so well as a country through 2020 and 2021. Estimates show that the national response to Covid has saved in excess of 30,000 lives, from closing our international borders to the work that we’ve done with states and territories right across the country – Labor and Liberal have all done – have saved tens of thousands of Australian lives. They’ve also, from our economic responses such as jobkeeper and other policies, saved many thousands of Australian businesses and hundreds of thousands of Australian jobs – estimates of more than 700,000 jobs being saved through our national responses to the pandemic. The vaccine rates across this country now are some of the highest in the world – 91% first vax, in excess of 85% now second-dose vaccination. These are world leading rates and now should give us confidence to try to move together as united as possible into the next stages, which the prime minister will further outline today in terms of opening our international borders – as we’ve been doing safely and progressively – to fully vaccinated international students and essential workers coming back to our country. Q: I want to come to it that in a minute. But just to stay with the tenor and the temperature of some of these protests that MPs have told us they’ve received death threats – federal politicians are saying their electoral offices are being inundated with, you know, angry anti-vaxxers. If the temperature isn’t worried, are you worried that we could see the same type of political violence that’s occurred in the US or even in the UK? Could we see physical attacks against politicians here? Are you concerned at [that]? Birmingham: That’s always a concern, perhaps in the back of the mind of any politician. Q: Is it? Birmingham: Ultimately, I’ve seen, you know, vandalism, attacks and other things on my own electorate office, and have had occasions where I – as many others –have had police engagement in terms of some of my public events and activities. That’s a sad part of public life. We should always try to keep the debate as respectful as possible and that is why, indeed, those who seek to elevate it to the levels that do provoke or promote violence in any form deserve condemnation – and have been condemned by the prime minister, by the leader of the opposition, by both sides of politics in this country, as they should be. For those who missed it, here was Simon Birmingham attempting to rewrite the narrative on how the prime minister answered questions on the anti-vaccine/mandate/far-right/conspiracy protests last week, which included threats of violence and death against sitting MPs. Fran Kelly: What angered many is the way the prime minister seemed to qualify his condemnation. He said that while he has no tolerance for violence, it’s time for Australians to take their lives back, expressly expressing sympathy for those who are demonstrating. I mean, doesn’t that signal to protesters that the prime minister’s got their backs? Birmingham: No, Fran. I mean, the prime minister listens to all Australians and listens very carefully to the concerns that he hears not just from those who might turn out to protest – who are usually only a very small proportion of the populace – but to those that he hears from right across the length and breadth of the country. And – Kelly: Sure. But was that the time to send that message to them rather than just stop at condemning those who bring gallows, death threats, all sorts of violent acts to a protest? Birmingham: Fran, he did condemn them, and – Kelly: And then he qualified it. Birmingham: And the condemnation was clear and he repeated it again subsequently, and the government has continued to do so. And I’ve certainly done so in no uncertain terms, and I’m happy to do so again. As I said, Fran, those activities, those actions, those banners and placards have no place in respectful debate, deserve condemnation, and we have done so. That doesn’t mean that you don’t keep trying to listen to all Australians, and legitimate concerns expressed in more peaceful ways. Victoria has posted its daily cases, deaths and vaccine numbers. Peter Dutton is smiling again. Stuart Robert, though, admits he doesn’t actually know how the Senate works (from a chat with the Nine network this morning). I’ve been here 14 years representing the people of my electorate and I’m still yet to work out how the Senate works. It’s a little, interesting place but we’re a broad church in the Liberal party. There are strong views and strong passions but we always tend to work it through in the interests of the country, so I’m very confident we’ll do the same thing in the next fortnight. AAP has pulled together the Morrison minister’s quotes from this morning trying to quell the level of discontent within its own ranks: Senior ministers have insisted the federal government won’t be held to ransom by rogue coalition senators over the issue of vaccine mandates. As parliament gets ready to sit for its final fortnight for the year, Queensland senator Gerard Rennick and South Australian senator Alex Antic have said they would withhold their vote from all legislation unless vaccine mandates are scrapped. One Nation leader Pauline Hanson has already promised to cause “mayhem” for the government over the issue. Finance minister Simon Birmingham said the government would not seek to overhaul mandates. He told ABC Radio on Monday The government won’t be dictated to, we will do as we’ve always done, which is work with our health advisers. What I urge any parliamentarian to do is not to hold one issue to another unrelated issue, each piece of legislation ought to be considered on its merits. Birmingham said he still respected the right of other government members to cross the floor of the Senate. It is a time-honoured tradition of the Liberal National party ... that we allow our MPs to cross the floor without being tossed out of the party. However, it’s a right that should always be used sparingly and I would urge any member of parliament to not conflate unrelated issues. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said discussions were ongoing with the disaffected senators over their vaccine mandate stance. He told the Seven Network: We will continue to present to the parliament important pieces of legislation. The treasurer said the issue of vaccine mandates were for state governments. Meanwhile, opposition leader Anthony Albanese has accused prime minister Scott Morrison of pandering to extremists for not fully condemning violent demonstrators protesting against vaccine mandates. Morrison had drawn criticism for urging states with mandates to allow freedoms for the unvaccinated, such as being allowed to enter retail and hospitality venues. Albanese told ABC Radio: The prime minister should be capable of just showing leadership, not being weak, and saying these comments and this behaviour is unacceptable in Australia in 2020. I hold the prime minister responsible for failing to call out unequivocally, the violent and extreme comments that are made, the taking of gallows, the threatening of Labor MPs and premiers and independents. The government also plans to use the final sitting weeks of parliament for the year to pass its religious freedom laws. Barnaby Joyce, who says the National party – the government’s junior partner – did not sign up to the Glasgow communique which was voluntarily signed by the Australian government, wants to know why LNP senators are bringing a disagreement they have with state government policies to the federal government: The federal government is not stopping people in Queensland from going to the football, the federal government is not stopping them from going to the shops, or for going to the pub – they are state laws so this is an issue that you’ve got to take up with the state. The federal government does not believe in compulsory vaccines, or vaccine mandates. Why are you bringing a fight into the federal government? NSW has posted its latest case, death and vaccine numbers: Everything seems completely normal and fine in the Coalition party room at the moment: There is still a lot of opposition to the government’s attempts to legislate voter ID laws – despite there being no problem or issue which needs to be addressed. Bus drivers are turning off their Opal machines across Sydney’s inner west and western suburbs today, as part of industrial action taken against private operator Transit Systems. Drivers are protesting against a “two-tiered” pay structure that allows Transit Systems to pay some drivers lower wages, and provide worse conditions than others doing the same job. David Babineau, secretary of the Rail, Tram and Bus Union NSW, says Transit Systems has refused to attend negotiation meetings, forcing drivers into industrial action. Transit Systems has refused pointblank to do the right thing and give its workers the same pay and conditions for doing the same job. This two-tiered system is absolutely rotten, and of course Transit Systems wants to keep that arrangement in place if it means they can get away with paying wither workers less. All bus drivers want is to be treated fairly, and they have had enough. That’s why on Monday they’re taking industrial action to turn off their Opal machines, carrying passengers for free so Transit Systems can’t profit. The two-tiered system came after some regions in the city had their bus routes privatised, allowing Transit Systems to hire new drivers who are not on government contacts. Babineau: This is what happens when public transport is privatised and run for profit – the public are robbed of their reliable services and workers are robbed of their pay and conditions. And it turns out that there are still some vaccine mandates the federal government is in support of – the ones it has set for international travellers coming in to Australia. Josh Frydenberg: Again, people who have come to Australia need to be double vaccinated and that is a requirement that applies and therefore you don’t have to go through the usual [quarantine]. As you know, the international students are a big part of our economy worth some $40bn and skilled migrants play a critical role. Last week I sat down with many Australians leading CEOs and company chairpeople and a single biggest issue, the most pressing issue for them, was allowing the borders to reopen and skilled workers to come back in because we do have work shortages and job ads are now 30% higher than they were at the start of the pandemic, and that is a real impact on the economy, so the sooner we can open safely, the better for the economy and for people’s jobs. Josh Frydenberg is also asked about the new Covid waves sweeping through the northern hemisphere as it enters winter and is asked if Australia is prepared for that, if it happens here when the weather cools off again next year: As I said here before, we want to look forward not back, and looking back is looking at lockdowns. That’s why booster shots is so important and we have been able to secure that vaccine so people should be encouraged to get the booster shot when they are eligible, but I think we can live safely with the virus. Of course, there will be hospitalisations and tragically, even some deaths, but the alternative to see economy-wide lockdowns and seeing people confined to their homes and, to see a repeat of the curfews, that is not on. I think it had a big impact, not just in terms of job losses, but it also had what Patrick McGorry has termed an impact on people’s wellbeing, so as not just about preventing Covid and the illness and is we should also be focused on people’s general wellbeing as well. Josh Frydenberg was also on the Seven network this morning, trying to walk both sides of the line on state vaccine rules (which were established as part of the national plan which came from national cabinet, which the prime minister chairs) as the federal government tries to shift any blame for vaccine angst to the (Labor) state governments. Q: State governments have already enforced work, travel and going to the pub [mandates]. Would the [federal] government ever overturn that? Frydenberg: These are matters for state governments. Q: Treasurer, you cannot handball like that. Frydenberg: [The federal government don’t] make those laws. Q: I know, but months in the past, you and the prime minister have all said, yes, it is every employer’s right to mandate vaccination and we want everyone vaccinated. Now, you seem to be backing off? Frydenberg: I’ll tell you what, I’m not backing off, the need for a string of people to get the jab and I think it has been a great success, our voluntary vaccination program that has seen Australia past the 85% threshold double dose. That is wonderful news, and in those states and territories where there has been extended lockdowns, there has been extended lockdowns, the ACT, NSW and Victoria, those vaccination rates are even higher, so our focus has been rolling out that they seem to as many people as possible, and as you know, that has allowed our economy to open up. That’s our focus. It has never been a mandatory vaccination program, it was always been voluntary. Q: You have said in the past, every employer has the right to mandate vaccinations in the workplace. Do you still agree with that? Frydenberg: I absolutely agree that those employers have those rights and so do the state governments under their own public health orders. I think it has been really effective, to be honest, to see the vaccine uptake increase to ease those restrictions. I was out in the CBD over the weekend and it was pumping. People moving about from venue to venue, and obviously, that is good news for our economy as well. As you know, we have an announcement today about skilled workers coming in and more international students come in. That is the next stage, and one of them reasons we can do that safely is because the vaccination rates in Australia are so high. Simon Birmingham may be trying to walk back the “both sides” of the so-called freedom protests, which included threats of violence and death against sitting state MPs, but Barnaby Joyce is holding the line. There is a lot of work being done by a small group of people to make sure those protesting aren’t all labelled as “mad”. This is despite that same group of people usually condemning peaceful protests from the left. Here is Joyce on the Seven network this morning: There’s not there’s not a person in this building, not any one, I hope exists that says that threatening a person’s life, building gallows, doing all that kind of total garbage is something that is just … we don’t want it. OK. So, no one is suggesting for one second, we do that. And it’s outrageous. But just because there’s a crazy person in the Carlton crowd at a football game that throws a rock doesn’t mean that every person in the Carlton crowd is crazy. We’ve got to understand the frustrations that are behind this. And you can’t be saying, ‘Oh, well, you therefore you’re a sympathiser,’ because you acknowledge that there are also people in those protests, who are not outrageous, who are mums and dads, who are law-abiding citizens who also want to be heard. You can’t say every person in that crowd is somehow a you know, a madman or a mad woman or a bad person – they’re not. And when you say that, that is also is kind of insulting because there are a lot of people just there, they’ve just had, it they’re frustrated. And a reminder that there is a lot more to the Hunter Valley than coal. There has been very short notice for this photo opportunity just announced by Peter Dutton’s office: Picture Opportunity – Signing of the Exchange of Naval Nuclear Propulsion Information Agreement. That will happen with Dutton, the United States chargé d’affaires Michael Goldman and United Kingdom high commissioner Victoria Treadell. Labor leader Anthony Albanese is not buying it though: After Scott Morrison “both sided” last week’s anti-lockdown/mandate/far right protests, which included threats of violence and death (and gallows and guillotines) against elected MPs with this comment (made after saying he condemned the violent threats): Of course, there are many people who are feeling frustrated. I mean, over the last couple of years, governments have been telling Australians what to do. Now, there’s been a need for that as we’ve gone through the pandemic. But the time is now to start rolling all of that back. Simon Birmingham is now trying to walk it all back, telling ABC radio RN: We absolutely condemn any threats of violence, acts of violence in Australian political debate, they have no place at all. What is happening for visa holders waiting to get back into Australia now that the international border has been reopened? Karen Andrews: The Morrison government made it very, very clear that they are a priority in opening the borders was to make sure that we opened to Australian citizens and permanent residents. We have done that. We’re very much aware of other cohorts that we need to make sure are getting into the country. That includes international students. It also includes skilled workers. We know that there is a desperate need for skilled workers in this country. So the Morrison government has always been very clear that we would work in accordance with the national plan and we are now at over 80% vaccination rates across Australia double dosed. So we are going through the process now of reopening Australia to the world. Q: How soon will those visa holders be allowed in? Andrews: Well, it will be as soon as we can possibly do that and we will be looking at bringing those people back into Australia as soon as we possibly can. So it’s imminent. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews spoke to ABC News Breakfast about a new AFP taskforce this morning but was asked about her colleagues Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic threatening to withhold their votes over vaccine “mandates”: All parliamentarians are elected to do their job. And that means that they need to look at the legislation that is before the House and before the Senate. There is some pretty significant legislation that will be in the senate this morning and that includes one of my bill, which is the critical infrastructure bill. It’s a national security matter. Now, there is nothing more important in terms of keeping Australians safe and secure than passing national security legislation. So I would encourage all members and senators to focus on the job that they were elected to do, which is to turn up at parliament and to look at the legislation and give their views on it. In other news coming out of South Australia, the state is about to hit its 80% vaccination rate, which means it will open its borders to Victoria and NSW (with some conditions). The South Australian deputy premier (and attorney general) Vickie Chapman will step down from her ministerial roles after a vote of no confidence from the SA parliament late last week. An inquiry, which had been moved by Labor MPs and found support from former Liberal MPs who now sit on the crossbench, found Chapman had acted with a conflict of interest when she blocked a timber port on Kangaroo Island while planning minister. Chapman owned property on the island, which the inquiry said presented an actual and perceived interest in rejecting the port, which it said was, in the committee’s view, was a breach of the SA ministerial code of conduct. She announced her decision to step down from her ministerial roles while an investigation is carried out. Welcome to the start of the final parliament sitting for 2021. The next two weeks were meant to be about Australia’s “new normal” but instead it’s about what legislation the Morrison government can get through its own party room. Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic have both said they will withhold their votes, leaving the government even shorter in the Senate than usual, while the religious discrimination bill, which was meant to be a salve for conservatives after the marriage equality legislation, has angered both moderates and their more conservative colleagues. The integrity commission bill is also up in the air, with the crossbench wondering what it even does. So as a lead-up to an election year, it is not shaping up as the ideal last sitting for Scott Morrison and his cabinet. Throw in Barnaby Joyce and his followers doing all they can to talk down the government’s climate policy as actually doing anything, Morrison himself trying to harness vaccine and lockdown discontent and a new war of words brewing between the federal government and popular Labor state premiers, and it’s all a bit of a mess. Meanwhile, while Australia may be “opening up” the pandemic is not over, with the Northern Territory dealing with its most serious outbreak in more than a year – 35 people are now part of the cluster which has hit Indigenous communities. Health authorities have identified 385 close contacts and 374 have been contacted and are isolating while 314 have tested negative so far. NSW and Victoria are both still recording deaths from Covid infections; it’s a stark and heartbreaking reminder of just how dangerous this virus is. Australia could not remain in lockdown forever but it doesn’t mean that there is still not an impact. We’ll bring you all of the parliament happenings, as well as anything else, with Mike Bowers, Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Paul Karp and Daniel Hurst at your service in Canberra. Amy Remeikis is on the blog for the sitting duration, while the rest of the Guardian team is working on news across Australia for you. It being Monday, I have had only two coffees. That will change though. Ready?When I started my training to be a journalist eight years ago, I didn’t want to be a black reporter who only reported on race. I was interested in the topic, but when people spoke of ambitious beats, they pointed to politics, finance, and culture. I wanted to be on the biggest stories of the day and was scared of being pigeonholed. I started as a science journalist before switching to general news and loved the breadth of stories I worked on, both in the UK and internationally. But whenever I was asked what I wanted to specialise in, I didn’t have a clear answer. That changed once coronavirus spread across the UK and the biggest story of the year was right at my doorstep. Like much of the country, I was glued to my TV to watch the daily Covid briefings at the beginning of the pandemic. Startled by the way the daily death figures were announced, stripping away what I felt was the human suffering central to the crisis, I emailed the Guardian’s head of news and executive editor in April 2020 and asked to cover deaths as a mini-specialism. As I spoke to loved ones for the obituaries I wrote of those who died, and explored the trends of death rates with the data team, the disproportionate impact that Covid-19 was having on black and minority ethnic communities was impossible to deny. There wasn’t a biological explanation for why someone’s race made them more likely to die from coronavirus. Instead, Covid-19 thrived in communities with high levels of in-work poverty, poor housing, and lack of appropriate access to healthcare. Being from an ethnic minority in Britain made it much more likely to be at the bottom of the pile on each front, and thus more exposed to the deadly virus. Simply put, longstanding racial injustice and economic inequality is at the heart of understanding the coronavirus pandemic, the most significant crisis since the second world war – which in turn makes it fundamental to understanding modern Britain. The pandemic, and the death of George Floyd, was the catalyst for last summer’s Black Lives Matter demonstrations, the largest anti-racism protests in British history, and why the Guardian announced it would be hiring community affairs correspondents – the first in the paper’s history. The beat would be challenging: covering the lived experience of people of colour and telling the stories of burning economic injustices. I thought I was scared of being pigeonholed when I was 21. But my fears then came from the racist notion that the stories of people of colour mattered less than our white counterparts. This is most aptly put by Ta-Nehisi Coates, the American author and journalist, who wrote in his book of essays We Were Eight Years in Power: “I could think of no better place to study that effort than from the perspective of those whom that society excluded and pillaged … I did not feel pigeonholed in my role. I felt advantaged.” Almost a year into the role, it’s obvious to see how central our lives are to understanding who we are as a country and how we change – from highlighting the worrying gaps in vaccine uptake in different communities, to reporting on the government’s racial disparity report, which researchers distanced themselves from as it downplayed the impact of systemic racism, to exclusives that showed worrying levels of government interference in attempts to have controversial statues removed. By covering community affair stories, I’ve been able to keep my finger on the pulse on the issues driving the national agenda. My beat largely focuses on the impact of Westminster policies on the most marginalised communities, but sometimes my stories bring me to the heart of government. When Samuel Kasumu, No 10’s former race adviser, resigned, I got the exclusive interview. It was an important one, with Kasumu warning of another Stephen Lawrence-style tragedy if members of the government continue to inflame the culture wars gripping parts of the nation. But it’s the more mundane, everyday stories that I find myself most proud of. When I got the role, Hugh Muir, a senior assistant editor on the paper, told me to think of the bigger picture. When I sheepishly admitted to not looking at the print editions of the leading national newspapers each morning, he told me that I’d understand once I did. I saw that the stories told of ethnic minorities were ones of endless pain and suffering. But we know our lives have always been about much more than that. It’s about balance. So reporting on racial inequality has to go hand in hand with more joyful things, whether that’s writing about the viral Somali TikTok song dominating streaming platforms or people’s deep attachment to the Notting Hill carnival. As I sit down now in the morning to read the news leading the day, I see how nationals are better reflecting that: and the Guardian is leading the way, thanks in large part to my immensely talented colleagues. It’s worth noting, however, that the Guardian hasn’t always got it right. My colleague Maya Wolfe-Robinson’s incisive story exploring the paper’s chequered history of race reporting for our 200th anniversary shows how far we’ve come and how far we have left to go. I therefore write this piece knowing I stand on the shoulders of giants. I’m constantly learning in this role, and often turn to those who came before me. I’ll continue doing what I have in the past year – listening to those who have been told they are “hard to reach”. I became a journalist because I love talking to people and hearing their stories. I cringe when I think of how painfully wrong I was to think reporting on race and inequality was sidelining me from the biggest stories of the day (to be fair to me, I was wrong about a lot of things when I was 21). I also never imagined I would get to be a specialist on a patch like this, where I’m talking to people whose lives aren’t dissimilar to the community I grew up in. And my favourite thing about the job? When readers get in touch to tell me they’ve bought the paper, or ask how to get copies, because of a story I’d written. They see themselves in the paper and have a sense of ownership over the Guardian. We all should.Hemlock Hill Farm, a 120-acre organic farm near Cortlandt, New York, has been in the same family since 1939. As they prepare their turkeys for this Thursday’s Thanksgiving celebrations, farmer Trish Vasta says they are facing a strange holiday season for the second year in a row. Last week the American Farm Bureau Federation (AFBF) warned that costs of the traditional turkey feast has risen 14% over the past year. The cost increase, up from an average of $46.90 for a family group of 10 last year to $53.31 in 2021, works out at $6 a person. Within the overall 6.6% increase in the cost of the family sit-down, including stuffing, sweet potatoes, rolls with butter, peas, cranberries, a veggie tray, pumpkin pie with whipped cream, and coffee and milk, the cost of the bird has increased more than any other factor – 24%. “The food system is consolidated, with a handful of farms feeding thousands or millions of people. But the system is breaking down. People can’t get the food shipped, because the shipping system is not working right, so people are looking local,” Vasta said as groups of turkeys, know as a flock or rafter, gathered near feeders, presumably unaware of a fate that was fast approaching. Hemlock Hill Farm’s costs have risen too, with the price of everything from feed to straw for bedding rising 20% across the board. According to the AFBF’s senior economist, Veronica Nigh, several factors have contributed to the increase in this year’s holiday meals, including “dramatic disruptions to the US economy and supply chains over the last 20 months; inflationary pressure throughout the economy; difficulty in predicting demand during the Covid-19 pandemic and high global demand for food, particularly meat”. While prices are rising, rumors of a turkey shortage were not realized at the Stop&amp;Shop in Poughkeepsie, New York. “Got turkeys stacked up to the roof,” informed a sales manager. That’s not to say people aren’t worried about shortages. A woman passing by with a Butterball turkey in her cart, who gave her name as Wanda, said she had come by early for her bird because she had heard there could be shortages. Circumstances, she said, hadn’t reached the level of consumer panic that accompanied the first weeks of pandemic lockdown. “It’s not like that yet, at least,” she said. “Wait for Christmas.” Nor was Stop &amp; Shop taking any chances. Just to be safe the store was also limiting sales to one per $25 spent to discourage turkey hoarding. Portents of empty shelves suggest inflationary psychology is hardening. Fears of inflation are growing, with consumers expecting prices to continue rising over the next year, amid a stew of unpredictable inflationary influences and supply-chain blockages. Buying a turkey early, then, is in keeping with an early surge in Christmas retail shopping – a conspicuous slow-motion panic that may speed up as Christmas approaches. . Thanksgiving can be a stressful celebration even in a normal year. The last two have been especially so. Last year’s was at the height of the pandemic, and a fractious election cycle. This year the US is still suffering the aftermath of Covid-19 and stories about inflation and supply-chain shortages abound. But it seems, at least, that fears of a turkey shortage have been overblown. Butterball, the North Carolina poultry giant that produces more than 1bn pounds of turkey each year, told the Guardian that it had been preparing for this Thanksgiving a year in advance and prices “remain roughly the same as previous years, and turkey is one of the most economical parts of the Thanksgiving meal. “While we can’t speak to the rest of the industry, Butterball, which historically represents about one-third of all turkeys on the Thanksgiving dinner table, can affirm that our products are available in stores this season,” said Christa Leupen, a Butterball spokesperson. “In fact, this Thanksgiving, we’ve shipped a record volume of fresh and frozen whole turkeys.” Major industrial producers like Butterball, however, look to economies of scale that small producers have limited access to. The price for Hemlock’s turkeys, at $5.99/lb, is close to five times the price of a Butterball bird. But they come with the knowledge that the bird itself has at least lived a life “that has been more sustainable”. An effect of the pandemic and its aftermath, Vasta added, was that customers may be more willing to entertain the belief that dinner should come from within a hundred miles of home. “More people are thinking about going local rather than just hitting the grocery store,” she said. “The pandemic has really pushed a lot of people to act, and that’s helped local farms.” Part of a farmer’s life, of course, is to predict the market six months out. Last year, as families gathered small groups, Hemlock produced smaller birds. This year, the birds are larger. But she too believes supply-chain fears have alarmed consumers. “Food is essential and we see people are getting nervous. People are calling from Connecticut or farther, and we’re still taking orders, but we’re limited in sizes. The bird might be more than you want, but you won’t go without.”“Their proportions are strange,” says Pia Bramley. “They exist completely at odds with the rest of the world.” The artist is talking about drawing babies, something she has been doing a lot of since her son, Fran, was born two years ago. She describes seeing Marlene Dumas’s giant watercolour baby paintings in the Netherlands, with their large, almost alien-like heads and flailing arms. “I thought of that exhibition when my son was born. I’d seen pictures of babies on nappy boxes and adverts for baby shampoo, and that is not what they look like. When Fran was born he was absolutely purple with solid black eyes and his hands were in claw shapes.” Bramley has just published Pandemic Baby, that collates a series of drawings about the “bonkers experience” of parenting in lockdown. The artist, who graduated from the University of Brighton and studied at the Royal Drawing School, has always worked from experience. “I’ve just drawn what’s around me and what’s happening to me,” she says. “And obviously when you have a baby, nothing else happens to you apart from that you are with a baby.” Historically, even some of the best artists have struggled with depicting babies. There’s even a blog, Ugly Renaissance Babies, which posts amusingly grotesque attempts to capture infants – usually the baby Jesus – on canvas. “My God, I’ve drawn those babies 100 times,” says Bramley. “At the Drawing School you do loads of drawings from paintings in the National Gallery. But they are different from drawing actual babies. The paintings just look like squashed adults.” Sketching Fran became a natural part of her practice. Like her other work, she posted her drawings on Instagram, and noticed that in the first lockdown – when she and her partner and son were confined to a small flat in Whitechapel, east London – she started to get more engagement, especially from other parents. Looking after a baby is not dissimilar to being legally restricted from leaving the house, with one big exception. In lockdown: “You don’t get to meet any other babies … We’d gone from being able to go to groups and meet parents. I suppose Instagram images of families were maybe the only way of seeing what other people were doing.” Then an editor from Icon Books, who had just had a baby in lockdown, got in touch about collaborating on something to mark the experience of new parents, and Pandemic Baby was born. The result is a tender, funny and frank collection of images, some based on Bramley’s experience and some on those of other parents. It serves as a memento, but her view is far from rose-tinted. As a friend said to her, looking after a baby is “like having the best time and the worst time of your life all at once”. One picture, for example, describes taking the bins out as “Finding moments of solitude” (the baby is pressed up against the glass of the window, wondering where its mother has gone), while another shows an infant’s rapid mood change with the caption: “The space between joy and fury feels very small.” “One person said, no one is going to buy this book because no one is going to want to remember the horror they’ve just experienced,” Bramley laughs. “I said, ‘You might be right’ … though a few people have got in touch to say they’ve bought it because they want their children to be able to look at it.” One of the friends I recommended it to said that she loved it and that it made her cry, and that she found it “very cathartic”. Bramley cites Louise Bourgeois as an influence, particularly her drypoint images from the 1990s, many of them depictions of her sons and domestic life. “The British Museum has a collection and you can just go and look at them. I did that a couple of years ago and they are really astonishing.” She has also long admired Charlotte Salomon, and was bowled over by Life? or Theatre? at the Jewish Museum with her son shortly before everything locked down. “They’re so inventive. We’re so used to seeing drawings and paintings of one event, in one time in one space … those pictures, the way she makes time progress and the way she moves between spaces in one image, it’s just mindblowing.” Scenes of motherhood and domestic life by female artists haven’t always been respected in the art world. “If I was a man making these drawings, I think people would be astonished,” she says. “People would probably have asked me to exhibit. I feel like I’d have got more attention … a man talking about his child is seen as a sign of him being spiritually connected and having the capacity for profound thought, but a woman talking about her baby is just her jabbering about her sweet angel. If my husband takes my baby to baby group people are like, ‘It’s so nice that you’re doing that.’ No one has ever, ever told me I’m a great parent just for looking after my son.” “I would desperately love to exhibit them,” she continues. “I’ve reached a point now where I feel like myself with a baby, as opposed to just this total stranger.” As to what Fran will make of them: “I wonder if he’ll be delighted or absolutely horrified.” Whichever it is, he’s a part of history. Pandemic Baby by Pia Bramley (Icon Books Ltd, £7.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Imagine the scene in Qatar, a year from now. Across the Corniche, the palm-fringed boulevard which runs along Doha’s seafront, thousands of football fans of different nationalities and religions are smiling, swaying, having fun. And that sound you hear? Not bottles being smashed, but stereotypes. Against expectations, the first Arab World Cup – and the first Muslim World Cup – is not only building bridges between East and West but changing perceptions of the country itself. The other hero in this rose-tinted story? The power of sport itself. Over the weekend Gianni Infantino, the Fifa president, praised Qatar for taking “real steps” since winning the right to host the World Cup, “particularly in relation to human rights and workers’ welfare”. It followed a promise by Hassan Al-Thawadi, the secretary general of the Qatar 2022 supreme committee, that the tournament would “set new benchmarks for social, human, economic and environmental development … and will forever be remembered as innovative, sustainable and transformative”. But will the World Cup really change Qatar – or merely alter perceptions of the country? As usual, it pays to be sceptical. Qatar, of course, insists it has made fundamental changes – in particular the abolition of the kafala system in 2020, which stopped migrants from changing jobs or leaving the country without their employer’s permission. “The abolition of kafala, the liberalisation of the job market and implementation of a national minimum wage would have happened in time,” says one insider. “But has the World Cup been a catalyst? Unquestionably.” But there are caveats and asterisks. Last week Amnesty International said that the new laws were not yet being implemented by all employers, leaving migrant workers still facing “widespread exploitation”. That sentiment is echoed by Nicholas McGeehan , of the human rights organisation FairSquare, who warns there is “genuine concern that as soon as the spotlight is taken away after 2022, these reforms will be rolled back.” McGeehan also points to the lack of investigation into the deaths of at least 6,500 migrant workers from south‑east Asia in Qatar since 2010 as another reason to be sceptical about claims the country has fundamentally changed. “The families still have no answers as to how these workers died, because no one took the time to do the investigations,” he says. “They’ve also ruled out their access to compensation. I think that’s inexcusable. And I would hope the players who participate in the World Cup agree.” What about freedom of speech? Qatar is certainly more open than most countries in the Middle East, with Reporters Without Borders noting that “the outspoken Qatari TV broadcaster Al Jazeera has transformed the media landscape in the rest of the Arab world”. But Qatar is ranked 128 out of 179 countries in the Press Freedom Index. In 2010 when it won the right to host the World Cup its position was 121st. “Qatar was already leading the way on media freedoms in the region,” McGeehan says. “It is a stretch to say it has become more liberal over the past decade.” A similarly complex story emerges when it comes to LGBT rights. Homosexuality is illegal in Qatar, but the authorities insist that gay fans are welcome at the World Cup – providing they act conservatively. That promise appears to be genuine. When Paul Amann, the founder of the Liverpool LGBT group Kops Out, visited Qatar for the Club World Cup in 2019, he was pleasantly surprised. “It’s not a country I would choose to live in,” he says. “But I wouldn’t mind revisiting it again. My husband and I went to the Corniche, museum and souk at night, and we felt entirely safe.” Again, though, there are significant caveats. As McGeehan points out, LGBT people living in Qatar face a very different experience. “The laws remain deeply discriminatory,” he says. “And if you’re gay, you are excluded from society. That takes an appalling toil on LGBT people in Qatar. It ruins their lives. Football is not going to change that. That change will come from within Qatari society.” Have there been actual changes since the country won the right to host the World Cup? Sure. Infrastructure-wise, it has been transformed. And when the academic Joel Rookwood visited Qatar for the Club World Cup in 2019, he noticed there were far more women fans compared to when he conducted research at the Asian Cup in 2011. Back then he saw just six women across 14 games. “It wasn’t just that there were far more women in 2019,” he says. “It was that they went unnoticed. They were accepted. I think that’s a really big shift.” Even so, it is hard to make a case that Qatar has become significantly more liberal and open since 2010. Yet, for many football fans, that probably does not matter. A few years ago when Rookwood interviewed supporters who travel to World Cups about the 2022 tournament, for instance, he found the “overwhelming majority… made little reference to Qatar’s human rights violations, discussed continuously by media sources and non-governmental organisation”. As one fan put it to him: “You don’t really think of the workers. I know it sounds bad, but … once you’re there it’s party time.” Such attitudes do not surprise McGeehan. When asked about the tournament’s potential legacy McGeehan is blunt. “Hosting the World Cup has largely benefited Qatar’s reputation. It is now identifiable on the world stage. And while that has come at a cost on one or two issues, for every fan who is concerned about migrant workers and LGBT issues, there’s probably another 40 or 50 people who are uncritically consuming PR content that presents Qatar as a luxurious destination with five-star hotels and camel rides.” Remind me, how do you say sportswashing in Arabic?Pick a humanitarian emergency in any part of the world, and the needs will seem remarkably consistent. Once people have escaped immediate danger, they need food, shelter, clothing and medical assistance – the things, in other words, that sustain us physically. The most pressing questions are about how to source the items and services required, and how to distribute them effectively. What determines whether an emergency is resolved quickly or allowed to persist, however, is politics. And if you want to see what happens when political solutions fail, then the scrubland of the northern French coast, just across the Channel from England, is an instructive place to look. The recent decision by Choose Love – a celebrity-backed charity set up in the aftermath of the 2015 European refugee crisis – to withdraw most of its funding for aid projects based in northern France, does not indicate that the needs there have changed in nature. There are an estimated 2,000 migrants camped out in and around Calais, looking for a way to reach the UK – fewer than when the crisis was at its peak in 2015 and 2016, but more than at other times in the past. Many of these people are destitute; as winter approaches, local aid organisations, which provide everything from clean water and cooking equipment to phone charging, have launched an urgent appeal to make up the shortfall in funding. Yet if the situation on the ground has not changed significantly, the context in which aid is distributed has been transformed. Political leaders have never wanted migrants to travel to Calais. For at least two decades now the French authorities, with British encouragement, have tried to make living conditions as difficult as possible, by demolishing camps and evicting squats. But the outpouring of public sympathy in 2015 – when hundreds of thousands of people across Europe demonstrated in support of refugees, and many others joined volunteer efforts to provide material help – forced them to temporarily back off. Choose Love was founded, initially under the name Help Refugees, amid that wave of sympathy, by a trio of media-savvy campaigners. It won the backing of celebrities including Coldplay’s Chris Martin, and actors Olivia Colman and Phoebe Waller-Bridge, and raises money partly by selling fashionable branded goods online and in a London boutique on Carnaby Street. Today, the charity has expanded to work with refugees in 22 countries and has raised £35m. Now, politicians talk once again of migrants in Calais as an inconvenience that must be eliminated – by repelling people rather than establishing routes to safety. In one recent statement, the UK Home Office implied that aid volunteers in northern France were part of the problem, telling the Guardian on 3 November: “It is dangerous to encourage these Channel crossings, which are illegal, unnecessary and facilitated by violent criminal gangs profiting from misery.” This is in keeping with the more hostile attitude of European governments in recent years to humanitarians whose actions they find inconvenient: this month, Seán Binder and Sarah Mardini, two volunteers who saved lives in the Aegean Sea, went on trial in Greece accused of human trafficking, money laundering, fraud and espionage. In a statement posted on its Instagram page, Choose Love said that it had been forced to make “some difficult decisions” in a strategic review, and that factors including the pandemic had prompted the decision to largely pull out of Calais. (Funding will still be provided to two charities working with unaccompanied minors in northern France.) But its decision tells us something broader about the limits of this type of humanitarian activism, which seeks to mobilise the might of branding and celebrity endorsements. It can be a powerful way to raise money and distribute resources in targeted ways – but what happens when the attention moves elsewhere, leaving a political problem unsolved? The promise of this type of action is that it offers us the opportunity to address the world’s problems with minimal disruption to our own privileged lifestyles, or to the system that enables them. As the late theorist Mark Fisher wrote in his book Capitalist Realism, it’s a form of social protest, but one that offers the “fantasy … that western consumerism, far from being intrinsically implicated in systemic global inequalities, could itself solve them. All we have to do is buy the right products.” Fisher’s point is not that celebrity-driven activism is inherently fake or insincere, as opposed to other more “authentic” forms. Rather, it epitomises a culture in which we are encouraged to think of ourselves as consumers instead of political subjects. During the triumphant era of global capitalism, before the crash of 2008, this model of action aimed high. Live 8, a string of benefit concerts in 2005 that marked the 20th anniversary of the original Live Aid, demanded nothing less than the abolition of global poverty. Bono’s Product Red, a fundraising partnership with corporate brands launched the following year, went a step further. “Philanthropy is like hippy music, holding hands,” the U2 frontman said. “Red is more like punk rock, hip-hop, this should feel like hard commerce.” The picture today is more fragmented. A new class of global billionaires have little need for even the illusion of popular consent, using their vast wealth to pursue individual passions from space travel to disease eradication. Campaigns that capture popular imagination, meanwhile, are now more likely to centre on crises closer to home. Think of the fundraising drives that have dominated the British public’s attention in recent years: we have been asked not only to help keep refugees alive on our doorstep, but to raise money for the NHS and to stop children from starving during the school holidays – tasks that our government, one of the world’s wealthiest, should be able to carry out itself. It’s more obvious than ever that charity is a response to a faltering system, not a sign of its success. Choose Love was the product of a moment when thousands of ordinary people intervened in a situation they found unjust. Its priorities might have shifted but that situation persists. Calais is not the site of a natural disaster, but a place where governments have deliberately created scarcity for political ends. It goes right to the heart of a debate about how states police migration, which itself is a proxy for the wider issues of war, global inequality and – increasingly – the climate crisis. In that context, the simple but urgent act of providing aid to others takes on a potentially greater significance, because it is a challenge to the established way of doing things. We should keep giving that help in Calais – but we should also be asking why it is necessary in the first place. Daniel Trilling is the author of Lights in the Distance: Exile and Refuge at the Borders of Europe and Bloody Nasty People: the Rise of Britain’s Far RightWhen Qatar won the bid to host the World Cup in 2010, the triumphant Gulf state unveiled plans to host the most spectacular of all World Cup tournaments and began an ambitious building plan of state-of-the-art stadiums, luxury hotels and a sparkling new metro. Yet, over the next decade, the brutal conditions in which hundreds of thousands of migrant workers toiled in searing heat to build Qatar’s World Cup vision has been exposed, with investigations into the forced labour , debt bondage and worker death toll causing international outrage. In an attempt to quell the mounting criticism, Qatar announced sweeping labour reforms in 2019. This included ending kafala, the system that made it illegal for migrant workers to change jobs or leave the country without their employer’s permission, effectively trapping workers who were being exploited and abused. Other reforms included the first minimum wage for migrant workers in the region and harsher penalties for companies that did not comply with the new labour laws. When they came into force in September 2020, the reforms were met with wide acclaim. Fifa called them groundbreaking. The UN said they marked a new era. An international trade union referred to them as a gamechanger. Even human rights groups, long critical of Qatar’s record on labour rights, gave them a cautious welcome. Yet more than 40 migrant workers who talked to the Guardian in Qatar in September and October this year say that for them, nothing much has changed. Despite the International Labour Organisation (ILO) claiming that more than 200,000 workers have changed employers since the new laws were rolled out, the Guardian met only one worker – a young man from Kenya – who had managed to leave his job. His experience spoke strongly of the potential empowerment the new laws could bring to worker’s lives. When he first arrived in Qatar, he was earning 625 rials (£127) a month as a construction worker. Now he is working for a logistics company with a salary almost three times higher. “I’m able to send much more money home. Now I can’t complain,” he says. Yet everyone else the Guardian spoke to who wanted to change jobs says it is difficult or impossible to do so. They allege their companies are simply ignoring the new laws. Some say their bosses threaten to impose fines or hold back wages if they try to change jobs, and that they are living so close to destitution this could be catastrophic. Other workers say employers refuse to sign resignation letters or issue “no-objection certificates”, seemingly unaware that neither are required under the reformed labour code. “They threaten us, saying they will deduct the cost of our room and bedding from our salary and refuse to pay end-of-service benefits if we try to leave,” one Indian security guard says. “We are still under their control.” A Kenyan security guard says: “I found another job but when I went to my company, they refused to release me. I waited three months and they refused again.” He says he could go to a labour court to fight his case but would have to pay for transport that he cannot afford and take time off work that his company will not allow. Migrant-rights.org, an advocacy group for migrant workers across the Gulf, describe the end of kafala as a “mirage”, saying that employers could easily prevent unhappy workers from leaving. When asked if the reforms had made a difference, another worker from Nepal gives a simple verdict: “Kafala is alive.” The new minimum wage of 1,000 rials a month, plus food and board, appears to be more rigorously enforced. Most low-wage workers interviewed said they receive the legal minimum, a significant increase on their previous salaries, except some security guards who routinely work 12-hour shifts, but do not receive the mandated overtime payments. Yet the new minimum wage set by the Qatari government, one of the richest countries in the world, is still equivalent to just £1 an hour. Such low wages mean that workers often remain in Qatar for years, unable to afford to return home to their families. One Nepali worker who talked to the Guardian has not seen his wife and child in five years. “When I call my son he doesn’t come to me,” he says. “He won’t [even] talk to me on the phone.” The Qatari authorities and the ILO acknowledge that the reforms are a work in progress. “[The Qatari government] are faced with implementation challenges and with some level of resistance, which is not surprising given their magnitude,” says Max Tuñón, head of the ILO project in Qatar. A spokesperson for the government says that with the new laws in place, the emphasis had shifted to implementation and enforcement: “Achieving systemic change is a long-term process and shifting the behaviour of every company will take.” Strict penalties have been imposed on companies that try to evade the law, they add. Qatar’s Supreme Committee, the body in charge of delivering the World Cup, said the tournament is a powerful catalyst for delivering a sustainable human and social legacy ahead of, during, and beyond the 2022 Fifa World Cup. It said in a statement: “Our commitment to workers welfare has resulted in significant improvements in accommodation standards, health and safety regulations, grievance mechanisms, healthcare provision, and reimbursements of illegal recruitment fees to workers.” Human rights groups are warning that Qatar is running out of time to ensure the new reforms actually make life better for migrant workers before the start of the World Cup in November next year. “[Qatar’s] significant reform to the kafala sponsorship system didn’t happen until late in 2020, 10 years after the country put itself in the global spotlight,” says James Lynch, a director at human rights group FairSquare. “The reforms have been beset by teething difficulties and pushback from the business community, and so there are real questions about whether it is going to deliver on its transformative potential in the lead-up to and beyond the World Cup.” Most of the eight World Cup stadiums and related infrastructure had been completed by the end of 2020, before the reforms fully came into effect. “There is an urgent need for an injection of political will to ensure this and other reforms have a meaningful impact for workers, and embed these changes for the long term,” Lynch says. Qatar, Fifa and the ILO have said repeatedly that the World Cup will leave a lasting legacy of better workers’ rights in Qatar and across the region. So far, anecdotal evidence suggests that legacy is far from secure. In the road construction works near central Doha last month, the Guardian met four workers who had recently arrived from India employed by AlJaber Engineering. AlJaber, one of Qatar’s top construction firms, built the Al Thumama Stadium. Along with all other World Cup contractors, AlJaber must adhere to strict worker welfare standards which, among other things, do not allow workers to pay recruitment fees. But the four workers claim they each paid almost £1,000 in recruitment fees to secure their jobs. Their claims suggest that AlJaber could be failing to apply the World Cup worker welfare standards to its new contracts. AlJaber Engineering did not respond to multiple requests for comment. Human rights campaigners are already questioning what pressure there will be on the Qatari government to ensure the new laws are actually implemented on the ground after the World Cup ends next year. In a recent interview, Malcolm Bidali, a Kenyan blogger and migrant worker who was detained, held in solitary confinement, and then charged with spreading “false news” for writing about the plight of migrant workers online, is asking the same question. “If I was unjustly detained and unjustly fined – while all eyes are on Qatar – what happens when no one’s looking?” he asks.Film “All happy families are alike; each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way,” wrote Tolstoy – and then there is Eraserhead. Quoted almost as often as the opening of Anna Karenina is the nugget that David Lynch made his first, horrified feature in response to his status as a new father. But the monstrous baby – as ever, pity poor Jennifer Lynch, born before work on the film began – is only part of a wider freakout. The whole family structure is a nightmare – on display in the dinner scene where Jack Nance’s woebegone Henry meets his prospective in-laws. Mom rants; Dad raves; in a glum corner of the kitchen, a random grandmother sits catatonic, salad bowl in her lap. Behold our futures. The serving of the infamous chickens – “They’re manmade!” – is almost a relief. Almost. Danny Leigh *** Stage At 120-something years old, it’s not that the couple in Ridiculusmus’s aggressively titled show won’t work together, but that they are trying so hard and can’t manage it. With their communication withering, the humour is at once gutting and giddy. I took my grandma, then in the beginning stages of dementia, none of us yet knowing how quickly it would steal bits of her. She held my knee and laughed and nodded throughout, recognising the comic tragedy of old age. A few years on, I see the echoes of the show’s dysfunction in reality, as its themes prevent our family from working as I feel it still should; with grandma looking after us, rather than the other way round. Kate Wyver *** Books Surely no good can come from Enid Lambert’s desperate attempts to bring her family together for “one last Christmas” in Jonathan Franzen’s The Corrections? Her three children are variously depressed; depressed and recently fired; and depressed, recently fired and now – somehow – working for a “warlord” in Lithuania. None of them wants to go home. Not least because their father, has spent his life abusing and bullying them and is now so deep into decline and dementia that he’s holding hallucinatory conversations with his own faeces. But Jonathan Franzen makes us long for a happy Christmas resolution. He also allows these people love, and that makes the messed-up emotions in The Corrections all the more exquisite and painful. Sam Jordison *** Art There is something deeply off about the Californian sculptor Charles Ray’s family of four, Family Romance. Holding hands in a line like anonymous paper dolls, they are a would-be parade of a cookie-cutter family, except they’re naked. The creepiest thing, though, is what Ray does with scale. The puppyish, pre-pubescent kids are as big – and as powerful – as Mom and Pop. While the title, from Freud, suggests Oedipal undercurrents or, most disturbingly, incest, Ray’s work makes broader points. In place of the conservative myth of the nuclear, patriarchal family – society’s supposed bedrock – we get skewed group dynamics and implicit struggle. Skye Sherwin *** Games Returning to your childhood home is often an experience fraught with emotion, especially if your parents still live there. But spare a thought for the poor cursed family in the magical-realist What Remains of Edith Finch, all of whom spent their lives arguing with each other before meeting with strange and tragic deaths. As the player, we explore the family’s tumbledown mansion, discovering the stories of these untimely demises and the charged family dynamic that surrounded them. To be fair, though, if you were living under imminent threat of a bizarre death, you’d probably argue with your mum, too. Keza MacDonaldGlobal problems require global responses. And we have plenty of global problems. Is a single, unified authority – a world government – required to solve them? Is that even feasible? It rather depends, doesn’t it, on what we mean by the phrase. An emperor with a single empire? Some form of democratic federal government of the world? Star Wars features a galactic republic, but then that’s science fiction. It is hard to imagine a global government with global citizens in a world with such strong local identities and such different political and social systems. As we have realised since the end of the cold war, the nation state is not only alive, it is kicking. The EU struggles with its members; think of that on a world scale. One person, one vote won’t work either when in certain countries a single leader would cast the votes for millions. If we accept, however, that government can be the exercise of power over the peoples of a particular area with or without their consent then, yes, it is possible to imagine some hegemonic power or a collection of powers governing the world, perhaps even benevolently. The Roman empire controlled its known world for centuries. Chinese emperors claimed the “mandate of heaven”, which, they assumed, gave them authority to maintain order on Earth. After the Napoleonic wars, the great powers formed the Concert of Europe to settle disputes peacefully and maintain a largely conservative order. As our knowledge of each other expanded over recent centuries, so too did our capacity to imagine a truly global order. The European empires justified themselves by claiming to bring civilisation to their subjects. Supporters of an earlier version of the Anglosphere dreamed of a condominium of the British empire (especially its white parts) and the United States to govern the world. Lenin, Stalin and Mao had a still different vision, where a single communist state dissolved national borders. Immanuel Kant dreamed of another possibility, where nations sharing liberal values cooperated willingly and peacefully. In the aftermath of the first world war, the US president Woodrow Wilson spoke for millions with his vision of a more liberal and democratic world order where nations worked together against common threats to humanity, from disease to war. Its embodiment was the League of Nations, which, with its council, assembly and bureaucracy, mirrored democratic governments but lacked their monopoly of force or ultimate authority. The League did not prevent the second world war, but lessons were drawn from its failure, perhaps most crucially that international unity from the start could prevent the spread of aggression. The shattered world of 1945 faced enormous challenges, both to rebuild and to prevent a third, even more catastrophic war. As head of the world’s strongest power, President Roosevelt was able to insist that the new United Nations have more power and more authority than the League. The UN’s founding conference in San Francisco created a body that incorporated authoritarianism and democracy. Roosevelt’s Four Policemen for the globe – Britain, China, the US and the Soviet Union – were permanent members of the security council (France was added as a courtesy) with, as the UN charter says, “primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security”. By 1948, the UN had created its own peacekeeping forces, something the League was never able to do. It also oversaw a host of agencies, such as the World Health Organization or the International Labour Organization, that created international standards and policies in areas such as health and labour, and became centres of global expertise. Roosevelt also insisted on a general assembly where all nations from the biggest to the smallest would sit as equals. In time it developed its own blocs that, on issues such as the dissolution of the European empires, were able to mobilise world opinion and exert pressure on the powerful. At the very least, the general assembly is a forum for 193 nations, from North Korea to Sweden. It is fashionable now to write off the UN, but its existence helps us to think globally. The other key lesson the world’s leaders took from the 1930s was that reacting to the Great Depression by erecting trade and other barriers prolonged the misery and poisoned international relations. The Bretton Woods institutions of the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and, eventually, the World Trade Organization, have helped manage the world’s economy and foster development. And, yes, there is much to criticise but, as with the UN, we would be worse off without them. However, as the American academic Anne-Marie Slaughter argues, world governance involves far more than formal institutions. Rather, it exists in the thickening networks of special agencies and interest groups from police forces to charitable NGOs that operate across and in spite of borders. Whether they are fighting crime, managing international flows of capital or helping refugees, such networks are sustaining a global order, even spreading shared values and norms. Will Covid-19 encourage us to make that order even stronger? Past great catastrophes made us think differently. New ways of managing international relations came out of the Napoleonic wars and the two world wars. The pandemic has highlighted weaknesses, for example in supply chains, and exacerbated inequalities. The world’s nations have too often resorted to blaming each other, and the distribution of vaccines to poorer countries has been shamefully slow. Yet there was an impressive international effort to develop and administer vaccines. Are we going to learn some lessons? We had better do so quickly, for we face more pandemics, more global turbulence and, above all, the existential threat of climate change. Can we start, as Richard Haass and Charles Kupchan recently suggested in an article for Foreign Affairs, with a new Concert of Powers, with the limited goal of maintaining stability? The obstacles are formidable. Rogue nations defy world opinion. Regional rivalries threaten to spill over into war. Powerful leaders act as if there is no tomorrow, leaving long-term damage. Donald Trump betrayed and insulted allies. Britain continues to alienate its neighbours and biggest trading partners. “Donnez-moi un break” is not going to bridge the gulf that has opened up with the French. You have to be an optimist at the moment to believe in a world government built on cooperation and shared values. If Hobbes and his followers are right, a state of anarchy among nations is all we can hope for. Or does the future hold one of those other models? A Concert of Great Powers, or something else? We thought the age of empires was over; maybe it has merely been resting. • Margaret MacMillan is Engelsberg chair in history and international affairs at LSE IDEAS and author of War: How Conflict Shaped Us. Reading list Governing the World: The History of an Idea by Mark Mazower (Penguin, £12.99) A New World Order by Anne-Marie Slaughter (Princeton, £32) The World: A Brief Introduction by Richard Haass (Penguin, £23.99)You can’t pin Leo Nocentelli down. When I ask the legendary funk guitarist how his extraordinary solo album Another Side has come to be released after 50 years in oblivion, he tells the whole story in a seven-minute monologue, but when I try to confirm his age, no dice. “It’s not important,” he says in a river-deep Louisiana accent. “I could say I’m 20, I could say I’m 85. Look at me. How old do you think I am?” He does look a decade younger than I think he is, so I go for a polite 65. He looks a bit disappointed. “I was thinking you were going to say younger but that’s OK, I’m flattered.” Nocentelli is on his sofa in New Orleans, wearing sunglasses and a beret. He returned to his home town five years ago after more than three decades in Los Angeles, “tired of the redundancy of great weather”. In the background, his wife Pesuky occasionally jogs his memory, not that he needs much help. He’s a vibrant storyteller, buoyed by the warm reception to the album he thought was lost for ever. In 1971, Nocentelli’s band, the Meters, were the kings of New Orleans funk thanks to tight, playful hits such as Cissy Strut, but they were between record deals, so Nocentelli started to write some songs to sell to other artists before deciding to record them himself. Wise, companionable and exquisitely played, the songs hit the same folk-soul sweet spot as his contemporaries Bill Withers and Terry Callier but Nocentelli credits his “country-and-western funk kind of thing” to his obsession with James Taylor’s album Sweet Baby James. “I’m hoping that James gets a whiff of this,” he says. Songs such as I Want to Cry were about his own frustrations and heartbreaks but most, he says, were just stories. “One interviewer said, ‘The song You’ve Become a Habit is about a prostitute. How was that, Leo?’ I said, ‘I never had no relationship with a prostitute!’ I just thought, how would a person feel? How would he tell this story?” He worked in Cosimo Matassa’s Jazz City Studio, a cavernous converted second-floor warehouse reached via a rope-operated elevator. He attributes the record’s spacious ambience to that “big, hollowed studio”. With his fellow Meter George Porter Jr on bass, the “unbelievable” jazz player James Black on drums and the New Orleans R&amp;B kingpin Allen Toussaint on occasional piano, he recorded nine original songs plus a sparkling cover of Elton John’s Your Song. “It wasn’t meant to be an album per se. It was just raw takes.” When Reprise Records picked up the Meters, their chief songwriter got distracted and the demos stayed on the shelf for decades. The mothballing didn’t haunt Nocentelli; in fact, he rarely thought about it. When Hurricane Katrina inundated Toussaint’s Sea-Saint Studios in 2005, Nocentelli assumed the tape was gone. “I said, ‘Oh well, so be it.’ It wasn’t that important to me. It was an afterthought.” Thirteen years later, however, cratedigging Beastie Boys associate Mike Nishita snapped up 16 boxes of Sea-Saint tapes at a swap meet in Torrance, California. It turned out that they had been salvaged from the flood and kept in a storage facility in Hollywood until the owner defaulted. Nishita realised this priceless trove included the only surviving copy of a completely unknown album by funk’s greatest guitarist. He shared his find with the reissue label Light in the Attic and the surviving artists. “It was great to hear those songs again,” Nocentelli says. “The majority I completely forgot about.” Nocentelli was born, it turns out, in 1946. His father gave him a $2.98 ukulele when he was eight and he was a guitar prodigy by 12. “When kids was on the block getting high and drinking and hanging out with girls, I was in my little room trying to stretch my fingers,” he says. Jazz was his first love but he followed the money. By his mid-teens, he was on the road with Otis Redding (“a very kind man”) and playing uncredited session guitar for Toussaint and Motown. Between 1964 and 1966, he served in the US army at Fort Riley, Kansas, but before he could be sent to Vietnam he received an honourable discharge on account of being his family’s main breadwinner. On his return to New Orleans, he joined George Porter, drummer Zigaboo Modeliste and keyboardist Art Neville in a band known as the Neville Sounds. Segregation still reigned in the clubs of Bourbon Street. At the Ivanhoe, the Neville Sounds would play for a whites-only crowd inside and a spontaneous second audience outside. “We would look out the window and there’s 200 Black people standing in the street, dancing to our music,” Nocentelli recalls. The memory of segregation still stings. “When I was a kid I had to get out of my seat on the bus to let a white person sit down. If a white person is walking on the sidewalk, I have to get off and walk in the street. It leaves an indelible stain on your brain. Even now if I walk into a Denny’s, I remember a time when I couldn’t do that. You hurriedly dismiss them but you never lose those thoughts.” He disappears for a bathroom break and returns to pick up the story while sucking on an orange ice lolly. In 1969, the Neville Sounds mutated into the Meters, the most important funk pioneers this side of James Brown. They backed the likes of Dr John and Labelle (Nocentelli points at a platinum disc for Lady Marmalade) and attracted some heavyweight fans. Led Zeppelin once asked the Meters to play a party at Jazz City – or at least it sounded like a party. “We all got dressed up,” Nocentelli remembers, “then when it comes time to play, where’s all the people at? In come these three guys and that was it. They were the audience!” In 1975, Mick Jagger invited them to open for the Rolling Stones. Fans who had queued for hours to get front-row seats were not necessarily funk-curious, Nocentelli says. “You want to see the Rolling Stones after all that time. It could be Jesus Christ; you don’t want to see Jesus Christ. A couple of times we had to duck bottles and cans. We knew we had to bear down to get the audience to accept us.” The Meters broke up after 1977’s New Directions with more credibility in the bank than money. Since then, there’s been session work, sporadic reunions, a lifetime achievement Grammy and the unexpected windfall of becoming one of the world’s most sampled bands, from Public Enemy’s Timebomb to Amerie’s 1 Thing. “Sampling, praise the lord, was the slickest thing that happened to the Meters,” Nocentelli says. Shortly before his death in 2015, Toussaint performed a tribute to Nocentelli in New Orleans, a song called Leo in the Key of F. “I will take that song to my grave,” Nocentelli says. He croons two verses while tapping out a tabletop rhythm with his lolly stick. “He’s a Meter man, of the Meters band,” he sings. “The whole world knows Leo … Nocentelli.” Does he think his career would have panned out differently if Another Side had been finished and released in 1971? He shrugs it off. “That doesn’t even exist in the mental and spiritual equation. Everything was supposed to happen the way it happened. When I went in the studio it was already preordained what this record was gonna be, spiritually, and it took 50 years to show it. And here it is.” Another Side by Leo Nocentelli is out now on Light in the Attic.1) United old boys bring an end to Solskjær saga It is a footnote to the weekend’s biggest story, but the final nail in Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s coffin was partly hammered in by four players who were at various points deemed not good enough for Manchester United. Ben Foster, Craig Cathcart, Tom Cleverley and Joshua King all made vital contributions to a Watford performance that brimmed with energy, intent and endeavour. United’s class of 2021 lacked all those qualities, and plenty more. They were simply overrun and, while Solskjær’s departure was both inevitable and correct, they might wonder whether a better engagement with the basics might have helped their old manager’s cause. After the final whistle Bruno Fernandes communicated to the away support that United’s players should take the brunt of their ire. In truth the blame for an unholy mess can be shared throughout the club, but Watford’s gang of old boys cast their successors’ efforts into stark relief. Nick Ames Watford 4-1 Manchester United 2) Title tilt shaping up for Liverpool In the aftermath of Liverpool’s customary Anfield cruise against Arsenal, Trent Alexander-Arnold heralded the start of a defining period in what “is kind of looking like a three-horse race” for the Premier League title. For all of the injury disruption in midfield, and the end of a club record-equalling unbeaten run at West Ham, Jürgen Klopp’s team look impressively equipped and motivated on the evidence of Saturday’s display. “The second half was probably our best pressing that we’ve had this season, it was back to what we do,” said Alexander-Arnold, who has provided six assists in his last nine games. “We put them under immense pressure and won the ball back and we were able to punish them with Diogo [Jota]’s goal.” The return of the Champions League this week affords Klopp opportunity to improve the match fitness of Takumi Minamino, Thiago Alcântara and others with the group already won, a rare luxury at this juncture. Andy Hunter Liverpool 4-0 Arsenal 3) Newcastle are sunk without midfield anchor Impressive going forward, hopeless at the back, Newcastle certainly entertained during an utterly chaotic 3-3 draw with Brentford. A positive Covid test confined Eddie Howe to his hotel room, but Newcastle’s new manager may have been most concerned with a midfield in which Jonjo Shelvey shone but Joe Willock underwhelmed. If he intends to continue in this ultra-attacking vein, Howe desperately needs a midfield enforcer to protect a Championship-standard defence. Indeed without such an anchor, the second tier is almost certainly where Newcastle, currently bottom of the Premier League and winless this season, will end up. As good as Allan Saint-Maximin and an apparently reborn Joelinton proved at the front of Howe’s 3-4-3, they could not camouflage the defensive fissures exposed by Ivan Toney’s desire to prove a point. Back in 2018 Newcastle sold Saturday’s star performer to Peterborough having deemed him sub-standard. Louise Taylor Newcastle United 3-3 Brentford 4) Rüdiger and wing-backs show worth Not only are Chelsea’s wing-backs flourishing as part of Thomas Tuchel’s free-flowing attacking interplay, they are also important with set-piece deliveries. Reece James and Ben Chilwell have contributed five assists and seven goals between them this season. With James outstanding on the right flank – and just about everywhere else as he roamed and interchanged – Chilwell delivered the corner against Leicester for Chelsea’s fifth headed goal of the season, when Antonio Rüdiger rose to open the scoring. Rüdiger’s Fantasy League points tally continues to reflect his worth at both ends of the pitch and Tuchel is optimistic the Germany defender, whose current deal expires in the summer, will sign a new contract. “We want him to stay,” the Chelsea manager said. “This is very clear and he knows it. He is fully committed to Chelsea right now. I am absolutely sure that he feels the trust and the respect and the love from club and spectators.” Pete Lansley Leicester City 0-3 Chelsea 5) Conte revolution will take time despite win Watching Leeds skate around Spurs in the first half, the impression was of a Subbuteo team playing a table football team, one all movement, angles and variety, the other stiff, slow and predictable. There are various reasons for this – Spurs are low on confidence and have a new manager still formulating his ideas. They are also low on pace, numbers and creativity in midfield so, though they turned the match around they will continue to struggle until that changes. It’s easy to understand why Antonio Conte wants the safety in numbers of three centre-backs, likewise his desire for three in attack – but this affords the former little protection and the latter little service. Consequently, Conte must either settle on a centre-back pairing or trust a strikeforce of Harry Kane and Son Heung-min, then add another body to his engine room, because that is the only way his team will control games. Daniel Harris Tottenham 2-1 Leeds 6) Everton’s problems predate under-fire Benítez Carlo Ancelotti’s last game as Everton manager was a 5-0 defeat at the Etihad Stadium. It was a sign of Rafa Benítez’s skills as a defensive strategist that this scoreline was narrower. Everton denied Antonio Conte’s Tottenham a shot on target but a sequel never felt realistic as City had 77% of possession. “To defend against a good team all the time is not easy,” said Benítez. Pressure told and Everton were depleted before they were defeated. Already without the spine of a side, in Yerry Mina, Abdoulaye Doucoure and Dominic Calvert-Lewin, they lost their most exciting winger, in Demarai Gray. As a former Liverpool manager, Benítez can make an obvious scapegoat but the problems predate his appointment. It is damning that a club who have spent half a billion on transfers under owner Farhad Moshiri had a bench of such mediocrity. Benítez, whose expenditure amounts to £1.7m on Gray, has been hamstrung by their past. Richard Jolly Manchester City 3-0 Everton 7) Brighton letting it slip after heady start Brighton began the season with a bounce but after eight matches without victory, early optimism is slowly fading. It was a familiar story at Villa Park, where they controlled large spells without baring their teeth. It was almost as if the noise surrounding Steven Gerrard’s first victory as a Premier League manager masked another slip, although they have only lost two games during this run, holding Arsenal and Liverpool to draws along the way. A glittering start suggested a team that battled relegation for the past four seasons could upset the normal order but bridging the gap is not easy. “Ninety-five per cent of all leagues are determined by finance,” said Graham Potter. “We are trying to be the 5% that makes a difference. You can only do that by having an idea and making your pound work harder than the rest.” Ben Fisher Aston Villa 2-0 Brighton 8) Turf Moor thrills point to Clarets avoiding spills A 3-3 draw, featuring five first-half goals and a second-half belter, between teams who started the match ninth and 18th, speaks volumes about the state of England’s top echelon: never has there been so much talent and never have matches as exciting as this one been so likely. This isn’t all good – it is rooted in a financial dominance that hands mid-to-low-ranking teams more money than title contenders elsewhere, though it’s also the case that the pool of high-level players has never been so deep. In any event, Burnley’s squad is not replete with players acquired solely with financial muscle; rather, it reflects Sean Dyche’s superb work. And, though Burnley remain in the relegation zone, 11 goals in seven games suggest he is developing a more expansive style that should see his team stay up comfortably once again. DH Burnley 3-3 Crystal Palace 9) Sargent finds order for Smith and Canaries Do Norwich City have enough quality to stay in the Premier League? That’s one of the questions asked by radio provocateurs after the Canaries’ dismal start to the season. Dean Smith arrived last week with a firm answer – yes – and against Southampton he got to test his hypothesis in the flesh. Reinstating two naturally talented players in Billy Gilmour and Todd Cantwell to the side had a mixed success. Both struggled in the first half as the Saints dominated, with Cantwell taken off at half-time. Gilmour grew into the game as Norwich played higher, but it was Cantwell’s replacement Josh Sargent who affected the game more. Sargent has been criticised for his lack of goal threat but his intelligence and determination disrupted the visitors’ flow. Equally, the timing and bravery of Ben Gibson proved crucial in keeping the Canaries in the match early on. The qualities required to keep Norwich in touch extend beyond technical ability. Paul MacInnes Norwich City 2-1 Southampton 10) West Ham reminded of need for depth There’s something very West Ham about beating Liverpool in rousing, memorable style, before losing tepidly to Wolves. And it will not have escaped David Moyes’s attention that his team’s next five league games include encounters with Manchester City, Chelsea and Arsenal, after which comes Spurs away in the League Cup quarter-final. Things can very quickly go wrong, something Moyes knows well from previous engagements. But if West Ham get through to Christmas still in the hunt for a Champions League spot, as the most settled of the contenders they’ll have a decent chance. When seeking a goal on Saturday, all three of their midfield creators were subbed, but the players who replaced them were not of comparable quality. After Daniel Kretinsky’s acquisition of a 27% stake in the club, Moyes should have funds available in January to address that. If he spends wisely, his team will immediately become an even more serious proposition. DH Wolves 1-0 West HamReligious leaders have said a pared-back version of the Coalition’s religious discrimination legislation would “deserve bipartisan support”, upping pressure on Labor to declare a position. In a joint statement, leaders including the Catholic archbishop of Melbourne Peter Comensoli, the Executive Council of Australian Jewry and the Australian National Imams Council argued that the “more controversial” measures appear to have been removed. On Monday the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said he “absolutely” supports religious freedom and would “always support faith communities” but protecting that right should not involve “taking away the freedom of others”. Albanese also suggested the government had not “worked in a bipartisan way” because it has yet to show the opposition the legislation. The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, has been briefed on the content of the bill, but Labor insists it won’t comment until the bill is finalised, saying Liberal backbenchers are still negotiating with the attorney general, Michaelia Cash. Cash has told Labor the bill will go to the Coalition party room on Tuesday and be introduced into the lower house this week, although some Liberal backbenchers still favour introduction in the Senate so an inquiry and amendments settle its final form before they have to deal with it. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, said on Friday the government agreed to introduce the bill this year as part of a deal on net zero emissions with the Nationals. Last week, Guardian Australia revealed two of the most controversial provisions had been removed: the so-called Folau clause preventing employers sanctioning employees for religious speech; and sections allowing health providers to refuse treatment on the basis of “conscientious objection”. Despite the changes, Liberal moderates including Katie Allen are still reserving their right to cross the floor on the bill, while conservative MP George Christensen is concerned the bill still doesn’t go far enough. The bill still allows faith-based institutions, such as religious schools, to positively discriminate against people who do not share their faith, something the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said is necessary to maintain their “distinctive faith-based ethos”. In the joint statement, the religious leaders said they “would have preferred” the Folau clause and conscientious objection be “retained in some form”. But they said they welcome the fact it will “protect people of faith from discrimination on the basis of their religious beliefs, and will allow faith-based organisations to act in accordance with their doctrines, tenets and beliefs without this being disallowed as religious discrimination”. “With the more controversial measures reportedly having been removed from the bill, there appears to be no sensible reason for it to generate a deeply polarising debate over religion,” they said. “If the reports about the key provisions of the bill are correct, it will deserve bipartisan support.” On Monday the financial services minister, Jane Hume, said the bill is likely to face “significant scrutiny”, including referral to a Senate committee. Asked if the bill overrides other minorities’ rights, Hume said that the current draft “doesn’t override the religious exemptions in any existing anti-discrimination legislation”. The bill is expected to be introduced in the lower house and would face great difficulty in the Senate, where crossbench senators Jacqui Lambie, Rex Patrick and Stirling Griff will oppose it, making Labor support critical. Albanese accuses prime minister of ‘spin’ Earlier, Albanese told ABC Radio that all that was known about the bill was “spin that’s come from the prime minister’s office”. “I’ve spoken to religious leaders … who are very disappointed that the government, on an issue which should not be an issue of partisan politics, has not worked in a bipartisan way across this parliament, as Scott Morrison is always seeking to divide rather than bring people together.” Albanese told reporters in Canberra it “should not be a partisan issue” because prohibiting religious discrimination “should be an issue which just unites the country”. Instead, the government had waited until “the end of the third term, the last two sitting weeks” to introduce legislation, he said. Christian lobby says bill doesn’t address ‘flashpoints’ In a statement, the Australian Christian Lobby’s director of politics, Wendy Francis, said she was pleased the bill will give religious institutions including schools the ability to prefer to employ faith-based staff, and overrides state-based laws that could prevent such religious preference. The Christian lobby also welcomed a protection for statements of belief that overrides Tasmanian anti-discrimination law, which prohibits speech that offends, insults or humiliates people based on protected attributes such as sexuality, sex, age or disability. “However, the bill does not address some of the flashpoints for religious hostility in the real world,” Francis said. She said these include: “Overreach of employers into the employee’s private speech; the misuse of hate speech laws against religious expression; threats to churches and families from LGBT conversion laws banning prayer and counselling; [and] the increasing attacks on the ability of Christian schools to operate according to their ethos.”The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has come under fire in parliament for falsely claiming he told the opposition leader Anthony Albanese that he was travelling to Hawaii during the black summer bushfires. Amid fierce parliamentary debate centred on Morrison’s honesty and his shifting rhetoric on vaccine mandates, Labor revived its attack on the prime minister’s infamous overseas holiday taken with his family at Christmas time in 2019. The trip became controversial after the prime minister’s office refused to reveal where Morrison was holidaying at the time, and briefed journalists that reports he was in Hawaii were wrong. In question time on Monday, Labor’s Fiona Phillips – whose electorate of Gilmore was being ravaged by the bushfires at the time – asked Morrison why his office had “told journalists he was not on holiday in Hawaii … when it wasn’t true?” Morrison then claimed he had texted Albanese about his plans. “I can only speak to what I have said. As the leader of the opposition will know because I texted him from the plane when I was going on that leave, and told him where I was going, and he was fully aware of where I was travelling with my family,” Morrison said. The response provoked fury from Albanese, who used a personal explanation following question time to explain to the house that he had been misrepresented. “That is not true. On the 15th of December 2019 at 9.44pm the prime minister did text me saying he was going on leave,” Albanese said. “He did not tell me where he was going. He said he was going with his family. I kept that text message confidential, as you do, with private text messages between private phones,” Albanese said. “On the Friday he disclosed it in an interview with 2GB that he had texted me and that was the first time that that became public. But at no stage did he tell me where he was going.” Morrison responded, saying: “Where I was going, was on leave,” but was later forced to correct the record. “I want to confirm what the leader of the opposition said that in that text I did not tell him the destination of where I was going on leave with my family,” Morrison said. “I simply communicated to him that I was taking leave. When I was referring to he knew where I was going and was fully aware I was travelling with my family, what I meant was, that we were going on leave together. “I know I didn’t tell him where we were going, because Mr Speaker, that is a private matter where members take leave and I know I didn’t tell him the destination, nor would I.” Albanese accused Morrison of divulging the private text exchange between the pair, and doubling down on the false assertion that Albanese knew where he was going. “The problem for this prime minister is that he has this character trait whereby he says whatever is convenient at the time, regardless of what the facts are. And it is just extraordinary that he has been prepared to do that,” Albanese told Sky News. The latest allegation of prime ministerial dishonesty comes after Morrison became embroiled in a war of words with the French prime minister, Emmanuel Macron, over whether he had lied about Australia’s intention to cancel the submarine contract. Macron sensationally said, “I don’t think, I know”, when asked if Morrison had lied to him about the decision, prompting the release of private text messages between the pair that further damaged relations. The stoush over the text messages between Morrison and Albanese came as the prime minister was also forced on the backfoot over claims he did not denounce violent protests in Melbourne, and for editing a social media post that removed criticism of the protests. In response to a question from Labor’s Josh Burns about the edited Facebook post, Morrison said the suggestion he had given “comfort to extremists” was a “complete falsehood”. “I was very clear in denouncing those things, and the suggestion I haven’t … is a complete falsehood,” Morrison said. The prime minister was also challenged over his support for vaccine mandates in NSW after he said last week that people should be allowed to “get a cup of coffee in Brisbane without showing their vaccination certificates”. “Is the prime minister aware that exactly the same health orders apply in Sydney? If people want to get a cup of coffee, they have to show their vaccination certificate. Does he also support that?” Labor’s Jim Chalmers asked. Morrison said the government’s position on vaccine mandates “applies right across the country”. “We couldn’t be clearer. We support mandatory vaccines for health workers, for aged care workers, for disability workers, Mr Speaker, those who are working with vulnerable people,” Morrison said. “But when it comes to what happens in somebody’s business, we believe business should make that decision and shouldn’t be told by the government what they should be doing.” The prime minister has been accused of “double speak” over the issue of vaccine mandates, after he expressed sympathy with the frustrations of protesters, and urged Australians to “take their lives back” from government. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Monday, Morrison said he did not subscribe to a “binary proposition” that he was either for or against government intervention, saying his position had changed along with changing circumstances. The final parliamentary sitting fortnight of the year got off to a rocky start for the government on Monday morning after five coalition senators crossed the floor to support a vaccine discrimination bill sponsored by the One Nation senator Pauline Hanson. Liberal senators Gerard Rennick, Alex Antic, and Concetta Fierravanti-Wells crossed the floor to support the bill, along with Nationals Matt Canavan and Sam McMahon. Antic and Rennick are denying the government their support in the Senate until Morrison meets a range of demands relating to vaccine mandates and adverse events, hampering the coalition’s ability to pass legislation before parliament rises for the year.It was a long season-and-a-half for the New England Patriots, and the post-Tom Brady era looked bleak. The emergent Bills appeared built to claim the AFC East for years to come while New England, with their rookie quarterback, were set up for a tedious rebuild. But before Pats fans had much time to process what it would be like to lose and lose often, the team started winning. And winning some more. Thursday night’s 25-0 slaughter of the Atlanta Falcons was New England’s fifth win in a row. And thanks to Buffalo’s recent fall from grace, guess who’s back atop the division? (Feel free to imagine a sly-looking Bill Belichick while you read the rest of this article.) It’s Belichick’s defense that has turned the 7-4 Pats into legitimate Super Bowl contenders. The unit has held its last three opponents (including the Browns and Panthers) to 13 total points. The defense is deep. It is fast. It is physical. Linebackers Matthew Judon, Kyle Van Noy, and Dont’a Hightower are dominant. Adrian Phillips and Kyle Dugger consistently break up passes and make bruising tackles at safety. Undrafted cornerback JC Jackson has been a revelation, especially given the scrutiny he faced as Stephon Gilmore’s replacement. On Thursday night, Jackson held the Falcons to just one catch on three targets for seven yards. No way was this version of the Pats’ defense giving up to 28 points to this version of the Falcons offense. Matt Ryan looked as shell-shocked and beaten down as we’ve ever seen him. Mac Jones has matured under center as the season has gone on, and he’s certainly having the most successful year among the rookie quarterbacks. But Jones is still good for a throw or two per game he wishes he could have back and lacks some of the explosive playmaking abilities of the best NFL quarterbacks. Falcons defensive coordinator Dean Pees did a heck of a job confusing Jones and the Patriots offensive line. Had Jones been Tom Brady in his prime, the score on Thursday might have been 45-0 While the Patriots are by no means perfect they are getting some major assists from their AFC brethren, some of whom have gone from dominant to dire. On Sunday, the Bills were annihilated from start to finish by Frank Reich and the scrappy Colts who left Buffalo with a stunning 41-15 win. A preseason Super Bowl favorite for so many, the Bills started off a strong 5-2, though they didn’t beat any of the NFL’s elite teams, whatever that means these days. Then two weeks ago they fell to the Jacksonville Jaguars, the ultimate embarrassment. Against the Colts, Sean McDermott was outcoached. There were drops galore for the Bills, including a few by Dawson Knox. But that wasn’t the only problem. There were untimely penalties, poor play from backups, and four turnovers. Unlike the Pats and the Chiefs, who beat Dallas on Sunday for their fourth straight win, the Bills may have peaked too early. Or perhaps Josh Allen’s brilliance last season was unsustainable – and he is a very good quarterback, rather than a great one. The Tennessee Titans also lost in baffling fashion on Sunday, to arguably the worst team in the NFL, the Houston Texans. They still hold a two-game lead in the AFC South but without Derrick Henry and to a much lesser extent, Julio Jones, their offense looks lost. Even the Chiefs, who have found some magic, don’t have the overwhelming offense we’ve seen in the past. And Baltimore, who pulled off a scrappy win over the Bears with Tyler Huntley, are inconsistent and boast a quarterback in Lamar Jackson who seems to get sick an awful lot for a 24-year-old elite athlete. So, while defense doesn’t always win championships, it certainly helps when the opposing offenses aren’t up to snuff. Thus, at this point we can safely welcome New England and their bruising defense back into Super Bowl contention. In the NFL, some things never change. Video of the week We at the Guardian would like to extend our sincere apologies to every parent who was forced to explain to their children why Chiefs running back Clyde Edwards-Helaire was penalized for this horrific crime. That fact that this penalty carries the same weight as a defender driving a quarterback’s head into the ground is idiotic. MVP of the week A running back has not been named NFL MVP since Adrian Peterson in 2012. That may change this season. Jonathan Taylor added another exclamation mark to his explosive season on Sunday. He accounted for five touchdowns in the Colts’ victory over the Bills, who entered the game with the league’s top-ranked defense. Taylor juked and muscled his way to four rushing scores, a receiving touchdown, and 204 yards of total offense. He is now tied for the NFL record for most consecutive games (eight) with a score and more than 100 yards from scrimmage. Stat of the week 10,000 career passing yards for Jimmy Garoppolo. This feat surprised Garoppolo. It’s also a surprise to all those who had assigned Garoppolo to quarterback purgatory when San Francisco drafted Trey Lance. But the league is a funny place and Garoppolo has had a resurgence of late, including a clean performance in San Francisco’s 30-10 win over Jacksonville on Sunday. In his last three starts, Garoppolo has thrown for six touchdowns and just one interception. It’s no coincidence that the 49ers are another team that seem to be peaking at the right time, though they’d be much better off in the AFC. Quote of the week “I’m excited for the kids to go to school tomorrow and wear the Vikings stuff” – Vikings wide receiver (and Minnesota native) Adam Thielen. What a cathartic win for the Vikings over division rival Green Bay and the quarterback who has historically owned them more than he owns the Bears. But it was Kirk Cousins, not Aaron Rodgers, who won the day. He marched the Vikings down the field for the 29-yard Greg Joseph field goal that gave Minnesota a 34-31 win as time expired. Green Bay, at 8-3, still have a commanding lead over the 5-5 Vikings in the NFC North but this win puts them deeper into the playoff conversation. It was also a statement win over a hated rival. A win which, as Thielen explained, will have the locals beaming with pride this week. Elsewhere around the league -- Justin Herbert was back to his best with a superb performance in the Los Angeles Chargers’ 41-37 Sunday Night Football victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers. The Chargers gave up a 17-point lead in the fourth quarter but Herbert’s third touchdown pass of the game sealed victory. Herbert also had 90 yards rushing on the night. He had help from Austin Ekeler, who ran for two TDs and caught another couple. -- The Bengals defense seems to have had a resurrection during the bye week. They smothered Derek Carr and Co in the team’s 32-13 win over Las Vegas. The Raiders converted just one of seven third-down attempts. -- The Chiefs’ acquisition of linebacker Melvin Ingram from the Steelers may turn out to be this season’s biggest difference maker. Kansas City are 3-0 since Ingram joined. Ingram has been a great scheme fit for the Chiefs, and has also allowed Chris Jones to play inside. Those two are a fearsome pair. -- Cam Newton missed his chance to pull out a late drive for the Panthers in a 27-21 loss to the Washington Football Team but he did relish his “homecoming” to Carolina. He also revealed that 21 November is a significant day for him: it is when he reached rock bottom after being arrested for stealing a laptop while in college. -- The Seahawks’ slide continues after Sunday’s 23-13 loss to Arizona. There are few positives for the Seahawks. Their offense is on life support, and their run of losses won’t even yield them a high first-round draft pick in 2022: they traded that to the Jets for safety Jamal Adams in what may go down as one of the worst deals (for the Seahawks anyway) the NFL has seen. The Jets also netted third-round picks and a first-rounder in 2021 in that deal. -- There were a slate of away victories on Sunday, meaning the winning percentage for home teams this season remains under .500. This “elimination” of home-field advantage is a trend that has continued since 2019. 2020 can be blamed on a Covid year with minimal fan attendance. But home teams having losing records in 2019 and 2021 is fascinating. Perhaps it’s a scheduling happenstance, or maybe the type of fans who can rock a stadium have been priced out.I could open with pro-forma generosity, noting politicians are humans, and they, like the rest of us, sometimes forget things, and have rushes of blood to the head. But honestly, we are well past that. We are facing the unnerving proposition that Australia’s 30th prime minister struggles to differentiate fact from fiction. What happened on Monday was deeply disconcerting, and all the more troubling because this conduct is an established pattern of behaviour. Labor came into question time with a simple objective: to pin Scott Morrison as a liar. We have entered the final two parliamentary sitting weeks of 2021, the federal election is now only a few months away, and Labor has a narrow window of opportunity to try to first define, then rapid set Morrison’s negative characteristics with Australian voters. Labor has been pounding away on Morrison’s trustworthiness for much of the back half of this year. Only a couple of weeks ago, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, declared Morrison had lied to him in the lead-up to the cancellation of a multibillion dollar submarine contract. Monday was the first time parliament has sat since Macron’s sensational j’accuse on the sidelines of the G20. Questions front-loaded with Morrison’s own conflicting statements came at him thick and fast from the opening of Monday’s session, and unfortunately for the prime minister, there’s an extensive back catalogue to draw on. One of the questions related to the events of December 2019. Morrison was asked about his decision to leave Australia during the catastrophic bushfires and holiday with his family in Hawaii. The Labor backbencher, Fiona Phillips, bowled her scripted bouncer: “When my electorate was burning, the prime minister’s office told journalists he was not on holiday in Hawaii. Why did the prime minister’s office say that when it wasn’t true?” Morrison answered the charge of institutional deception by declaring he had texted Albanese on the plane when he took off for the infamous overseas holiday “and told him where I was going and he was fully aware of where I was travelling with my family”. There was a significant problem with Morrison’s self-exoneration. It was completely untrue. Albanese corrected Morrison and the Hansard record very shortly after. He told the House of Representatives Morrison had texted him at 9.44pm on December 15 2019 to impart the news he was going on leave. “He did not tell me where he was going,” the Labor leader said. “He said he was going with his family. I kept that text message confidential, as you do, with private text messages between private phones.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Albanese said Morrison had subsequently disclosed the heads-up during a radio interview. “That was the first time [the text] became public. But at no stage did he tell me where he was going.” Now it’s possible at this point in the recount this whole fracas might sound like a distinction without a difference. Morrison told Albanese he was going on leave, so why does the ultimate destination matter? The answer to that question is simple. Morrison’s staff were so sensitive about the destination becoming known to voters they went to great lengths to conceal the boss’s holiday in Hawaii. A holiday in Hawaii in the middle of a catastrophe was a very bad look for any prime minister. It was known Morrison was on annual leave. Michael McCormack was acting prime minister. But there was no timely transparency about the destination, and the destination was politically potent. Given how heavily that whole issue was contested, and how long that negative symbolism has endured, you would think if you were Morrison, you would remember reasonably vividly what you said to whom at various points in the whole drama. So why lie? And why lie on an issue that even the most disengaged voter in the country would actually remember? After Albanese corrected the record, a visibly irritated Morrison then corrected his own untruth while blaming the Labor leader for provoking him. The prime minister acknowledged he had told the opposition leader he was going on holiday (“and that was the important thing”) but he hadn’t told him where he was going. “Mr Speaker [Albanese] chose to politicise that and has done so ever since.” An hour or so later, Morrison had another go at trying to clean up. “I wanted to confirm what the leader of the opposition said that in that text I did not tell him the destination of where I was going on leave with my family.” “I simply communicated to him that I was taking leave. When I was referring to ‘he knew where I was going and was fully aware I was travelling with my family’ what I meant was that we were going on leave together,” Morrison said. “I know I did not tell him where we were going because that is a private matter where members take leave and I know I did not tell him the destination, nor would I, nor would he expect me to have told him where [I] was going. I simply told him that I was taking leave with my family and he was aware of that at that time”. Perhaps Morrison is working on a supposition that voters don’t care about politicians lying because they assume all politicians lie. Perhaps he really is that cynical. Perhaps the prime minister is retreating into a world where truth is defined by what is true to him. When you believe something to be true, is it really a lie? Is this character, or strategy? Perhaps Morrison thinks he’s just escalating various distractions before a close election contest, rendering politics a hall of distorting mirrors. Perhaps you get to a point where you reposition so kinetically and so often (and that is Morrison’s hallmark) you can’t remember what you said yesterday. But whatever the explanation, the behaviour is corrosive. It seems extraordinary that a prime minister who worked, I believe genuinely, to rebuild trust in institutions, including the Australian prime ministership, during the pandemic, could so willingly abandon that advantage.Towards the end of her new essay collection, Ann Patchett describes being inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Letters, where a portrait of her now hangs alongside the likes of Henry James, John Dos Passos and Eudora Welty. “The picture I’d chosen to send was joyful,” she writes. “I’m showing all my teeth and am completely out of step with every serious and circumspect photograph surrounding me.” At first brush, These Precious Days seems a similarly incongruous addition to the sizeable stack of recently published essays by female writers. Though not devoid of joy, titles such as Lavinia Greenlaw’s Some Answers Without Questions or Lucy Ellmann’s Things Are Against Us are unabashed polemics; they grapple with the gritty, they rail and they fulminate. Patchett’s, in contrast, is characterised by sun-dappled beneficence. At 57, her bestsellers have won prizes and plaudits, and the bookshop she co-owns in her native Nashville, Tennessee, has become a thriving cultural hub. Her marriage is harmonious (her first essay collection was titled This Is the Story of a Happy Marriage), and her expansive friendship network includes celebrities such as the soprano Renée Fleming as well as girlhood besties. She blitzes up green smoothies, does kundalini yoga, and if ever she’s to be found at a bar, it’ll likely be with her pal and former primary school teacher Sister Nena, an octogenarian Catholic nun (Sister Nena drinks merlot, Patchett sips a seltzer with cranberry juice). This is the world in which Patchett’s intimate, elegant essays are rooted, be they about taking up knitting or giving up shopping for a year, about how Snoopy was her role model growing up (he made her want to be a writer) or why she decided not to have children. More than once, she remarks on her good fortune, though she also happens to believe in knuckling down, whether it’s to a new novel she’s writing or an article for a women’s monthly. As she reasons: “So many possibilities can arise as a result of intelligence, education, curiosity and hard work.” It’s not, of course, that she doesn’t find herself in tight spots; it’s just that when she does, she’ll unfailingly salvage something positive. Like the time, aged 19, she went backpacking around Europe with a friend, and they accepted a lift to Derry, promptly finding themselves in a war zone. That piece, The Paris Tattoo, becomes a paean to friendship. Even a health scare involving her husband, related in The Moment Nothing Changed, yields the reassuring affirmation that “For as many times as the horrible thing happens, a thousand times in every day the horrible thing passes us by.” And there are always books – books to teach, to befriend, to rescue you when, for instance, you’ve rashly agreed to cook Thanksgiving dinner for six for the very first time. This mood abruptly changes, however, three-quarters of the way through, with the title essay. As Patchett notes of the writings she has assembled here: “Again and again, I was asking what mattered most in this precarious and precious life.” The title essay snaps that precariousness sharply into focus. Topping 60 pages, it’s by far the longest, and recounts how Patchett fell into a life-changing friendship with Tom Hanks. Or at least that’s what she assumed it was going to be about, but Hanks turns out to be only a bit-player; it’s his assistant, Sooki Raphael, a thwarted painter reticent of manner and flamboyant of wardrobe, who is its bright star. (One of her paintings, of Patchett’s dog, adorns the book’s jacket.) Sooki has recurrent pancreatic cancer and, just as the pandemic hits, arrives in Nashville to take part in a clinical trial. Patchett insists she stay with them, and so begins a profound deepening of their fledgling rapport. With the world turned upside down, they’re soon heading off on nocturnal rambles and trying medicinal magic mushrooms together. It’s radiant storytelling, both questing and vulnerable in its candour. It’s also the reason this book exists. “That essay was so important to me that I wanted to build a solid shelter for it,” Patchett says, and yet it’s the essay that gives the shelter its heft, foregrounding darker currents that have been flowing through its pages all along. Mortality, in particular, looms suddenly larger. And then there’s her frank acknowledgment that to befriend an author is to have your life written about, your psyche’s innermost corners probed and exposed. Patchett of course hymned another friendship, with the late Lucy Grealy, in her 2004 memoir Truth and Beauty, and elsewhere in this very book the author is to be found plotting a piece about her dying father even as she holds his hand. It was “like holding a linen sack full of bumblebees”, she recalls – a reminder, should one be needed after reading the collection’s few slighter pieces, that she has serious literary chops. These Precious Days contains some masterclass-grade tips on writing, but it confronts, too, the extent to which literature and life diverge: people aren’t characters; our daily hurryings and scurryings do not a plot make. And while Patchett can’t start work on a novel without having figured out exactly how it will end, living well requires the opposite: “Death always thinks of us eventually. The trick is to find the joy in the interim, and make good use of the days we have left,” she advises. As a rallying call, it’s timely, timeless and as full-voiced as her smile is broad. • These Precious Days by Ann Patchett is published by Bloomsbury (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe Headland hotel in Cornwall has been in Veryan Palmer’s family all her life. Her parents bought the imposing Victorian pile overlooking Fistral Beach, Newquay, 43 years ago. Now Palmer, 37, is director. They have always had staff from Europe. “My parents would talk about when European countries joined the EU they would suddenly get an influx of staff from a new country,” she says. “They remember the summer that Poland joined and the sudden influx of Polish housekeeping staff who are just phenomenal.” In 2019, about half the staff were non-British. Palmer attributes the identity and the success of the hotel – one of just two in the county with five stars – to them. “There is no chance we would be where we are now without the skills of people coming from other countries.” It used not to be hard to recruit. “Cornwall is a lovely place to come and work; we’re pretty hot on the work-life balance, and the life part is pretty fun, with beaches and surfing. So it’s always been attractive for hospitality team members from across Europe.” Workers came from all over: Spain, Italy, France, Poland, Romania, Estonia, sometimes whole families. Some came for just a summer, to practise their English; others came over and settled. They brought experience with them, says Palmer. “They have a greater understanding of what our European guests want, and a skill level you don’t always see in UK hospitality workers. In Europe, a lot of young people have part-time jobs from around the age of 16, so when they come over at 18 or 20 they have already got quite a bit of work experience. They understand that if work starts at nine, you turn up at five to nine. We end up doing quite a lot of life-skills training for people who have been brought up in the UK.” Hospitality has been hit hard recently. Palmer says it’s difficult to distinguish what is Brexit and what is the pandemic: “It’s just all come together in one mighty swirl of a disaster zone.” What’s certain is that many workers went home during the pandemic and didn’t come back, either because they weren’t allowed to or didn’t want to. If they don’t already have settled status in the UK, applicants from both EU and non-EU countries have to be paid a salary of at least £25,600 under the new skilled worker visa scheme. More than 90,000 workers left the country’s hospitality sector during the past year. London, where up to 75% of hospitality workers were from the EU pre-Covid, has been hardest hit. Job vacancies across the industry are at the highest levels on record. She thinks her business will survive, by looking hard at costs, but that some hotels won’t and that it’s going to be incredibly tough for the industry. “Hospitality works on such tight margins. With the rising cost of food, most of us have used the drop in VAT to suck that up, instead of putting up our prices.” But that VAT reduction for hospitality is tapering off: it’s up from 5% to 12.5% and in April will return to its pre-pandemic 20%. On top of that, hospitality wages are up 23%, Palmer says. “Someone’s got to pay for that. Your food and drink is going to cost a huge amount more and a lot of places won’t survive. The expectation of cheap food, drink and accommodation – that horse has bolted.” Palmer says that the percentage of British staff at the Headland has risen to about 80%, and that in Cornwall some businesses have been able to put wages up because they’ve had such a busy year. But that’s had a detrimental knock-on effect on other sectors – such as care, for example. “If you can get maybe two, three, four pounds an hour more in hospitality, where you’re not doing night shifts, what are you going to do?” For now, Palmer has 11 international placement students at the Headland hotel. They are attached to UK universities, so have student visas and are permitted to work. But still she could do with another 30 or 40 staff, especially as Cornwall is such a hot destination. “We’ve got a crazy October and, in theory, this November will be the best November we’ve ever had. However, we have had to shut off 20 out of 91 bedrooms to make sure all our staff can have two days off a week.” On Brexit, Palmer says a lot of promises were made by both sides, “when actually no one truly knew what the outcome would be. It was a bonkers thing to go to a referendum on, there was never going to be accurate and truthful information.” So which way did she vote? She laughs – she’s not telling. “Whichever way I say, people would tear me apart.”During An Audience with Adele, the musician was asked by Emma Thompson to name a figure who was influential in her early life. She named her former English teacher, Ms McDonald, who she was then reunited with on stage. We would like to hear about the teachers who changed your life. What did they mean to you and what impact did they have? Are you still in touch? What would you say to your teacher now? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A government minister has been unable to guarantee that some people will not have to sell their homes to fund their own social care amid a backbench rebellion over plans to scale back a cap on costs. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) caused alarm on Thursday when it revealed it would calculate the £86,000 cap on lifetime care costs in a way that could leave tens of thousands of England’s poorest pensioners paying the same as wealthier people. With MPs due to vote on the proposal on Monday evening, some expressed hope that the government would make a last-minute concession in the face of increasingly rebellious backbenchers who fear a backlash from constituents. Pressed on whether some people would have to sell their homes to pay for care, despite Boris Johnson’s pledge that his policy meant they would not, the business minister Paul Scully told Sky News: “There will be fewer people selling their houses and hopefully none.” He continued: “I can’t tell you what individuals are going to do. What I’m saying is the social care solution is all about getting a cap above which you do not need to pay – that gives people certainty.” Asked again whether some people receiving care may have to sell up under the proposals, he said: “It will depend on different circumstances. “If you hit the cap you will not have to pay any more money for your personal care – I think that is a fair, balanced approach for taxpayers and people who are having to pay for what is a really expensive, at the moment, form of care through social care.” In a subsequent interview with BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Scully said that under the new plans people would not need to sell homes in their lifetime, but did not disagree that some would be unable to pass them on to children. He said: “If you’re solely looking at what happens to someone’s home, there are deferred payment agreements, and if the spouse continues to live in the home, the value of the house won’t be included in someone’s asset calculations, so nobody will be forced out of their homes.” Sir Andrew Dilnot, the economist whose report on social care a decade ago established the principle of capping costs, told Today that the government’s tweak to the system would save it about £900m a year by the time it was fully operational, near the end of this decade. “That needs to be compared to the much more than £10bn a year that the health and social care levy was going to raise,” he said. “If this amendment is passed, then the less well-off person will not hit the cap at the same time as the better-off person, and will go on spending out of their own income and wealth until they spend exactly the same as the amount the better-off person has spent, £86,000, and then they hit the cap. That doesn’t seem very progressive.” The shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, said the new plan was “a care con” rather than a care plan. He said: “Because if you live in a £1m house, perhaps in the home counties, 90% of your assets will be protected if you need social care, but if you live in a £80,000 terraced house in Hartlepool or Mansfield or Wigan, for example, you lose nearly everything. That is not fair. That is not levelling up. That’s daylight robbery.” Christian Wakeford, the Bury South Tory MP, previously expressed anger that the plans appeared to have been changed since MPs voted in September to support the £12bn a year health and social care levy that will pay for the policy. “If we’re changing the goalposts again, halfway through the match, it doesn’t sit comfortably with me or many colleagues,” he said, warning the government: “It shouldn’t be taken for granted that we’re just going to walk through the same lobby.”A legal action group is warning there may be an information blackout on sewage discharges by water companies for years, after the Environment Agency announced an inquiry into more than 2,000 sites. Fish Legal said that in the past, the EA has refused to disclose any information once an investigation is launched. The group said the systemic abuse of the permit conditions under which sewage treatment works have to operate had been brought to light by the public, often using environmental information requests. If that access to information was shut down it would make it impossible for the public to engage with the process of assessing harm caused by these spills. The EA announced on Friday it was investigating water companies which had admitted they may have illegally discharged raw sewage from their treatment plants. Their admissions came during discussions with the agency about the installation of flow monitors on treatment plants that could show up any illegal discharges. The investigation into potentially illegal dumping of sewage is huge in its scale and involves more than 2,000 treatment plants. But given the length of time it has taken in the past for the EA to investigate and take enforcement action, in some cases many years, Fish Legal fears there will be a total information blackout. Penny Gane, head of legal practice at Fish Legal, said: “We are seeking assurances that a veil of secrecy is not about to descend on the operation and impact of storm overflows.” Fish Legal, which was previously known as the Anglers’ Conservation Association, takes up cases on behalf of its members involving pollution, abstraction and poaching. It has 24 active cases relating to sewage pollution by water companies. In a letter to Sir James Bevan, the chief executive of the EA, Gane called for transparency and openness as the agency ran its investigation. “We have serious concerns that the agency will effectively shut down all information-sharing about the operations of these works whilst its investigation is ongoing,” she said. The EA held a briefing on Friday with NGOs and environmental groups, including Fish Legal, after its announcement of the latest investigation. Gane was not reassured by the meeting. In her letter she said: “We have, in the past, battled for disclosure of information relating to pollution incidents.” Gane highlighted the length of time it had taken for the EA to investigate and prosecute Southern Water over the illegal dumping of billions of litres of untreated sewage. The investigation into offences that took place between January 2010 to December 2015 only ended in July 2021 when the company was fined £90m. “We therefore consider there to be a very real prospect that the agency will impose an information blackout relating to storm overflows for years whilst its investigation is ongoing,” said Gane. “[I]t will make it impossible for the public to effectively engage with the process of assessing harm caused by these discharges.” Gane called for Bevan to disclose which treatment plants were under investigation. An Environment Agency spokesperson said: “This week, the Environment Agency and Ofwat have launched a major investigation into sewage treatment works. Investigations are beginning and, as would be expected, we must be guided by legal advice on what we can say and when in order not to prejudice any future legal proceedings. Data related to over 12,000 storm overflows is already online for everyone to see.”Presenting Nigella’s drunken devils on horseback, Simon Hopkinson’s prawn cocktail, Edson Diaz-Fuentes’s Mexican bacalao. Feast on Lindsey Bareham’s foolproof turkey, trimmings and gravy, Trine Hahnemann’s salmon and Andi Oliver’s glazed ham. We have mince pies, a sherry trifle, Elizabeth David’s definitive St Emilion au chocolat. Plus, of course, Nigel Slater’s essential cake, without which Christmas is incomplete. Happy holidays all, from all at OFM. Simon Hopkinson’s prawn cocktail The classic, crowd-pleasing start to a Christmas dinner Claudia Roden’s roast belly of pork with baked apples Celebrate with this fruity, meaty centrepiece Blanche Vaughan’s mince pies A festive treat or gift for guests, packed with homemade mincemeat Simon Hopkinson’s sherry trifle Fruit, booze, custard and cream – a perfect end to a celebration meal Nigella Lawson’s drunken devils on horseback Armagnac lifts these canapes to another festive level Mandy Yin’s coconut and lemongrass roast duck A hot and spicy Malaysian way of cooking a festive roast duck Edson Diaz-Fuentes Mexican bacalao a la vizcaina A traditional Mexican fish and rice dish for Christmas Eve – just like abuela makes Andi Oliver’s brown sugar, cranberry and rum-glazed ham An easy, show-stopping ham to impress friends and family Elisabeth Luard’s rice pudding with honey and bay What better than this comforting, creamy dessert to end the festive banquet Lindsey Bareham’s roast turkey, chestnut and sausage stuffing and gravy Everything you need for the classic Christmas centrepiece Yotam Ottolenghi’s black miso sticky rice with sprouts and peanuts Make the sprouts sparkle with this Asian take on the prep Rory O’Connell’s roast potatoes One of the star dishes of the Christmas meal – and here’s how to make perfect ones Anna Jones’s celebration celeriac and sweet garlic pie A cheesy, festive pie for the vegetarians at the table (and probably a few meat-eaters, too) Jane Scotter and Harry Astley’s baked squash with celery and herb cream A winter-warming take on the fondue for a holiday supper Nigel Slater’s Christmas cake Prepared well in advance and packed with fruit and nuts, the star of the festive dinner table Jeremy Lee’s baked salsify The root veg is centre stage in this party snack Trine Hahnemann’s Christmas salmon Try this citrussy, peppery Danish-style starter to the main event Elizabeth David’s Saint Emilion au chocolat A rich and indulgent French dessert from the queen of continental cooking Nigel Slater’s warm marzipan buns A sweet toasty treat for breakfast the day after the main event Tom Kerridge’s steamed ginger puddings with vanilla custard Spicy little sponges for a change from the traditional fruited versionWhen people ask me if I’m a dog lover I always say, “I’m a dog owner – it’s not the same thing.” It’s not that I don’t like my dog; I just don’t wish to be mistaken for some kind of enthusiast. I don’t want to see a photo of your dog. I’m not that interested in talking about dogs. And what I mean by that is: I don’t want to have a conversation about your dog. I especially don’t want to talk about your dog as if it is a person – a person who offers you support in difficult times, or whose outlook on life serves as a shining example, or who possesses an uncanny emotional intuition. Like I said, I have a dog, so I know they’re actually pretty stupid. Mine is, anyway. In the first year of the pandemic, more than 3 million new pets were acquired in the UK – many of them dogs. During that period the average price of a puppy doubled to a staggering £1,900, peak puppy if you will, which is an awful lot for an animal that hasn’t been trained to do laundry. Employees are increasingly able to demand “pawternity leave” from work to help their new pets settle in. As offices reopen, a flurry of new innovations have arrived to ease the loneliness of the at-home dog – or, more likely, the conscience of the at-work owner. Earlier this month we saw the launch of Dog TV – a sort of canine educational network designed to keep your dog stimulated – or relaxed, or whatever – while you’re out all day. In my experience TV means absolutely nothing to a dog – even a cat will pay more attention to a screen – but according to its developers TV for dogs is doing its work even when your dog appears to be ignoring it. Now comes the advent of the DogPhone – a device that allows your pooch to ring you at will, as if this was always a need waiting to be filled. I can’t really imagine what it would be like to have your phone go off in a meeting and then say: “Sorry, I need to take this; it’s from my dog.” In order to provide a pet-friendly interface, the DogPhone is built into a soft ball that places a call when moved. Testing appears to show that even after several lessons, dogs mostly tend to ring their owners inadvertently, sometimes by sitting on the ball: a canine butt-dial. The researchers who developed the DogPhone claimed it was about “giving dogs a choice”, but most of ownership involves restricting a dog’s options: stay off the sofa, don’t eat shoes, even when I’m not here. We might differ about where those boundaries are set, but my first rule would be: don’t call me at work. Predictably, as restrictions lifted in July, the Dogs Trust reported a huge increase in traffic – up 180% from February – to the “giving up your dog” section of its website. People are reportedly handing in their animals as “fake strays” in order to spare themselves the embarrassment of being failed or fairweather dog owners. Maybe the work of caring for the dog was too much, or maybe the emotional hole it filled turned out to be temporary. It’s easy to think of people who ran out and bought dogs in the first throes of isolation as selfish, but there are probably no non-selfish reasons for getting a dog that didn’t need rescuing in the first place. I have my own selfish reasons for being a dog owner – it eats almost anything I spill on the floor, and as long as it’s in the room I am technically not talking to myself. But in exchange for its smelly, good-natured company I require very little of it in terms of emotional support or affirmation. Nor, to be honest, would I expect much. As I said, I’m a dog owner, not a dog lover. As much as it’s worth reminding people that a dog isn’t just for Covid, I can’t help hoping that the fading of the pandemic will bring a stop all to the madness. At the moment, I can’t see an end to either. • Tim Dowling is a regular Guardian contributorWell before the pandemic upended his world, Antonio Luna struck his new therapist Paul Jamison as a challenge. At his intake appointment in late October 2019, Luna, a skinny, shy 16-year-old with dark, wavy hair and an oversized leather jacket, talked about his struggles with suicidal urges and the plans he had made to act on his distress. After one close call in May, he had been hospitalized for more than a week. He was still feeling hopeless and beset by self-destructive thoughts. When Jamison asked about his goals for therapy, Luna replied, “Try to find a reason to live.” Luna, who had been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder as a child, came across as guarded but willing to work with Jamison in creating a plan to stay safe. “I’ll tend to lie that I’m fine but really I’m not,” Luna conceded to Jamison in their first session. He answered the therapist’s questions about his prior experiences in the mental health system and shared information about his tough childhood. While he did not completely trust his new therapist, he at least felt secure at the clinic. It was what he knew. The one-story, beige and white brick building just south of downtown Nashville, Tennessee, was a familiar and soothing place. It was run by Centerstone, a nonprofit that operates more than 170 mental health clinics across the south and midwest. Luna had gone there for years, starting at age 10, to calm his in-the-red emotions and to decode the complicated social cues at school. His family had since moved about an hour north to Springfield, which was closer to other Centerstone locations. But Luna insisted on returning to this particular clinic. His mother, Elizabeth Lucatero, 42, and stepfather, Kevin Poole, 48, drove him to each session. There were always jokes about who was the better driver, Mom or Dad (the answer was always Dad). From the backseat, Luna kept the conversation light and unremarkable. His parents believed these commutes showed their son the importance of seeking help for one’s problems. Lucatero had a long history with mental illness and she didn’t want her son to suffer as she had. After therapy, Luna knew to expect a reward, an ice-cream from Sonic or a steak and rice dinner from a favorite Mexican place, interludes that granted time to decompress before the long drive home. His parents tried to keep the conversation upbeat. “I always told him to keep his head up, to keep going, that things were going to get better,” Lucatero said. Luna’s treatment was covered by Lucatero, who was on the state’s public assistance health insurance. They were lucky. Even before the pandemic propelled an unmeetable rise in demand for youth mental health services, there have never been enough therapists to treat children and teens. Parents agonize over waiting lists, calls to clinics that go unreturned, and the promise that the next referral will pan out. And even when there are openings, families contend with a dearth of providers who accept insurance and are willing to treat a young person with a complex psychiatric history. Not only does Centerstone take teens and adults at risk for suicide, it strives to keep them engaged in therapy. If suicidal clients miss a session, they get a check-in call to schedule a new appointment. The manager of Luna’s clinic, Susan Seabourn, secured grant funding to pay for indigent clients’ bus tokens and copays in the hopes of increasing attendance. Luna was a beneficiary of the careful attention the clinic aspired to give. At that first instake session, Luna was deemed a suicide risk and the clinic mobilized a team to watch over his case. The high-risk status entitled him to regular therapy and medication management appointments. A Centerstone staffer spoke with Lucatero about removing guns and other hazards from their home, and she said their firearms were locked away at a friend’s house. Over the course of a few months, Luna began to talk about his moments of intense suicidal thoughts and what overwhelmed him. He compared his depression to having a migraine. “There’s just so much going on in my mind,” he said to Jamison. “It literally hurts my head.” During a session in mid-February 2020, he admitted to Jamison that he had thought about suicide the previous night and had devised a plan to hang himself from a tree in the woods near his house. Jamison called in Seabourn, who was skilled at working with kids, to counsel the teen. Luna agreed to avoid the woods and consented to let Seabourn coordinate with his brother to keep an eye out. Luna eventually reported that his suicidal thoughts had waned. Therapy seemed to be working. But in March 2020, the pandemic shuttered normal life. Luna’s high school closed for spring break and never reopened. His church closed, as did the public library where he had been a regular in the young adult section. And overnight, with no playbook or precedent, Centerstone went remote, replacing the vast majority of face-to-face services with Zoom rooms and phone calls. For Luna, this meant no more weekly trips to one of the few places he could be himself unconditionally, no more steak and rice dinners and special family time. The structure he depended on vanished. Despite his ambivalence, Luna was willing to try a new routine. In March, he began teletherapy. ••• Like the vast majority of mental health systems across the US, Centerstone embarked on an unparalleled experiment: the clinic had to repurpose its traditional offerings using smartphones and video links. These tools had to suffice to treat and manage its high-risk clients – the victims of trauma and domestic abuse, the chronically suicidal, and those who were losing loved ones to the pandemic. The stakes were especially high for children and teenagers, as hospitals around the country experienced dramatic increases in pediatric psychiatric emergencies. Becky Stoll, vice-president for crisis and disaster management for Centerstone, tried to view the lockdown as an opportunity. For years she had wanted to offer teletherapy services as a way to expand Centerstone’s reach. “Covid-19 has pushed us into the largest beta test that we ever could have hoped for,” she told me in the spring of 2020. With each passing week, Centerstone’s staff worked long hours to stabilize and expand its pandemic response. Unreachable places suddenly became reachable. People in pain could simply log on or pick up the phone for a session. For many, teletherapy proved to be as effective as in-person treatment, and it had the power to ease barriers like transportation costs and commute times. After therapy went virtual, the nonprofit experienced a steady increase in people showing up for new intakes – up by as much as 20% a month. The new protocols, however, took a toll on staff. Every day, therapists were conducting sessions in their bedrooms, basements, and living rooms, often without a break between the next Zoom hit. Heather Kamper, a licensed clinical social worker who recently left Centerstone, described the experience as “robotic”. Absent the structure, and etiquette, of in-person therapy, some sessions felt ineffectual, Centerstone therapists said, even like a waste of their client’s time. Clients struggled to find private places to speak. They called from the road, and from the aisles of the grocery store, and from living rooms crowded with family. Some Zoomed without clothes. One victim of domestic abuse had to arrange to do therapy from inside a closet in her home. Going remote made Kamper appreciate how much she relied on physical cues to gauge her clients’ wellbeing. She was accustomed to calmly sitting with her suicidal patients while reassuring them that their crises were temporary and could be overcome. She’d find a way to bring them down from this painful state. Now, no matter how hard she concentrated, when there were breakthroughs, she couldn’t feel them. When one of her long-term clients, a woman in her 50s, admitted that her suicidal thoughts were back, Kamper’s own anxiety spiked. In that moment, both patient and provider felt unmoored. “I miss our Saturdays,” the client told Kamper. “I want to be in a room with you. What if I die? What if you die?” ••• Luna struggled with the transition to teletherapy. He was no longer just a client but an unwitting participant in this unfolding virtual experiment. When he first began therapy at Centerstone about seven years earlier at age 10, in-person interactions played a large role in his treatment and in his ability to establish trust in his therapists. Luna’s sessions involved more than just talking; they also included physical observations as well as games like Connect Four and Battleship. He was able to open up about his deepest traumas and anxieties as he tried to make sense of an unjust world. At his first session in late 2013, he wept while describing how his estranged biological father used to mistreat him (Lucatero said he could be abusive and violent). Later, he shared that he was worried about his mother because she wasn’t eating and that he was being bullied at school. During this time, he also told a therapist he had suicidal thoughts. Progress was marked by how often he pulled his hair as a coping mechanism or whether he was able to tame his outbursts in school. “Our lives never got easier but it was easier because we knew exactly what was going on,” Lucatero said. By the end of seventh grade, Luna’s therapist noted: “Client has done well in school this year with no incidents of mobile crisis or police being called. No elopement from school or hiding under furniture or cars in the parking lot.” Luna insisted on conducting his teletherapy sessions by phone, rather than video, and initially maintained that he felt safe. Of his suicidal thoughts, he remarked: “I don’t feel like I have to work on that stuff any more.” But a few weeks later in early April, his mood soured. The lockdowns and all that he was missing were on his mind. He told Jamison he felt angry that “something has been taken away from me.” The two brainstormed strategies for when his anger flared up, such as listening to music, taking a shower, or cycling. But that session, Jamison thought, could have gone deeper. In his notes, Jamison wondered if conducting the session by phone “could have hindered rapport and communication.” The session lasted only 30 minutes. On their next call two weeks later, Luna seemed especially concerned about his mental health. He reported that he was starting to have auditory hallucinations, like someone was making him feel as if he wanted to die. “I’m satisfied with life,” Luna said. “It’s like someone else is thinking for me.” Jamison suggested meditation to ward off the voice in his head. Susan Seabourn, the clinic manager, and Jamison recognized that Luna needed extra support. They repeatedly invited him to join their virtual teen therapy group – he did not have to talk or turn on the camera, they said. But it was to no avail. They had good reason to be concerned. Centerstone was seeing an increase in suicides among its 21 and under clients, up from three in 2019 to five between May and December 2020. This ratcheting up of acute distress roughly tracks what was taking place across the country. While there is still much to learn about all the ways the pandemic has affected children and taxed an already inadequate mental health system, between isolation, anxiety, and mounting household-level stress, young people like Luna have experienced and continue to experience worsening mental health outcomes. In a national survey of parents, 46% said they noticed a decline in their teenager’s mental health. Roughly a third of teen girls and a fifth of teen boys had increased symptoms of depression, poor sleep and withdrawing from family. The pandemic further coincided with a time of national upheaval and instability. Systemic problems like racial injustice and financial precarity can increase stress at home, all at a time when kids have nowhere to go, explained Jeffrey Bridge, director of the Center for Suicide Prevention and Research at Nationwide Children’s Hospital. Across the US, hospital emergency departments reported seeing more suicidal kids than they had in the year before the pandemic. The situation got so dire that the CEO of one Colorado children’s hospital declared a state of emergency. Children’s Hospital at Montefiore, the largest children’s hospital in the Bronx, saw an 80 percent increase in suicide attempts during the lockdown months over the previous year for patients under 21 years old, according to Dr Lisa Hutchison, an attending psychiatrist at Montefiore Medical Center. “I think everyone can agree that telehealth is not the same, especially for children living in poverty where access to screens and wifi and privacy are limited,” Hutchison said. “These challenges are not a reflection of telehealth’s failures, but rather reflect ongoing socioeconomic issues that continue to create barriers to care.” For children with more serious behavioral issues and psychiatric histories, virtual care might not be best for them or even possible. “They’re hyperactive, they’re dysregulated, they really struggle to connect with people on screen,” said Meredith Gansner, a child and adolescent psychiatrist at Cambridge Health Alliance in Massachusetts. For children who have experienced trauma, she added, it can be hard for them to even look at themselves on screen. Luna spent most of the lockdown at the home of his partner, Alex Fulton, a fellow 16-year-old who uses the pronoun they. Their days were spent in Fulton’s bedroom playing out endless Dungeons &amp; Dragons scenarios or building worlds in Minecraft. The two shared a similar mental health history that included hospitalization and years of being burdened by chronic suicidal thoughts. Fulton was his sympathetic ear, the one person who could understand what he was going through. During Luna’s therapy calls with Jamison, Fulton was often present. The sessions were sometimes helpful, Fulton recalled, though not in the way Jamison may have intended. Luna hated to talk about what was bothering him, Fulton explained, so much so that he’d try to talk about anything else, and his mind would shift out of his self-hatred. The distraction could sometimes leave him in a better mood. But not always. In early May, Luna told Jamison his suicidal thoughts had become overwhelming. He asked Luna if he wanted to talk to the mobile crisis team or the police. Luna told his therapist to call the police. Their phone connection then dropped. Luna was at Fulton’s house at the time. His stepfather, Kevin Poole, had just arrived and was idling outside waiting to pick Luna up when Jamison called him. Poole assured Jamison that he would take his step-son to the hospital. But Jamison called 911 anyway and requested the police do a “welfare check”. Therapists will call the police to interrupt a suicide attempt or check on a client they think might be in danger of making an attempt. The police can do an assessment on the spot and decide whether the client needs to be transported to the hospital. But by calling the police, the therapist risks alienating the client, who can feel humiliated and exposed by the experience. The police arrived and ordered Luna to come with them. To Fulton, the cops seemed indifferent and maybe a little annoyed – like they would rather be anywhere else. Luna hardly looked at them; he just followed their commands. This was the one time since the lockdown that Centerstone had intervened into his physical world. When the officers got outside with Luna, they told Poole to take him to the hospital. Luna seemed upset and shaken by the experience, “like he wanted to kill the world”, Poole said. On the ride to the hospital, Luna became defiant. There was no way the hospital was going to commit him. “I won’t talk to them,” Poole recalls Luna saying. “I won’t tell them anything. They can’t keep me.” At the hospital, Poole pulled the nurses aside and told them of Luna’s intent. But it didn’t make a difference. If Luna did not want to talk to them, they told Poole, there was nothing they could do. Luna was soon released. ••• Even under normal circumstances, clinicians have difficulty reaching those who become paranoid and mistrustful. During the pandemic, clinicians had to work especially hard just to get these clients to answer their calls and to stay on the line. Some hung up on them and weren’t reachable again. In these cases, clinicians need uninterrupted time in the same room as their clients. In person, therapists can gauge eye contact, body language, and even hygiene to determine whether there’s an immediate concern or something more benign, Gansner said. Kids, she noted, have an especially hard time distinguishing between what might be a really loud inner voice and what might be a hallucination. This can be terrifying for anyone, let alone a 17-year-old. Jamison, who no longer works at Centerstone, said he had a caseload of 150 clients, and of those he was regularly seeing 80. There was hardly time to think about clients ahead of their teletherapy sessions. The pressure fell hardest on clinicians, the majority of whom are paid fee-for-service, which means their wages are tied to productivity. Limiting therapy with Luna to phone calls made it even more challenging because Luna spoke in a monotone. The small circle of family and friends around Luna noticed a change in him after the police welfare check. At dinner, he pushed food around his plate, merely pretending to eat. He withdrew from conversations more and more. Lucatero thought she was watching her son become a ghost. “I just didn’t know how to fix him,” she said. Luna was still looking for answers from Centerstone. Five days after the incident, with Jamison’s prompting, the two explored Luna’s underlying depression and Luna thought maybe his anxieties were linked to his traumatic childhood. He added that he felt really down and was hopeless about his future. Jamison marked him, again, as a suicide risk. After one abbreviated session, Jamison’s notes contained a familiar refrain: “client seemed tired today and was not fully engaged in session.” Luna would open up just for a moment, the way a flat stone skips over the water before plunging back into the deep. The two were stuck. The onus was on the therapist to get them unstuck. “I don’t know if doing sessions on telehealth really made that much of a difference in his care,” Jamison said. “Overall I think we can connect with clients better when we can see them, when we are in the same room with them.” As spring inched closer to summer, Luna’s trust in therapy may have begun to falter. He didn’t answer his phone for two consecutive sessions. In a meeting with his medication provider at Centerstone, he complained of having an “anxiety attack”. He said his heart rate had spiked and he had trouble breathing. He had felt like he was dying. He seemed lost, describing his mood as “pretty bad” and said he hadn’t gotten much sleep. The provider recorded him as “markedly ill”. When he next spoke to Jamison, he told his therapist: “I’m super paranoid, and I’ve gotten to the point where I can’t trust anybody.” His mood persisted into their next session, where he said he had a “mental breakdown” the day before and still had suicidal thoughts periodically. Luna wouldn’t elaborate further. Again, the therapist wrote that Luna “presented with a flat mood, gave minimal responses”. Their next therapy call was scheduled for a month later. From what Jamison could remember, he just didn’t have another session time available. He only had time enough, he said, to call him once to check on him. But when he did call, Luna didn’t pick up. Meanwhile, Luna’s mood swings were only getting more extreme. When Lucatero and Poole took Luna and Fulton to Barnes &amp; Noble, it was the happiest they had seen him in a while. But the next day, on 3 July, Luna was so agitated that Lucatero left work to check on him. At home, she noticed that he seemed different, more desperate and more hopeless than usual. He paced their house, unable to calm down. But he had a solution. He asked his parents if they could drive him to the hospital. “He was reaching out for help,” Lucatero thought, like she had taught him. Poole had a shift at UPS that he couldn’t afford to miss, but Lucatero told Luna she would quickly clock out of her shift at a nearby convenience store, then come home and take him to the hospital. She’d be back in just a few minutes, 10 minutes at most. She told him she loved him. “I’ll be right back,” she said. He said he was going to get dressed so he’d be ready to go to the hospital. His two siblings were home too. Luna rummaged through his parents’ bedroom until he found his stepfather’s gun. It was the one gun they kept because Poole worked the late shift and Lucatero felt they needed protection in the home; they thought it was secure in a lockbox under their bed. On her way home, Lucatero noticed her phone was buzzing with texts and calls. She hit the gas and ignored them. When she arrived home, she found her daughter desperately trying to rouse Luna’s body. Paramedics rushed Luna to the hospital. But there was nothing the doctors could do. Lucatero asked for a chaplain who then escorted her to her son’s bedside. After they prayed over his body, she asked to be left alone with her “Tony”. She held his hand and tried to brush back his hair. She told him it was OK for him to go. After his death was confirmed, a nurse handed her a printout of her son’s last steady heartbeats and told her it would make a great tattoo, which she later had inked on her body. Within days of her son’s death, Lucatero made the 10-minute drive back to the convenience store to take a shift. She had to endure customers who told her that her son was going to hell or expressed relief that he didn’t kill anyone else before taking his own life. There were times when she had to hide in a back room to take refuge from their judgment. *** Luna was a victim of Covid. He may not have been one of the more than 700,000 Americans who have died from the virus, but the virus created the circumstances that led to his death – putting physical and psychological distance between him and the help he needed, upending the routines he had come to rely on for security and comfort. With the spread of increasingly contagious variants and too many Americans still refusing vaccination, the pandemic will define our lives for the foreseeable future. It will continue to create unbearable environments for teenagers. It is impossible to know if the continuation of his in-person therapy would have prevented Luna’s suicide, but it’s devastating to have to wonder. Fulton worried that people would view Luna’s death as a personal failing and not what it really was. “I feel like it was just a failure of the whole world,” Fulton said, “and every single thing that we had turned against us.” In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Rest O Earth, lie heavily upon her eyes; Seal her sweet eyes weary of watching, Earth; Lie close around her; leave no room for mirth With its harsh laughter, nor for sound of sighs. She hath no questions, she hath no replies, Hush’d in and curtain’d with a blessèd dearth Of all that irk’d her from the hour of birth; With stillness that is almost Paradise. Darkness more clear than noonday holdeth her, Silence more musical than any song; Even her very heart has ceased to stir: Until the morning of Eternity Her rest shall not begin nor end, but be; And when she wakes she will not think it long. Framed by Christina Rossetti in mainly secular terms, this prayer for rest seems at times simply a prayer for sleep. The state it evokes is nearly, but not quite, oblivion, a marginally conscious sense of succumbing to deliciously peaceful unconsciousness. While the sonnet’s title, Rest, inevitably carries the suggestion of death (and the closing lines reiterate this dimension) the opening plea, significantly, is to “Earth” itself. A certain sensory luxuriousness adheres to the substance – which is soil, planet and, perhaps, mother goddess. The chiasmic structure of the first two lines expresses earth’s all-encompassing solidity. Earth is also conceived almost as a visible form of darkness – the kind we may “see” when we close our eyes before dropping off . This earthen dark doesn’t only mercifully prevent sight but, in the poem, encloses the whole body and shuts down its responses. The first four lines very effectively mime a settling-down process. Rossetti handles the iambic line lightly, for instance, introducing a dactyl at the start of line two (Seal her sweet eyes). The effect is of slight tremors or shudders as muscles relax, and consciousness recedes. The even breathing of deep sleep can be imagined in the steadily metrical and beautifully serene fifth line, “She hath no questions, she hath no replies … ” That steadiness of rhythm is sustained to the last line of the octet: “With stillness that is almost Paradise”. The focus of “hushed in and curtained” seems to combine internal and external views. (A comparison with the sonnet After Death might be revealing). We see the speaker as a visitor to the bedside might, but we’re also still inside her mind, feeling the cessation of “all that irked her” and its exchange for the “stillness that is almost Paradise”. A particularly lyrical sestet finds the darkness clearer than “noonday” and yet it still “holds” her. There’s particular poignancy in such a music-loving and melodically attuned poet finding “Silence more musical than any song”. At this point, I feel convinced that the poem is autobiographical, despite the third-person point of view. The one who feels such an overwhelming peace in her imagined rest is the poet herself, “irked” for most of her life by severe ill-health besides being prey to turbulent mood swings: according to a Poetry Foundation essay, Christina and her brother Dante Gabriel were known during childhood as “the two storms”. In line 11 of the sonnet, the cessation of “the very heart” seems, again, to suggest a process that belongs to metaphorical rather than literal death – and to signify primarily the loss of emotional reaction. There’s a sense now that every nerve has been sedated. The process seems closer to death, as the focus moves from unconsciousness to a wonderful evocation of timelessness in line 13. Rest, above all, means the exclusion of the sense of passing time. The speaker will wake to “Eternity”, but the experience is described very much in terms of ordinary waking up. The last line gains its simple, colloquial power from this connecting sense of everyday experience. After an extra long sleep, we look at the clock in sheer disbelief and, as long as we haven’t missed some important deadline, satisfaction. “And when she wakes she will not think it long.” The theology of a recuperative post-mortem sleep seems liberal, compared with the demand for repentance in purgatory. Rossetti is certainly doing something more serious than praising “care-charmer sleep” but her vision is communicated so well, I think, because she understands what it is to be tired and worn, and knows the sheer sweet pleasure of turning in for a night’s kip.The first single I ever bought Tearin’ Up My Heart by ’NSync. My mum and I used to go to Peckham Woolworths every Saturday. She never used to let me buy singles, she’d always say: “Wait for the album,” but she let me buy this one because it was in the bargain bin. That’s when my love affair with Justin Timberlake started. *** The song that is my karaoke go-to Last Night a DJ Saved My Life [by Indeep]. As soon as it starts, the beat is pure funk. Also you can make someone else do the rap, so it’s functional when it comes to getting people up who don’t really want to do karaoke. *** The song I inexplicably know every lyric to DJ Pied Piper and the Masters of Ceremonies’ Do You Really Like It? I had that on tape and I made up a dance routine to it. When it comes on I’m like [starts rapping] “Hardcore, you know the score … ” I just played it to death. *** The best song to play at a party Like Glue by Sean Paul. The music video is my idea of a sick house party. In terms of when to play it during the night, I’d say it’s best when things are winding down. It’s still got energy to it but it’s not “ompf, ompf, ompf”. *** The song I want played at my funeral R U Sleeping by Indo. I think it would be a funny song to play at my funeral. I can have an open casket and everyone can sing “You better wake up” to me. *** The song I pretend to hate that I secretly like I was a massive Vengaboys fan when I was younger. At primary school We Like to Party! (The Vengabus) was kicking off at every party and disco. I actually put it on earlier and it made me so happy. Their whole back catalogue is sick, but I have to pick that one as my favourite. *** The song I tell people is my favourite Someone asked me the other day who I would listen to if I could only listen to one artist for the rest of my life, and the first person to come to mind was Erykah Badu. My favourite is Didn’t Cha Know. It’s a nice, warming, comforting song. *** The song that is my actual favourite I Will Survive by Gloria Gaynor. It’s kind of seen as a silly song but when it comes on I actually get quite emotional. I start welling up. It’s such a victorious song. It can relate to any situation where you’ve come out the other side. The strings in it are amazing, her voice is amazing, I’m even getting goosebumps now just talking about it. Katy B’s Peace and Offerings EP is out now.A cloak of darkness hangs over the opening of this film, directed by Chloe Fairweather, as a young woman takes the camera crew to the place where her ex-husband shot at her in a fit of rage. Such painful anecdotes recur throughout this stirring documentary which examines the correlation between gender-based violence in Turkey and the country’s political turbulences. Following the court cases handled by the We Will Stop Femicide Platform, a Turkish feminist advocacy group, the film closely captures how women are being systematically failed at every institutional level. Married off according to traditional custom at the age of 14, Arzu was shot multiple times by her husband after asking for a divorce, leaving her paralysed. In another case, Kubra, a former Bloomberg news presenter, was hit repeatedly on the head by her husband, causing a brain haemorrhage. Despite the cruelty of these attacks, the victims and their lawyers cannot rely on the justice system for fair punishment, since domestic violence cases often result in reduced sentences. The healthcare system is also complicit; traumas sustained from domestic abuse are written off as either self-inflicted or casual injuries. In 2019 alone, more than 470 women were killed in Turkey, their names honoured on the screen as the film’s ending lends a humanity to the shocking statistic. Powerfully interweaving the intimacy of these stories with the fevered rallies for President Erdoğan, who has openly criticised the feminist movement, the documentary paints a bleak picture of Turkish women’s rights. Still, at a time when lawyers are being arrested and killed, the courage of Ipek Bozkurt, a feminist attorney highlighted in the film, is exceptionally moving. The film might begin in the dark, but it is looking towards a more hopeful light. • Dying to Divorce is released on 24 November in cinemas.Britain loves toast for breakfast but, arguably, lacks a sense of adventure about how to top it. As a nation, we tend to stick to marmalade, lemon curd and a small number of fruit jams, neglecting what, if you look around the world, are the endlessly varied, spreadable ways in which you can titivate toast. To inspire you, here are 20 chefs and food-lovers on the international spreads that make their breakfast toast bang. You may never eat strawberry jam again. Molasses and tahini In the eastern Mediterranean, nutty tahini is often mixed into something sweet, such as honey or – in Turkey – molasses-like fruit syrups called pekmez. For two people, mix together 30g of tahini with 30g of date or mulberry molasses, and slap it on buttered sourdough. “If you want it richer,” advises Esra Muslu, the chef-owner of Zahter, London, “instead of butter, add kaymak on top – it’s like clotted cream.” Finally, scatter crushed walnuts over your toast. Ricotta and honey Italian food lovers go into raptures about eating fresh sheep ricotta in Italy. Gip Dammone, co-owner of Salvo’s in Leeds, remembers family trips home to Sicily where a farmer would go door to door, cheese “dripping from conical baskets on a yoke round his neck. Everyone came out to buy some for breakfast, eaten on bread or toast, sprinkled with sugar or sometimes coffee grounds.” In the UK, cow’s ricotta is more common. Spread on sourdough toast (approximately 300g for four slices), dressed with honey and toasted almonds, it still makes a tasty breakfast – indeed, some brunch fans are calling it the new avo toast. For maximum authenticity, try the semolina flour pane Siciliano bread recipe available at the online deli Strazzanti. Plantain spread “As kids, we had fried plantain sandwiches in Jamaican hardo bread. This is my healthier take,” says Michelle Miah, co-owner of Rudie’s Jerk Shack venues in London. For two people, choose a very ripe, blackening plantain. Wrap it in foil and roast it for an hour at 200C (180C fan)/400F/gas 6. Mash the plantain with a little cinnamon, and add honey to sweeten, if necessary. Spread on buttered Jamaican hard dough bread, AKA hardo, or any dense loaf. Anko This sweet adzuki or red bean jam has multiple uses, but, in Japanese ogura toast, it is served on thick shokupan toast with either a square of butter or whipped cream on top. Its beany flavour is “unique”, says Nina Matsunaga, the chef-owner of the Black Bull in Sedbergh: “It’s similar in mouthfeel to tinned chestnuts.” Making anko takes hours but you can buy it readymade from specialist suppliers such as Japan Centre or Sous Chef. If want to make your own anko, spend what you can on the adzuki beans: “Cheaper beans can be a little bitter. Plumper beans give a smoother texture.” Gochujang Fold the sweet, savoury heat of this Korean fermented chilli paste into butter and spread away, advises chef Judy Joo from Seoul Bird restaurants, London. Or mix in some Marmite, too: “Its soy-sauce-like flavour goes well with gochujang’s spicy, earthy notes. It’s like an umami bomb going off in your mouth.” Sprat pate Growing up in Siberia, cookery writer Alissa Timoshkina, the author of Salt &amp; Time: Recipes from a Russian Kitchen (Mitchell Beazley), loved sea buckthorn jam: “But savoury breakfasts are probably more common than sweet ones – things like Russian cheese and salami. Patés such as cod’s liver and sprats are also a staple.” To make paté for six people, drain a 240g can of sprats in oil (available in eastern European stores; alternatively, sardines are a good sub), and mash them with two hard-boiled egg yolks and 2 tbsp of mayonnaise, until smooth. Add lemon juice and seasoning to taste and, optionally, grated cheddar and chopped dill, before topping slices of toasted baguette. Peanut butter and ‘jelly’ Shaun Hurrell, the chef-owner of the Mexican restaurant Barrio Comida in Durham, spent his formative years in California and occasionally rolls out this US staple for his kids. Cheap, smooth, highly processed peanut butter with grape jelly (ie clear jam, no bits) is the classic combo on white bread, served sandwich-style or on toast. “On toast, go peanut butter first then jelly, so all the peanut butter’s gooey fats start to melt. It’s not normally done to butter the bread.” Sweet soy butter “Bread is not traditional Japanese food, but it’s everywhere,” says Masaki Sugisaki, the chef-owner of Dinings SW3, London. At home, it is often toasted and topped with sweet soy butter: “It has a salted caramel-like flavour with a nutty sesame aroma.” Per slice of toast (thick-cut shokupan milk bread, ideally), mix 1 tbsp of sugar with 1 tbsp of mirin and ½ tsp of soy sauce in a ramekin and microwave it until boiling. Butter the toast and brush over half the sweet soy mix. Return the toast to the grill until the sweet soy begins to caramelise. Remove the toast. Apply the remaining sweet soy and, preferably, dress the toast with roasted sesame oil and black sesame seeds. Cut into quarters and serve. Olive paste “I’ve always chosen salt over sugar. At breakfast, I want punchy, salty flavours,” says Crete-born Marianna Leivaditaki, the head chef at Morito, Hackney Road, London, and author of Aegean (Kyle Books). To that end, per person Leivaditaki blitzes two handfuls of destoned, brined green olives with a few pieces of sun-dried tomato, “capers, a bit of garlic, dried oregano and drops of red wine vinegar”. Adjust to taste and smother on toasted sourdough. Top with halved cherry tomatoes, olive oil and an anchovy fillet: “A delicious start to your day.” Kaya Popular in south-east Asia, this coconut jam or curd (in the UK, look out for Madam Chang’s Great Taste award-winning version) is thought to be the creation of Hainanese chefs who, historically, were often employed by British colonial bosses. As a dish, it has morphed significantly over the centuries. Typically, it is made with white sliced bread, crust off (some aficionados prefer brown), with the jam and a thick slice of cold butter sandwiched between two slices. “The butter is important – you need a hunk of it,” says Sandra Leong, the UK director of the Singaporean fast-food chain Old Chang Kee in London. This toast sandwich is then dipped into runny, soft-boiled eggs seasoned with soy sauce and white pepper for a compelling sweet-savoury contrast. “The yolk gives it extra richness, too.” Msabacha Middle Eastern msabacha or msabbaha (spellings vary) is a chunky hummus variant which, says chef Eyal Jagermann, the leader of Israeli courses at the online cookery platform Rassa, people are increasingly “playing around” with in Tel Aviv. “Originally, it was eaten with pitta, but you see it in sandwiches and on toast with olive oil, chopped parsley and tatbelah – a cool condiment you can make by mixing a finely chopped garlic glove and half a deseeded green chilli into the juice of a lemon.” To make msabacha for two, mix 50-60g of tahini into 150g of cooked chickpeas, loosening the mix with cooking water and seasoning it with lemon juice and salt. “It’s best eaten warm and fresh,” says Jagermann. Condensed milk Colonial rule and the upheaval of the second world war left Hong Kong and wider south-east Asia with a love of condensed milk in tea, used as a dessert topping or spread on unbuttered, toasted white bread. “We call it GI food, things in a tin,” says Taiwan-born Erchen Chang, the creative director at Bao restaurants in London. “As a kid, particularly, condensed milk’s milky, toffee flavour felt indulgent.” Pan con tomate As a Valencian, Jose Garzón, the head chef at Porta in Chester, favours the approach of neighbouring Catalonia: toasted slices of “light, airy Spanish coca” (or use ciabatta) are gently rubbed with a peeled garlic clove and a halved very ripe tomato, then drizzled generously with extra-virgin olive oil and sea salt. But, says Garzón, “If you don’t have ripe tomatoes, you can finely grate them and spread them on the bread.” In fact, that technique is common in other parts of Spain. If using poor-quality tomatoes, let them sit in oil and salt to develop the flavour. Do not deseed them: “I find the flavour is more in that juice around the seeds than the pulp.” Salată de vinete “In Romania,” says food writer Irina Georgescu, the author of Carpathia: Food from the Heart of Romania (Frances Lincoln), “it’s traditional to serve savoury breakfasts, which often turn into mini-feasts.” Salată de vinete, an aubergine spread, is a feature. To serve two, cook a medium aubergine in a griddle pan over a high heat, turning it regularly until it softens (10-15 minutes). Once cooled, halve the aubergine. Scoop out and roughly chop the flesh. In a bowl, slowly stir in 20-25ml of oil (sunflower, normally) and a quarter of a finely diced red onion until everything is smoothly incorporated. Serve on unbuttered toast, seasoned with salt, pepper and drops of cider vinegar. Dulce de leche Nicknamed milk jam, this caramelly amalgam of milk and sugar is an obsession in South America, where it is further flavoured with vanilla, cinnamon, chocolate or honey. Making your own is worthwhile but laborious. As an intro, you can find it in delis and online. “My favourite way to eat it is spread on brioche with toasted cashews or hazelnuts,” says Brazilian/Italian Rafael Cagali, the chef-owner of Da Terra, London. Amlou Almond-based Moroccan amlou has, says chef Nargisse Benkabbou, the author of Casablanca (Mitchell Beazley), “a nutty, earthy taste nicely balanced with honey”. It is eaten as a dip or spread on pitta-like batbout bread but, says Benkabbou, “I love mine with good white sourdough.” For two to four people, in a food processor combine 50g almond butter, 30ml Moroccan argan oil (eg Belazu’s, or substitute walnut oil), 20ml clear honey and a good pinch of salt. Shito “Growing up, my Aunt Grace Mary would visit from Ghana and eat shito on toast. I thought this was a strange use of this umami chilli sauce made with dried fish and smoked prawns, but now I’m fully converted for breakfast,” says the chef Akwasi Brenya-Mensa, who next year will open a restaurant, Tatale, at theAfrica Centre in London. You can buy shito in several supermarkets. Brenya-Mensa prefers it on Caribbean hard dough bread or the sweet bread from the Ghanaian bakery Uncle John’s in London. “I like that slight sweetness in contrast with the heat.” Lardo Where pigs are raised in southern Europe, you will find people letting slivers of what the Italians call lardo (cured pork back fat – widely available in UK delis) melt into toast. Transylvanians also make a moussey lardo spread, chisătură. To serve four, blend 125g of rindless lardo in a food processor with the white of two spring onions and a handful of chopped parsley. “Spread thick on warm toast. It melts in the mouth and feels light despite its robustness,” says Irina Georgescu. Bombay sandwich chutney Unsurprisingly, this was originally a sandwich filling, often putting some pep in a cheese toastie. But, says Gouranga Bera, a chef at the Curry Leaf Cafe in Brighton: “Like lots of people back home, I love it on toast. The flavour’s fresh with a nice chilli kick.” For two people, in a food processor blitz 70g of coriander, 30g mint leaves, two spring onions, one hot green chilli, 10g of fresh ginger, the juice of half a lime and ½ tsp of salt into a paste. Heap on white toast, crusts cut off, butter optional. Liptauer Variations of this sharp, spicy Slovakian cheese spread are served throughout central Europe, often during a blowout brunch. “Originally, it was served on schwarzbrot, black bread, or traditional sourdough. But it works just as well on a baguette or crispy toast,” says Hubert Zanier, the owner of Kipferl, London, an Austrian deli-restaurant. For four people, mix 250g fresh soft cheese (typically quark, but cottage cheese or ricotta will stand in) with 50g of unsalted butter and 3 tbsp of sour cream, until smooth. Fold in 1 tsp of smooth mustard; 10 large chopped capers; 3 small diced pickled gherkins; 1 tsp crushed cumin seeds; 1 tsp sweet paprika; 1 tsp salt; and 1 tsp black pepper. Importantly, advises Zanier: “Let it rest for one hour before serving.”Homemade mincemeat is simple to make and easy to store, so I always make a few jars before Christmas. One batch of pastry and one jar of mincemeat will make 12 mince pies. This crisp pastry holds the filling well and I prefer to cut out a star shape to cover the top of the pies, allowing some of the filling to be visible. It also provides a better mincemeat to pastry ratio. You can keep a tray of uncooked pastry shells in the freezer to fill and bake for last-minute mince pies; they also make sweet gifts, in a box tied with a ribbon. For the mincemeat, makes three 350ml jars Bramley apples 225g, cored and chopped small shredded suet 110g raisins 175g sultanas 110g currants 110g mixed candied peel 110g, chopped finely dark brown sugar 175g orange juice and zest of 1 lemon juice and zest of 1 blanched almonds 25g, chopped ground mixed spice 2 tsp cinnamon 1 tsp grated nutmeg a pinch fine sea salt a pinch brandy 3 tbsp For the sweet pastry, makes 12 pies plain flour 250g caster sugar 25g salt a pinch cold butter 170g ice-cold water egg 1, beaten For the mincemeat, in a bowl large enough to hold all the ingredients, mix everything together and stir well. Cover and set aside overnight. The next day, put the mixture into a large pan and gently heat, stirring, until the fat has melted and the mixture is heated through. Remove from the heat and allow to cool before packing into sterilised jars. This will keep for up to a year in a cool place and it’s best left for a week or so before use for the flavours to really mingle. For the pastry, put the flour, sugar and salt into a mixer and add the butter, in large chunks. Blitz until the butter has been cut up into petit pois-sized pieces, then tip the mixture into a bowl. Add 3–4 tablespoons of cold water and start to bring the mixture together lightly, with your hands. Add more water if necessary to form a cohesive dough. Wrap in clingfilm and press into a disc shape, then chill for at least half an hour before rolling. Roll on a lightly floured surface to approx 5mm thickness. Cut out round shapes, large enough to fill a standard 12-hole tart tray. Re-roll the remainder and cut out 12 stars to put on top. Heat the oven to 130C fan/gas mark 2. Fill the pastry cases with mincemeat and top with the stars. Brush with egg and bake for 25–30 minutes or until the pastry is browned and crisp. Allow to cool before removing from the tray. Blanche Vaughan is a cook and food writerA Christmas ham is a thing of joy and smoky, sticky deliciousness. This recipe is an easy to deliver but beautiful version that will really make you look accomplished to your friends and family – and keep them coming back for more! Serves 3–4 people smoked gammon 1kg-1.2kg joint For the poaching liquor whole black peppercorns 5g bay leaves 3 onion 1 medium (approx 150g), quartered red chilli 1 large (approx 6g) celery sticks 100g (with leaves), roughly chopped cold water 2 litres For the glaze dark brown sugar 120g poaching liquor 60ml, from the pot rum 50ml – any dark or gold, but I wouldn’t advise using white cranberry juice 40ml black treacle 3 tbsp Place the joint of gammon in a deep pot (it will have a dark brown rind on it but we will take that off later) and add all of the poaching ingredients, topping up with cold water to cover. Put a lid on the pot and simmer gently for 2 hours. Remove the meat, cover with a cloth and leave to cool on a rack or board, and make your glaze. Combine all the glaze ingredients in a pot and turn the heat right up and bring to a rolling boil. Let it vigorously boil for 5 minutes, then turn the heat down and let it boil a little more gently for 20 minutes. The mixture will thicken. Remove from heat and leave to one side. Now, we return to the gammon. Take one corner of the brown rind and peel back gently. Take your time, there’s no rush; you want to remove the rind but leave the fat on the joint. Now take a small knife and score the fat – you just need to make a criss-cross pattern right across the top over all the fat. Heat your oven to 170C fan/gas mark 5. Place the gammon joint in a baking dish and pour your glaze all over the meat, then slip into the preheated oven and bake for 15 minutes. When 15 minutes are up, take the baking dish out and, with a long handled spoon, spoon the glaze from the dish back over the ham then return to the oven for a further 15 minutes. Repeat this twice more. Then the ham will be ready, glazed and gorgeous. Eat the ham hot with roast or mashed potatoes and loads of greens, or cold, sliced thinly in a toasted cheese sandwich. Andi Oliver is a chef, broadcaster and food writerYou need to start this recipe three days ahead. Serves 8–10 people whole coriander seeds 2 tbsp whole cloves 1 tbsp whole black peppercorns 2 tbsp unwaxed orange finely grated zest of 1 flaky sea salt 150g, or fine sea salt sugar 150g side of salmon 1.2 kg, skin on toasted rye bread to serve For the citrus cream full-fat Greek yoghurt 200g (10% fat content) unwaxed lemon finely grated zest of 1 lemon juice 2 tbsp fresh thyme 1 tbsp, chopped fresh dill 4 tbsp, chopped Using a pestle and mortar, lightly crush the coriander seeds, cloves and peppercorns together. Add to the bowl with the orange zest, the salt and sugar and mix well. Line a ceramic dish at least 40cm long with clingfilm, letting it overhang the sides, and place the salmon fillet skin-side down inside the dish. Spoon the spice cure evenly over the salmon, making sure the whole fillet is covered. Wrap the clingfilm tightly around the fillet so the mixture stays in place. Refrigerate for 3 days to cure. Rinse the cure mixture off and make sure to wipe the fish clean. For the citrus cream, mix the yoghurt with lemon zest and juice, thyme and dill, and season to taste with salt and pepper. Cut the salmon away from the skin into thin slices and serve with citrus cream and rye toast. Trine Hahnemann is a Copenhagen-based chef and food writerTo serve 4–6 as a nibble salsify 6 sticks lemon juice of 1 salt and pepper butter 120g, melted parmesan 90g, grated feuilles de brick pastry 3 sheets Preheat the oven to 180C fan/gas mark 6. Wash the salsify very well. Peel swiftly and brush lightly with lemon juice. Bring a pan of water to the boil and salt lightly. Drop in the salsify and simmer until tender, around 12–15 minutes. Remove from the pan when cooked and cool. Lay the brick pastry sheets on a surface, cut each in half so they are half-moon shapes, anoint with butter, liberally season with salt and pepper, and strew with parmesan. Lay the salsify along the flat side and roll very tightly towards the curved side. Lay the wrapped salsify upon a baking sheet. Brush with any remaining butter and bake for 12 minutes or until golden brown. Lift carefully from the oven and remove to a board. To serve, cut into three or four pieces, adding a little more grated parmesan. Jeremy Lee is chef-proprietor of Quo Vadis, London W1This has been my Christmas centrepiece for the last couple of years. It’s everything I want in a pie: a cheddar and winter-herb flaky pastry; a creamy filling, sweet with balsamic garlic and roasted celeriac; and a crisp grated celeriac roof. Serves 8–10 For the pastry plain spelt flour 250g, plus a little extra for dusting unsalted butter 125g, cold, cubed fine sea salt ½ tsp rosemary, thyme and sage a few sprigs of each, leaves picked and finely chopped unwaxed lemon zest of 1 good cheddar 25g, grated egg yolk 1 medium cold water 50–70ml For the filling garlic 3 heads, cloves separated and peeled olive oil balsamic vinegar 1 tsp runny honey 1 tbsp rosemary, thyme and sage 2 sprigs of each, leaves picked and finely chopped, plus extra to finish celeriac 1kg Lancashire or good cheddar cheese 220g, crumbled creme fraiche 150g lemon juice of ½ wholegrain mustard 1 tbsp parsley a small bunch, chopped Worcestershire sauce eggs 2, beaten Put the flour into a mixing bowl. Add the butter and salt. Rub gently with your fingertips until the mixture is like fine breadcrumbs. Stir through the herbs, lemon zest and cheddar. Beat the egg yolk with 1 tablespoon of cold water. Add to the flour and mix until it forms a dough. Add more water, a teaspoon at a time, until it comes together into a smooth dough. Wrap in clingfilm and chill in the fridge while you make the filling. For the filling, put the cloves of garlic into a saucepan, cover with cold water and bring to a gentle simmer. Cook for 2–3 minutes, then drain. Wipe the saucepan dry. Add the garlic and 1 tablespoon of olive oil and fry on a high heat for 2 minutes. Add the balsamic vinegar and 100ml water, bring to the boil and simmer gently for 10 minutes. Add the honey, most of the rosemary and thyme (reserving the rest, with the sage) and a good pinch of salt. Continue to cook on a medium heat for a further 5 minutes, or until most of the liquid has evaporated and the garlic cloves are coated in a dark syrup. Meanwhile, peel the celeriac and cut it into quarters. Set aside 300g and slice the rest into 2cm-thick pieces. Put them into a saucepan, cover with hot water and boil for 7–10 minutes, until they are soft and have turned slightly translucent. Drain and tip into a big mixing bowl. Add the cheese, creme fraiche, lemon juice, mustard, parsley, a splash of Worcestershire sauce and eggs. Add a good pinch of salt and grind of pepper and gently fold in the garlic cloves. Preheat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Sprinkle flour on a work surface and roll out the pastry to 3–4mm thick. Line a 20cm-diameter cake tin with the pastry, ensuring a little spills over the edges. Pour the filling into the pastry case. Coarsely grate the reserved celeriac and pile it on top. Finish with the reserved rosemary and thyme, all the sage, and a drizzle of olive oil. Bake for 45 minutes or until the tart filling has set and the top is golden brown. Remove from the oven, leave to cool a little, then take it out of the tin. Lay a few herbs on top and serve warm. From The Modern Cook’s Year by Anna Jones (Fourth Estate, £26). To support the Guardian and Observer, order a copy from guardianbookshop.com.What is the social care cap? The cap is a lifetime limit of £86,000 on how much individuals will have to pay towards their care costs. First proposed more than a decade ago by the economist Sir Andrew Dilnot in a government-commissioned review, it is designed to allow individuals hit by hefty care costs to pass on more of their assets to their children, instead of seeing them wiped out. In September Boris Johnson announced the cap would be implemented from 2023, funded by a new £12bn-a-year “health and social care levy” that comes into force next April. What has been announced ? While MPs at Westminster were focused on the scandal over MPs’ second jobs, the government published new details of how the social care cap will operate. People with assets of less than £100,000 will receive means-tested support to help them pay for their care, under the new system. But Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) guidance has revealed that only the amount these households contribute themselves – not the total cost of their care – will count towards the £86,000 cap. In other words, many will still end up paying a total of £86,000, the same contribution those with much larger assets will have to make. That approach was rejected by the Dilnot review as “unfair for those on low incomes” because the net effect would be that this group “contribute more slowly, rather than contributing less overall” than much wealthier individuals. What do experts make of the changes? Sally Warren, director of policy at the King’s Fund, said the cap as described “no longer protects those with lower assets from catastrophic costs” when they need care. Torsten Bell, of the Resolution Foundation thinktank, tweeted: “Here’s a simple way to think about the problem the government has created: if you own a £1m house in the home counties, over 90% of your assets are protected. If you’ve got a terraced house in Hartlepool (worth £70k) you can lose almost everything.” Will MPs be given a vote on the cap? Yes, the vote will be held on Monday evening. A cap on care costs was originally legislated for by MPs in the 2014 Care Act under David Cameron’s coalition government but never implemented. That legislation will now have to be amended to make it operate in the way the government is suggesting. This could give Conservative MPs concerned about the impact on lower-income households the opportunity to express their concerns and possibly rebel against the government. And is £86,000 the maximum anyone will pay for their care? No. The DHSC guidance also makes clear that, as expected and as Dilnot recommended, “daily living costs” will be excluded. These will be set at a nationwide flat rate of £200 a week. The guidance says: “People will remain responsible for their daily living costs throughout their care journey, including after they reach the cap.” • The headline of this article was amended on 18 November 2021. The original incorrectly suggested the social care cap would cover the whole of the UK. The policy covers only England.A former barrister who led the first strike at the England and Wales bar has said he “can’t see any alternative” to fresh industrial action in a dispute over legal aid fees. Nigel Lithman QC said conditions and morale were worse now than when barristers walked out in 2014 over the same complaint – that pay for publicly funded work was too low. At that time he was head of the Criminal Bar Association (CBA); he went on to become a judge, and retired last year. The strike, believed to be the only one to date in the bar’s history, was called off after a day and a half when the government suspended planned legal aid cuts. “What should have happened is that remuneration should have then been taken on an upward trajectory to increase the rates of pay,” Lithman said. “That would have stopped what has happened, which is the exodus of lawyers from the criminal justice system.” According to the CBA, 22% of junior criminal barristers have left since 2016. Lithman said: “We’ve reached the position where they’re waiting to see [new] offers for their remuneration but knowing that they are likely to take action again. I’m right behind them because I can’t see any alternative. At the moment it looks like they are being led up the garden path.” Lithman, whose book on his career, Nothing Like the Truth: the Trials and Tribulations of a Criminal Judge, is published on Thursday, said it was inevitable that the threat of legal action would be used in talks with the Ministry of Justice (MoJ), and if a fair deal was not forthcoming “there’ll have to be stronger steps taken”. He said he continued to provide moral support to the CBA, which declared earlier this month that it would be gauging the appetite of its members “for action should it become clear that there is no likelihood of a decent settlement on fees for our members. Nothing will be ruled out.” In a 2019 ballot, CBA members overwhelmingly supported a mandate for action to secure fair fees, but it was suspended pending the outcome of the keenly awaited criminal legal aid review, which was launched in March 2019 and whose findings are due to be published this year. Lithman said: “The idea that one can be earning – according to one set of figures – £12,000 a year for the first three years, it’s totally unacceptable. And you’re then getting back to all the issues of diversity, of people not being able to come to become a criminal advocate unless they’re well-off in the first place.” He said that as well as increasing pay rates, barristers’ earnings could be boosted – and the backlog in courts reduced – by making all non-trial hearings remote by default, thereby allowing advocates to appear at different courts on the same day. Having been on both sides of the bench, he is convinced judges would be sympathetic to industrial action by barristers. Giving credence to his viewpoint, on Tuesday the lord chief justice, Lord Burnett, told parliament’s justice committee there was a shortage of criminal lawyers, “and the likely reason is the relentless reduction in real rates of remuneration over the last 15 years”. An MoJ spokesperson said: “We continue to support legal professionals and have invested an additional £51m in the sector. We will set out our plans to reform the criminal legal aid system shortly.”Energy giant Woodside will forge ahead on the Scarborough gas project off Western Australia’s northwest coast after it gave the project final approval. The $16.2bn Scarborough project is a joint venture between Woodside and BHP and the announcement posted to the ASX on Monday afternoon also confirms the two companies have agreed to a $40b merger of their petroleum businesses, creating one of the world’s biggest fossil fuel companies. The oil and gas field will be one of the biggest fossil fuel projects in Australia in the last decade and has been labelled a “disaster” by environmentalists. The field lies 375km off the Western Australian coast and will consist of eight wells drilled in the initial phase, with 30 to be drilled over its lifetime. A 430km pipeline will link it to the mainland, and the Pluto LNG processing facility near Karratha will be expanded to handle the increased capacity as production is slated to begin in 2026. Woodside chief executive, Meg O’Neill, said the project would mark a “transformative” moment for the company and insisted it would be a source of low-carbon gas. “The Scarborough reservoir contains only around 0.1% carbon dioxide, and Scarborough gas processed through the efficient and expanded Pluto LNG facility supports the decarbonisation goals of our customers in Asia,” O’Neill said. “Developing Scarborough delivers value for Woodside shareholders and significant long-term benefits locally and nationally, including thousands of jobs, taxation revenue and the supply of gas to export and domestic markets for decades to come.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning BHP chief executive, Mike Henry, said the merger would provide value for the resources giant’s shareholders. “Scarborough will provide a reliable source of LNG for global customers and secure gas supply for the domestic market, as well as ongoing employment in Western Australia,” he said. A report by the Conservation Council of Western Australia and the Australia Institute released in June found the project would release 1.6bn tonnes of greenhouse gases across its lifetime – or the equivalent of 15 coal-fired power plants. Under the company’s carbon abatement plan, Woodside will be allowed to increase its emissions of greenhouse gas over the next decade before attempting to reach net zero by 2050. The development has been fiercely opposed by environmental groups such as the Conservation Council of WA, which launched an 11th-hour legal action against the project last week. They say it represents the most polluting fossil fuel development in recent memory. The International Energy Agency said in May that limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop this year. Greenpeace Australia Pacific CEO David Ritter said that Woodside was “treating Australian’s with contempt” by forging ahead on the project. “Public outrage at what Woodside has planned - the threats to whales, the marine environment, the WA coastline and the climate - will continue to grow,” Ritter said. “For so long as the company persists on this course, the corporate name of Woodside will become synonymous with the destruction of everything that Australians hold dear.” Director of climate and environment with the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility, Dan Gocher, described the company’s decision as a “desperate” attempt to escape its financial woes. “Woodside doesn’t seem to care about climate. It didn’t talk about climate or emissions in its release,” Gocher said. “It’s a disaster all round, to be honest.”The Truro-based Three Spires Singers – founded 40 years ago this year by the late conductor Richard Hickox – marked their anniversary with a substantial commission from the Cornish composer Graham Fitkin. It was premiered in Truro Cathedral by the singers and their orchestra, together with the Cornwall Girls’ and Boys’ Choirs, and soloists counter-tenor Rory McCleery and narrator Samuel West, conducted by Christopher Gray. Fitkin was asked for a Cornwall-centred work, and he settled on the Penzance-born chemist Humphry Davy as its subject; the composer himself was a pupil at Humphry Davy grammar school in Penzance. He sees the “relationship between science, culture and political movements as constantly fluid and interdependent”, and his text for Humphry Davy – The Age of Aspiration combines extracts from Davy’s notebooks detailing his experiments and discoveries with passages providing a wider context for the period around the turn of the 19th century when the scientist worked, when the industrial revolution was gathering momentum and the horrors of the slave trade were being revealed. Davy’s observations, many of them dealing with his work on gases and breathing, are mostly given to the counter-tenor, while the narrator supplies the historical detail, including an extract from William Wilberforce’s 1789 Commons speech on the abolition of slavery; the chorus provides a gently shifting, dappled background to it all, fastening on individual words and phrases, as well as the sounds of breathing. It all builds slowly, with the orchestra mostly in a supporting role, and just occasional outbursts providing a reminder that all the scientific and industrial progress came at a huge social cost; the ending is quietly beautiful but at the same time profoundly ambiguous. The texts are elaborately interwoven, and the performances from the choirs and soloists did a remarkable job in making so many of them audible in a cathedral acoustic that in the first half of the concert had largely reduced the text of Poulenc’s Gloria to incoherence, and played havoc with the balance between the soloist and orchestra in Cordelia Williams’ brisk, no-nonsense account of Ravel’s G major Piano Concerto.At Joe’s Travel Plaza, a neon-lit rest stop on California’s main interstate highway, truckers can get a brief respite from life on the road. There’s a TV lounge, a laundry room and a free shower if you buy at least 75 gallons of fuel. There’s even a pair of massage chairs in the corner. But drivers here are worried about the future. The supply chain crisis roiling the US has inevitably drawn them in, with a shortage of drivers being blamed for containers idling in ports and packages being delayed for months. The trucking industry’s main trade body has said America is short about 80,000 drivers, a figure that’s made headlines around the country. Truckers say the problem isn’t a shortage of qualified drivers; there’s plenty of people who have been through the training programs and hold a commercial driver’s license. The rot, they say, is far more systemic: low pay, long hours and an industry that treats drivers like “cannon fodder”, churning out new recruits who inevitably quit because the job is so grueling. “There is no driver shortage; there’s a retention problem,” said Mike Doncaster, a 30-year veteran and driver trainer who parked his big rig at Joe’s Travel Plaza for the night, before heading up to Canada with another load of vegetables. He said of the five drivers he’s trained in recent years, only one stuck with the industry. “It’s not a job; it’s a lifestyle – and new recruits don’t receive enough pay for the lifestyle.” This month, the American Trucking Association said the nation will need to recruit nearly 1 million more drivers in the next decade to keep up with demands. Bob Costello, the chief economist for the American Trucking Association, said in a statement that the reasons behind the latest shortage are myriad – an increasing demand for freight, pandemic-related challenges, early retirements and driving school and DMV closures, to name a few. “There has been tremendous pressure on the driver pool,” as a result, he said. But labor economists, trucking experts and the drivers themselves described an industry where deregulation and constant pressure to deliver goods at ever-cheaper prices has resulted in working conditions so poor and pay rates so low that they amounted to “indentured servitude”. As a result, companies that trained and recruited new drivers often had turnover rates as high as 100% in a year, they said. Rise of the ‘owner-operator’ scheme Trucking used to be a high-paying, blue-collar job, but since the industry was deregulated in 1980, pay rates have dropped dramatically, said economics professor Michael Belzer, who authored the book Sweatshops on Wheels: Winners and Losers in Trucking Deregulation. One of the biggest problems is that most drivers get paid by the mile, often meaning that while they’re waiting to load their trucks, stuck in traffic jams, or on mandatory rest breaks, they aren’t making money, said Belzer. “Drivers earn a piece-rate wage that may look attractive but, when they realize the big promises aren’t real, they exit,” said Belzer, who drove a truck in the 1980s, but is now a professor at Wayne State University in Michigan. “If you can work construction and get paid $20 an hour and be home every night, why would you drive a truck and get paid $10 an hour to not be home for weeks?” In an industry so closely linked to economic ups and downs, there’s also a lot of volatility, said Todd Spencer, the president of the owner-operator Independent Drivers Association, which represents independent truckers. At various times in the last decade, including after the coronavirus first hit, there were too many drivers on the market, he said, but the pandemic sent people on a “buying binge”. “At Lowe’s and Home Depot, suddenly everything they had was very valuable, because everyone was remodeling their homes,” he said “We’re talking about an increase in import goods of 30 – maybe 50%. It’s buried our supply chain.” That prompted a huge recruitment effort to find new truckers. But as soon as the kinks in the supply chain work themselves out, Spencer believes the demand for truckers will drop. There are still some decent paying truck driving jobs with private carriers, but a lot of the cheapest ones are done by companies that are constantly recruiting to train new drivers, said Steve Viscelli, a sociology professor at the University of Pennsylvania, who authored The Big Rig: Trucking and the Decline of the American Dream. Viscelli said the training programs offer to train recruits at no cost as long as they drive for the company for a year. Otherwise, the new drivers are told they will have to pay back training fees to the tune of about $8,000, which keeps them bound to the company, even if the pay is low for long hours on the road. “What the industry wants is super cheap, flexible labor and that’s what it’s had for years,” said Viscelli, who described the situation for trainees as “debt peonage”. “They’ve been cycling through literally millions of people, who decide to become truck drivers and then get burned by the industry.” Some new hires end up with an even worse deal when they are roped into dubious “owner-operator” schemes in which they are enticed to lease trucks from their companies, Viscelli said. Such schemes have come under scrutiny at companies like Uber, with drivers saying they wind up earning far less than initially promised. A major class-action lawsuit, representing as many as 40,000 drivers, has recently cast light on such arrangements. Drivers sued the trucking company New Prime Trucking, alleging it used driver trainees as employees, failed to pay them minimum wage and that many lost money after being encouraged to start their own owner-operator businesses. The lead plaintiff, Massachusetts driver Dominic Oliveira, said he was lured into signing the papers to lease a truck – and then wound up seeing his pay statements go hundreds of dollars into the negative because of fees the company deducted, according to his class-action lawsuit. The case went all the way to the supreme court and resulted in a settlement this July, with the company paying drivers $28m. New Prime Trucking did not respond to a Guardian request for comment but has previously said the company stands by its independent contractor model, but felt “moving past this litigation was the right thing to do”. The attractive bonus offers and recruitment bonuses advertised by trucking companies for new hires also rarely pan out to be as lucrative as they sound, said Norita Taylor of the the Owner-Operator Independent Drivers Association. One such offer, that made rounds on social media, promised to pay truckers as much as $14,000 every week – or $728,000 a year because of the trucker shortage. But when NPR’s Planet Money ran down the real story, a spokesperson for the company explained that drivers would first have to own their own truck, move to Texas and get the proper certificates to haul “frac sand” used by the fracking industry. Then the company acknowledged it didn’t actually pay by the week, but by the load. “When we hear about these bonuses and recruitment fees, we don’t know of anyone who actually ever gets them,” said Taylor. One of the most deadly jobs in the nation At Joe’s Travel Plaza, truckers say one of their biggest worries is safety on the road. Driver Raul Herrera sits in the corner of the trucker’s lounge eating a cup of noodles, reading on his cellphone about an accident in which an inexperienced trucker lost control of his semi-trailer and killed four people. The driver was found guilty of vehicular homicide last month. Herrera worries about a federal plan that will allow 18-year-olds to drive trucks as “apprentices”, while the current law requires truckers to be 21. The provision to put teenaged truckers on the road was tucked into the recently signed federal infrastructure bill and seen as a major victory for trucking industry recruitment efforts. But truckers, who already work one of the most deadly jobs in the nation, were horrified. “You don’t want to put new guys on the road, even if there’s a trucker shortage,” said Herrera. “It’s not safe.” For veteran trucker Doncaster, a lot of the problems would be smoothed out if truckers could be paid for all their time on the road with fair and uniform pay rates. This, he said, might stop the “race to the bottom” that drives shipping prices ever cheaper, often at the expense of truckers. But, he said, if companies don’t stop treating newer drivers like they are disposable, things won’t change. “It doesn’t matter to them if they can only keep a driver in a truck for a year,” he said of companies’ current outlook. “They’re making money.”The wine and beer shop I can see from our kitchen window sells biscuits and sweets, too. Like any shop, the selection and volume varies over the year. There are great waves of stuff around carnival and Easter, followed by a low ebb of boiled sweets and hard, nutty biscuits over the summer, until another wave starts in September, which gets bigger and bigger until a few days before Christmas, when the shop suddenly seems looted and full of holes. Living just metres away and watching the arrival of dozens of panettoni from my desk is risky, like living too near a train station, and I often manage to miss out on what I want. Last year, it was a chocolate advent calendar – rare in Rome and promised to my son. For weeks, they had a pile, until suddenly they didn’t. Also, chocolate-coated tangerine segments and stuffed figs – also promised, also gone. This year, determined not to make the same mistake, I went in as soon as I saw the wave had started. The front section of the shop, which always smells of cardboard and marzipan, is relatively small; the bottle-lined shelves make it seem even more so, while at the same time making the tables with the biscuits, cakes and sweets seem bigger. I looked for the segments and figs, just two of many things made by a company called Colavolpe in Calabria, whose square boxes stand out for their art nouveau lettering or a picture of a ballerina with a tutu made from whatever is inside – candied orange, alcoholic cherry or segment of tangerine. Nothing stood out. So I asked and was told by the owner, Orazio, that the figs would be arriving in a week. He explained they were still being processed; this year’s late harvest is being split, so that they look like a pair of goggles, then dried and packed in various ways. As he spoke, Orazio did a movement I assumed meant dipping a fig in chocolate. I was reminded of how, when someone told me about the time they worked in a doughnut factory, they made small gestures to demonstrate how they pumped the jam into the side. Years ago, we drove through Calabria in August. My partner, Vincenzo, and the rest of his band stopping to play concerts along the way, which invariably finished late, meaning we left late the next day and often with a tricky journey ahead. Much of what we saw was through the window of the Ford Transit van, miles of hot tarmac cutting through the watery woodlands of the Sila mountains, flashes of sheer coast and sea so blue it seemed violet. Coastal Calabria is where the oldest records of human presence in Italy have been found. It is thought the first villages were founded here around 3,500 BC, and it’s also where wild figs grew and were cultivated for food, especially after the Greeks arrived. The van didn’t stop in the province of Cosenza, home to the noted fico dottato di Calabria, but we remember the fig trees, their leaves like green hands with silvery undersides; also citrus, olives and vines flashing past. Endless trees mean endless figs, and the Calabrese have become masters at preserving this valuable source of sweet, concentrated nutrition, drying them in the sun or baking them in the oven, possibly stuffing them before storing in circles, or piles, or crocette (a cross shape). I bought a pallone di fichi (AKA u paddruni i ficu), a ball of figs made by boiling fruit with a little water until the fruit is soft and the water a dark, thick syrup, from a shop in the village. The figs are then dried in the sun before they’re mixed with some of the dark syrup, orange peel, chopped nuts and cinnamon, all of which is formed into a sphere, wrapped in fig leaves and tied, like a gift, with raffia. After another late dinner, we were given dried figs coated in chocolate, a good moment. I am always struck by how dried figs, while sweet, are also savoury somehow, in much the same way as chestnut honey or molasses, then there’s the crunch of the seeds, with one or two saved between teeth for later. There are various risks attached to edibles brought back in bags from trips away. One is that they never get eaten. Another is that, when the now established wrapping is removed, they disappoint. Or maybe they take you back to a table in another place, so when they are finished, it is a relief to find out that the shop across the piazza sells them, or that you can make them yourself. Dried figs stuffed with almonds and dipped in chocolate While you can stuff whole dried figs, they are quite big, so I suggest stuffing halves instead. Makes 20 10 large semi-dried figs 20 whole peeled almonds 20 little strips candied orange 300g dark chocolate, broken into bits Carefully pull/rip the figs in half, which should happen quite easily; if not, use a small knife to help. Insert an almond and a strip of orange into each half, then press the edges of the half together to close it as best you can. Have ready a sheet of greaseproof paper. In a small pan balanced over gently simmering water, melt the chocolate, then remove the bowl from above the water. Working quickly now, dip the stuffed fig halves into the melted chocolate, rolling them around to coat – either half or completely, it is up to you – then sit on the paper and leave to dry. They will keep for months, or until they are all gone. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoIt’s one of the biggest industries in the world, consumes more than 10% of fossil fuels produced globally and emits an estimated 3.3 gigatons of greenhouse gas emissions a year, more than India’s annual emissions – yet the chemicals sector has largely slipped under the radar when it comes to climate. This sprawling industry produces a huge range of products, many of which support other industries – pesticides for agriculture, acids for mining, lubricants for machinery, ingredients in cleaning agents, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals and plastics. While the industry has an important role to play in moving to low-carbon economies – providing coatings for solar panels, lightweight plastics to reduce vehicles’ energy consumption and insulating materials for buildings – it’s also hugely carbon intensive and predicted to become more so. Oil companies have been betting on chemicals as a way to remain profitable as the world pledges to turn away from fossil fuel energy. The International Energy Agency predicted that petrochemicals could account for 60% of oil demand in the next decade. The chemicals sector is the largest industrial user of oil and gas but it has the third-largest carbon footprint – behind steel and cement – because only about half of the fossil fuels that the industry consumes are burned for their energy. The rest is used as feedstock for products such as plastics with the emissions released only when these products reach the end of their lives, for example, when waste plastic packaging or an old mattress is incinerated. Lowering the industry’s emissions is possible but technically daunting. Plus this large, complex industry, which supports millions of jobs worldwide, has significant political and economic clout. “They’ve become a bit of an untouchable sector for many politicians,” said Jan-Justus Andreas, who leads industrial policy at the Norwegian environmental non-profit Bellona Europa. Yet the chemicals industry is finding itself increasingly under scrutiny – both from nations that need to meet ambitious emissions reduction targets and from researchers, scientists and campaigners calling on the industry to cut its polluting products. Moving away from dirty energy One way to lower emissions is to focus on chemical plants – improving efficiency and switching to low-carbon energy. Most of the industry’s direct carbon dioxide emissions come from burning fossil fuels to power chemical transformations, many of which take place at high temperatures and pressures. These emissions could be significantly reduced if the industry moves away from dirtier fuels such as coal. If renewable wind or solar energy is available, certain chemical processes that are already driven by electricity, such as the production of chlorine used to make other materials such as PVC pipes or solvents like chloroform, could immediately become low carbon. And chemists continue to look for ways to power traditionally heat-driven chemical transformations with electricity instead – such as the process of converting nitrogen to ammonia, mostly used for fertilizer, which requires temperatures of about 500C (932F). While chemical companies are counting on efficiency improvements and investing in renewable energy to meet their climate goals, many chemical products themselves cannot be decarbonized because they are made of carbon, said Martin Scheringer, an environmental chemist at the public research university ETH Zurich. Removing fossil fuels from the raw materials used to create carbon-based chemicals and materials is crucial, said Jonatan Kleimark of the non-profit ChemSec. Kleimark likens products made from fossil fuels – such as clothes, toys and paints – to a carbon debt, because the carbon embedded within them will only be emitted in the future. “The longer we wait to change, the larger debt we will build, and that will be very hard to do something about if we don’t start,” Kleimark said. To stop adding to this debt, chemicals and materials could be made with sources of carbon that are already above ground, such as plants. Bioplastics – made with plant materials such as sugar, corn or seaweed – are booming, for example, as companies and scientists try to remove fossil fuels from plastic production. Another idea is to turn waste products into raw materials for the chemical industry. Chemists have been using agricultural waste or waste plastics – even the ultimate waste material, carbon dioxide – as feedstocks. A Berlin-based startup, Made of Air, is attempting to create plastics from wood waste, while an Icelandic company, Carbon Recycling International, turns captured carbon dioxide emissions into methanol, used in fuels and for making other chemicals such as formaldehyde. ‘Why don’t you deal with someone else first?’ But all these ideas – especially those involving a shift in feedstocks – are very hard to implement. Technologies to turn agricultural or plastic waste into new chemicals are still unproven on a large scale and using carbon dioxide as a raw material will require vast amounts of zero-carbon energy. Manufacturers making products with plants rather than fossil fuels need to ensure that they do not create new problems through deforestation, destroying wildlife habitat, raising food prices or increasing the use of water or pesticides. Biomass resources also tend to be more spread out, whereas traditionally, chemical plants stay close to where fossil fuel resources are easily accessible. “With renewable feedstocks, you will need to reestablish new supply chains,” said Zhanyun Wang, a senior scientists at ETH Zurich. In addition to delivering a steady stream of renewable raw materials to chemical plants, the new supply chains would need to be competitive with well-established ones making products from fossil fuels at low prices, Wang said. The clean power infrastructure requirements alone are tremendous. Electrifying Europe’s chemicals sector would require 4,900 terawatts of renewable electricity, according to an estimate by the European Chemical Industry Council, almost double the total amount of electricity Europe generated in 2019. “If you are a lobbyist for the chemical sector, showing those numbers helps you to put your head down again and say, ‘Look, firstly I’m too important and valuable, and secondly, it’s really, really difficult to deal with me, so why don’t you deal with someone else first,’” Andreas said. Currently, that someone else refers to the cement and steel industries, said Andreas. The internal competition between the three industries to avoid scrutiny is unhelpful, he said, because they could benefit from developing an industrial strategy together. The exhaust gases from steel and cement plants could serve as valuable feedstocks for chemical plants. All three industries need large-scale renewable electricity or carbon capture facilities, which require significant investment. The financial risks involved in building these new facilities could be mitigated, Andreas said, if the new facilities serve multiple operations instead of a single steel mill or fertilizer plant. Governments could also help build the necessary infrastructure or help companies gain access to renewable feedstocks, said Rebecca Dell, who directs the industry program at the San Francisco-based ClimateWorks Foundation. But with less than 30 years to 2050, time is short. If there are no delays, typically, it takes about seven years for companies to get a new process up and running, Dell said. “We have to move a lot faster.” Simplifying products One important, but neglected, lever for cutting emissions from the chemical sector is to simply use and produce fewer chemicals. “That would lead very directly to a reduction in CO2 emissions and also reduce the toxification of humans and the environment,” Scheringer said. The overuse of materials such as plastics, fertilizers and other synthetic chemicals has caused devastating effects on ecosystems and human health. Plastic debris chokes waterways and wildlife, fertilizer-laden runoff from fields can cause algal blooms and create dead zones in coastal areas. These impacts have led policymakers and consumers to cut back – for instance, many cities and countries now have prohibitions on some single-use plastics. “It’s an attempt to reduce plastic itself as a pollutant in the landscape, more than concerns about greenhouse gases, but we can make simultaneous progress on more than one front,” said Dell. Studies have also found that being more precise about applying fertilizer could save farmers money and keep greenhouse gases out of the atmosphere. It is less straightforward to cut back on some of the chemicals that are used to make consumer products, but Scheringer, Wang and others have proposed a way to start. Alarmed by the dangers of some cancer-causing PFAS, also known as “forever chemicals”, researchers have suggested eliminating PFAS from their “nice-to-have” applications – such as nonstick cookware, long-lasting mascara, or water-repellent surfer shorts that don’t need the level of high performance that “forever chemicals” confer. The researchers recommend that “forever chemicals” be used only in really important products, such as protective gear or medical devices that save lives. The same philosophy could be applied to identify and eliminate other chemicals that have been unnecessarily formulated in products, such as adding antimicrobials to soaps that can already kill germs. Simplifying the chemical ingredients in products has an added benefit: they are easier to take apart or recycle when they are no longer useful. Wang points to the example of carbon black, the chemical used as a pigment in food takeout boxes. The pigment serves no technical function other than providing colour and it is used because food looks more appealing set against a black background, Wang said. But the pigment also means the takeout boxes are invisible to devices that use light to sort plastics at sorting facilities, making them impossible to recycle. The chemical sector is producing more than consumers need, Wang said: “The business model is driven by how many chemicals you sell, it’s not necessarily driven by the added societal value of the chemical.” But the “enormous demand” for products is also a big driver – and perhaps harder to address, said Kleimark. “We’re standing in front of a really, really big challenge because there we cannot rely on technologies, but on changing the way we do things today.”At the end of 1958, Jackie was living with her parents in Kent and working as a filing clerk in London. Then a friend asked if she would like to write to a British soldier who was stationed in Hong Kong: “She knew a soldier out there and he wondered if any of her friends would like to write to him,” she says. “I thought it would be nice for them to get letters so far away from home.” She began to write to Colin and they soon struck up a friendship. “Jackie and I wrote about once a week, and talked about our lives,” he says. While he was living near the Chinese border, taking part in military exercises, Jackie was helping her mother to look after her father, who had a disability, and going out with friends in London when she had the chance. “Colin comes from a big family – he’s one of 16 children. I remember him telling me all about his brothers and sisters,” says Jackie. Shortly before Colin returned to the UK in April 1960, Jackie’s father died. “I told him in one of my letters and he wrote back, telling me I’d never walk alone. That’s the moment I knew I was going to marry him,” she says. When Colin came home, he had two weeks leave before his next posting to the Isle of Wight. He and some army friends arranged to meet Jackie and the other women who had written to them while they were stationed abroad. “I met her under the clock at Euston,” he recalls. “I was planning to stay for a short time, then get the train up north to see my family.” She says they were “shy with each other” when they finally met: “I wore a white coat with a rose emblem on the collar so he could recognise me easily.” Colin “already knew she was pretty” because they had exchanged photographs in their letters. Despite initial shyness, they hit it off instantly. When Colin said he was going to see his family, she invited him to her house instead. “She insisted,” he says, laughing. “So I went to stay with her family in Kent for my period of leave.” Two weeks later, he was stationed on the Isle of Wight but came to Kent at weekends. “Before the army, I’d never been one to have girlfriends. I was more interested in sport,” says Colin. “But once we met I knew that was it – we were going to stay together.” They were engaged that July, and married in March 1961. Over the next few years they travelled between army bases in Germany and the UK, returning to stay with Jackie’s mum in Kent when they could. Colin left the army in 1964 and they moved to Dorset five years later, where he found work with a forklift truck company. The couple have three children, born in 1965, 1968 and 1974. In 1976, they moved to Runcorn in Cheshire, along with Jackie’s mum. “It meant we could be close to my family in the north-west, and near cities with good colleges and job prospects for the children,” says Colin. They now have six grandchildren and celebrated their 60th wedding anniversary in March this year. “We got a card from the Queen,” says Jackie. “That was so nice because Covid meant we couldn’t really celebrate.” Colin says “tolerance, patience and kindness” is the secret to their long, happy marriage. “Jackie is very helpful to everyone – she’d do anything for anyone. She is never selfish.” They look after each other every day. “He’s had a heart attack and a triple heart bypass, he’s insulin dependent and has had a stroke, while I have problems with my eyes. We take care of one another and that’s what marriage is about,” says Jackie. “We never row – life is too short for arguments. We’re always laughing together. It’s a bit like an old pair of slippers – you want to hold on to them and never throw them away.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.The Morrison government is embarking on “the most dangerous election tactic in Australian history” by talking up the prospect of Australia joining a war over Taiwan, according to senior Labor frontbencher Penny Wong. The shadow minister for foreign affairs will use a speech on Tuesday to accuse Scott Morrison of “desperately playing politics on China whenever he’s in trouble” – citing the prime minister’s recent attempt to portray Labor as siding with Beijing. Wong will also accuse the defence minister, Peter Dutton, of straying from longstanding bipartisan policy on Taiwan. She will say Dutton is doing the people of Taiwan “no favours by amplifying Beijing’s fatalism” about the limited options available. In a wide-ranging foreign policy speech, Wong will say Australia needs to expand its power and influence, including by restoring its “reputation for being straight shooters who pull our weight”. She will say it is a time of “great uncertainty’ with challenges including “rising nationalism, fraying multilateralism, great power competition, emerging Covid strains, an ever-warming planet – and a more assertive China”. ‘Amping up’ war The Australian government and the Labor party have both raised concerns about an increase in Chinese military pressure against Taiwan, a democratically governed island of 24 million people, amid Beijing’s long-term goal of “unification” with what it considers its territory. Dutton told the Australian newspaper earlier this month: “The question is: would we join with the US? It would be inconceivable that we wouldn’t support the US in an action if the US chose to take that action.” Wong will characterise Dutton’s comments in the context of the Morrison government’s reported intention to make national security a focus of the election, which is due by May. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Amping up the prospect of war against a superpower is the most dangerous election tactic in Australian history – a tactic employed by irresponsible politicians who are desperate to hang on to power at any cost,” Wong will say a speech to the Australian National University on Tuesday. Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson will describe a Taiwan conflict as the greatest risk to peace, stability and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific region, with the consequences potentially “catastrophic for humanity”. Australia, Wong says, has long adopted a bipartisan position of advocating to deter unilateral changes to the status quo in Taiwan. Republican and Democratic administrations in the US have also upheld “strategic ambiguity” in relation to whether to join a war over Taiwan. Dutton is “wildly out of step” with this strategy. “Surely the real question is not, as he suggests, whether we declare our intentions, but why the defence minister is amping up war, rather than working to maintain longstanding policy to preserve the status quo – as advocated by the Taiwanese leader, Tsai Ing-wen.” Wong will point to observations by the Lowy Institute’s Natasha Kassam that the People’s Republic of China has long pushed the narrative that “the only options available to Taiwan are unification or war”. Other analysts have also argued Beijing’s goal is to “gradually weaken the will of the people of Taiwan to resist integration with the mainland”. In parliament on Monday, Dutton said the Australian government was “providing certainty to Australians when it comes to national security. “People understand – they’ve seen Labor operating in the past, they understand that Labor is weak on national security,” Dutton told parliament. “And the reality is that it doesn’t get any weaker than this leader of the opposition.” ‘Never trust him again’ Wong will cast Dutton’s comments on Taiwan as “the worst in a litany of cases of the Morrison-Joyce government seeking to use foreign policy and national security for political advantage”. She will cite Morrison’s attempt to link the Labor leader to China as another “shameless example”. Earlier this month, Morrison was asked whether he was concerned about the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and the former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull both calling him a liar. Morrison replied: “Well, no. I see Anthony Albanese backed in the Chinese government and a number of others in having a crack at me as well.” Wong will say while it is true that China has changed, and that the relationship has become harder for Australia to manage, the prime minister’s instinct to play politics “does nothing to strengthen Mr Morrison’s authority with Australians or Beijing”. She will say world leaders “will never trust him again after he leaked private text messages” related to the submarine contract cancellation “which in fact proved that president Macron did not know what was coming, exposing another lie”. Projecting a ‘confident, unified, modern Australia’ In broader remarks on Tuesday, Wong will say Australia needs to expand its power and influence by setting “political interests aside from our national interests” and bringing all the aspects of its statecraft together. That would include reaching “into the vast, untapped power of our people” and projecting “a confident, unified, modern Australia to the modern world”. Wong will argue Australia needs to treat southeast Asia as a priority. While Labor has backed the Aukus partnership with the US and the UK, she says that must be accompanied by more regional engagement. She will pledge to appoint an Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) special envoy, “a roving high-level representative, respected in the region, to complement our diplomatic network, and forge close relationships with capitals”. Wong will also fault the government for “stubbornly ignoring” calls from Pacific leaders for Australia to do the right thing on climate, saying a credible “step-up” in the region would “only happen under an Albanese Labor government that is genuine on climate”.The UK metals company Hochschild Mining is to fight plans by Peru’s government to hasten the closure of several mines in the southern Ayacucho region because of concerns over their environmental impact. The London-listed mining company has promised to “vigorously defend” its plan to continue mining gold and silver from two mines – Pallancata and Inmaculada – which it claims operate under the “highest environmental standards”. Ignacio Bustamante, the Hochschild chief executive, said he was “surprised” by the “illegal nature” of the government’s planned action and would “vigorously defend its rights to operate these mines using all available legal avenues”. Shares in Hochschild plunged nearly 40% on Monday morning, wiping more than £300m off the value of the company, after the Peruvian prime minister, Mirtha Vásquez, told local media over the weekend that four mines in the southern Ayacucho region would be barred from further expansion, and would be closed “as soon as possible”. They closed down 27%, the lowest since April 2020. Hochschild said it had “not received any formal communication from the government regarding this matter”. The plan could have severe consequences for Lima-headquartered Hochschild, which sources more than two-thirds of its gold and silver from its Peruvian mines. The announcement is likely to raise hackles throughout the mining sector in Peru, the world’s second largest producer of copper, which includes UK miners Anglo American, Newmont, Glencore and Freeport-McMoRan. Peru’s mines are also operated by China’s MMG and Chinalco alongside local producers such as Buenaventura. Peru’s mining industry has been linked to a string of environmental issues in recent years including deforestation, pollution and the mistreatment of environmental activists. Bustamante said: “Our goal is to continue investing in Peru, growing our resources and extending mine lives, in accordance with the Peruvian legal framework.” Hochschild said it was a significant employer in the region, employing more than 5,000 people directly and about 40,000 indirectly, and has long-term investment plans for the local region. “We are prepared to enter into a dialogue with the government in order to resolve any misunderstandings with respect to our mining operations. However, given the illegal nature of the proposed action, the company will vigorously defend its rights to operate these mines using all available legal avenues,” Bustamante added.Good morning. A vehicle has ploughed into crowds at a Christmas parade in a town in Wisconsin, killing five people and injuring more than 40 adults and children, including some from dance troupes and marching bands. A red sport SUV drove at speed into crowds in a “tragic incident” in Waukesha about 20 miles west of Milwaukee on Sunday afternoon, the town’s police chief, Dan Thompson, told a media conference on Sunday night. Eleven adults and 12 children were taken to hospital, Thompson said, who declined to give any more details about the casualties until families were notified. “Some of the individuals were children and there are some fatalities as a result of this incident,” Thompson told reporters. “We’re working with the families, that is our priority in this tragic incident.” Was it a terror attack? The investigation was still “very fluid”, Thompson said, adding that he did not know if the incident was terror-related. Was the driver arrested? Police confirmed one person of interest was in custody and the vehicle involved had been recovered. Who were the victims? Police have not released the names or ages of the deceased. Here’s everything we know so far. ‘It’s devastating’: how fentanyl is unfolding as one of America’s greatest tragedies More than 100,000 people died from overdoses in a 12-month period ending in April, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It is the biggest-ever increase – and that figure is rising each month, drug researchers say. Fentanyl is driving the majority of these deaths, associated with at least 60% of the fatal overdoses – a 50% increase in a single year, Nora Volkow, the director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, told the Guardian. “It’s devastating,” she said. “It’s an epidemic within the pandemic.” Deaths from fentanyl were already on the rise across the country, but the pandemic supercharged their speed and intensity.” “It’s not unusual to see people turn to drugs or alcohol during times of crisis. But what we didn’t expect was that during that period, there will be a massive increase in the entry of these illicit substances into the country.” What is fentanyl? It’s a substance 30 times more potent than heroin. It’s “an extraordinarily potent drug” and people who have never used opioids before are dying from a single fatal encounter with fentanyl. How is it being sold? Counterfeit pills are a big part of the problem. High-quality pill presses can make the substance look like a legitimate medication and people often take them thinking they are percocet or Xanax pills. Jamal Khashoggi’s fiancee urges Justin Bieber to cancel Saudi Arabia performance The fiancee of the murdered Saudi Arabian journalist Jamal Khashoggi has called on Justin Bieber to cancel his performance in the kingdom’s second-largest city, Jeddah, scheduled for 5 December. Khashoggi was killed and dismembered in 2018 after walking into the Saudi consulate in Istanbul the day before his wedding. His fiancee, Hatice Cengiz, was waiting outside. The Turkish scholar and activist has written an open letter to the singer, urging him to not perform for Khashoggi’s “murderers”. In the letter, published on Saturday in the Washington Post, Cengiz asks Bieber to cancel the performance to “send a powerful message to the world that your name and talent will not be used to restore the reputation of a regime that kills its critics”. Why is Bieber going to Saudi Arabia? He is among a group of artists scheduled to perform as Saudi Arabia hosts the Formula One Saudi Arabian Grand Prix in Jeddah. What else did Cengiz say? “Do not sing for the murderers of my beloved Jamal,” she wrote. “Please speak out and condemn his killer, Mohammed bin Salman. Your voice will be heard by millions.” In other news … A “mortified” Australian TV reporter has tried to explain how he bungled an exclusive interview with Adele about her new album. Matt Doran conceded during the interview that he had heard only one track from her latest work, 30, leading the interview to be canned. The US has been added to an annual list of “backsliding” democracies for the first time, the International IDEA thinktank has said, pointing to a “visible deterioration” it said began in 2019. Globally, more than one in four people were living in a backsliding democracy, the organisation said. In a new book, the former Trump White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany repeats her famous insistence that she never lied to reporters, in part because her education at “Oxford, Harvard and Georgetown” meant she always relied on “truthful, well-sourced, well-researched information”. The Republican party’s vilification of members of Congress who have criticized Donald Trump or supported bipartisan legislation is “ruining America”, New Hampshire’s governor, Chris Sununu, said on Sunday, adding that House Republicans “have their priorities screwed up”. Don’t miss this: yes, there will be enough turkeys for Thanksgiving – at a price Costs of the traditional Christmas feast have risen 14% over the past year, the American Farm Bureau Federation said last week. The increase, up from an average of $46.90 for a family of 10 last year to $53.31 in 2021, works out at $6 a person. Within the overall 6.6% rise in the cost of the family sit-down – including stuffing, sweet potatoes, rolls with butter, peas, cranberries, a veggie tray, pumpkin pie with whipped cream, and coffee and milk – the cost of the bird has increased by 24% more than any other factor. But fears of shortages appear overblown. … Or this: Glennon Doyle on how many women feel caged by gender, sexuality and religion Glennon Doyle is the writer who transformed from a Christian mommy-blogger into a feminist mentor, and who has been hailed by Adele as her go-to emotional guru. Oprah and Reese Witherspoon have also sung her praises; and Doyle campaigned for the white female vote for Joe Biden (another fan). Her close friend Elizabeth Gilbert (the author of Eat, Pray, Love fame) has predicted Doyle’s star will rise still further, and called her “the next Gloria Steinem”. Here she discusses her memoir Untamed, which was an instant New York Times bestseller, and more. Climate check: climate denial is waning on the right. What’s replacing it might be just as scary Standing in front of the Colosseum in Rome, the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, explained before Cop26 that a motive to tackle the climate crisis was uncontrolled immigration. This wrapping of ecological disaster with fears of rampant immigration is a narrative that has flourished in far-right fringe movements and is spilling into the discourse of mainstream politics. Whatever his intent, Johnson was following a current of rightwing thought that has shifted from outright dismissal to using its impacts to fortify ideological, and often racist, battle lines. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last Thing: Japan enlists Prof Poo to teach children about paying taxes Japan’s government is hoping that children’s fascination with bodily functions will help them appreciate the importance of paying taxes when they reach adulthood. Years after he fueled huge sales of school textbooks, Unko Sensei (Professor Poo) has been enlisted by the finance ministry to appear in a brochure as part of a campaign to engender an appreciation of the role of the treasury among the country’s youngest citizens. One of the questions he poses: what do poo and tax have in common? The answer: fertiliser, since both are used to grow things. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe last time Democrats held the presidency and Congress, the party spent its first year in power enriching big banks that had cratered the economy and then letting public money subsidize the Wall Street bonuses of their campaign donors. The spectacle gave Republicans a political bailout in the 2010 midterms, allowing them to depict themselves as anti-establishment populists challenging an elitist government. Twelve years later, history is rhyming. Democrats were vaulted into office on popular promises to tax the wealthy, but they are now generating national headlines about their proposal to provide new tax breaks narrowly targeted to enrich their affluent blue-state donors – just as a new survey shows nearly two thirds of Americans see the party as “out of touch with the concerns of most people.” And now the Republican machine is gearing up to demagogue the issue in 2022. The situation is like a storyline from Veep satirizing liberal elitism: As millions of voters are being crushed by health care costs and higher energy prices, and as Democratic lawmakers have abandoned a $15 minimum wage, Democratic leaders are pushing a regressive proposal to allow wealthy property owners to deduct more of their state and local taxes (SALT) from their federal taxes. This initiative, which would provide almost no benefit to the working class, isn’t some small tweak. After Democrats gutted their wildly popular initiatives to expand Medicare and lower drug prices, the tax initiative has now become one of the most expensive provisions in President Joe Biden’s entire Build Back Better legislation. Under current law, the relatively small number of Americans wealthy enough to itemize their tax returns are barred from writing more than $10,000 of their state and local tax levies off their federal tax returns. In 2019, that was just 13% of Americans. That means the entire SALT debate is about a policy almost exclusively affecting a small number of rich people, who already disproportionately benefit from other tax breaks. And really, it’s about the miniscule number of rich folk who happen to live in specific locales with higher state and local levies, and who pay more than $10,000 of those levies every year. Mimicking Republicans who lied through their teeth pretending estate tax cuts help poor farmers, Democratic lawmakers from wealthy districts – and even some union leaders – have spent months telling a different story. Brushing aside criticism from the few outspoken Democratic opponents, they have insisted that a repeal or hike would mostly help “hard-working middle-class families,” as a group of affluent liberal-district Democrats recently claimed. But a new Tax Policy Center analysis of the current Build Back Better legislation lays bare that flagrant lie. It shows that while the Build Back Better reconciliation bill would still raise taxes on billionaires, adding SALT deductions to the bill would provide no significant help for the middle class, and would result in big tax breaks for very rich people just below the billionaire stratosphere. In all, raising the SALT cap would result in a BBB bill in which two thirds of Americans who make over $1 million get a tax cut, and the average reduction for those households would be more than $16,000. In a nation where 87% of people already make too little to itemize their tax returns and are therefore not eligible for any SALT deductions, Democrats’ whole campaign is designed to confuse and distract from all the data showing that repealing the SALT cap would be a more regressive policy than Donald Trump’s 2017 tax cuts, and would exacerbate racial and economic inequality. But precisely because a group of high-profile corporate Democrats have insisted on constantly lying to their liberal-state constituents and pretending a SALT cap repeal is mostly for the middle class, many of their voters have almost certainly been convinced they are being crushed by the SALT cap. Realizing these aforementioned facts were irrefutable, Democrats and their allies tried a different tactic – two union leaders published an op-ed asserting that “the SALT deduction is a tax break you receive for supporting your community” by paying higher state and local levies for schools and public services. A group of congressional Democrats also claimed that the SALT cap has led to “wealthy taxpayers leaving high-cost-of-living states” for low-tax jurisdictions. The arguments fell flat because they are ridiculous. There are simple ways to more surgically reform the federal tax code to support communities without nakedly funneling tons of cash to billionaires – and those who reject that truth are either too ignorant, too unimaginative, or too corrupt to acknowledge an alternative. Meanwhile, there is scant evidence that the SALT cap has prompted mass tax migration. In other words, the entire argument is another cynical lie. That raises the big questions: Why is there so much lying about this? Why are Democrats treating a hike in the SALT cap as such a must-pass part of their economic agenda? Two reasons – both of which illustrate the Democratic Party’s core motives. First and foremost, a SALT cap repeal is a precision-targeted enrichment scheme for the corporate attorneys, hedge fund managers, business consultants, real estate investors, and other affluent caricatures who host and attend Democratic fundraisers in wealthy enclaves. Democratic leaders answer to the donor class concentrated in these rich locales, and that donor class covets the return of tax breaks for its McMansions (as do the wealthy congresspeople who stand to personally benefit from a SALT cap repeal). Just as significant, though, is the motivating power of tribal partisanship. Corporate Democrats who want to enrich their donors with a cap repeal are constantly reminding liberals that the cap was originally imposed by the bogeyman Donald Trump, whose motive was revenge. He wanted to punish blue-state donors that funded his opposition, and a SALT cap was the perfect way to do that. But motives aside, the policy itself made sense: It actually limited a few giant tax breaks for the rich. Left without a compelling argument for repealing the cap and enriching their donors, corporate Democrats have seized on the SALT cap’s Trump origin story. They are using that provenance to gin up Democratic support for the initiative by cynically weaponizing progressive voters’ hatred of the former president. In effect, these Democrats are suggesting that the best way for liberals to get back at Trump is to pass a tax policy that provides coastal millionaires lucrative tax breaks and gives the middle class almost nothing. This is a dream scenario for Republicans. They are getting another political bailout from a Democratic Party that is still captured by its affluent donors. Ahead of the 2022 elections, the Republican party seems to sense the opportunity already. Senator Tim Scott, the Republican from South Carolina, recently tweeted, “The Democrats’ SALT tax deduction is almost exclusively a tax cut for the rich. They’re out here yelling ‘tax the rich’ while crafting handouts for the wealthy behind closed doors.” In October, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell criticized “Democrats’ obsession with the so-called SALT cap,” saying: “Even as our colleagues draft the biggest tax hikes in half a century, they cannot resist the concept of special tax cuts for high earners in blue states.” There is still an opportunity for senate Democrats to block the most egregious of these tax breaks. But if Democrats instead advance their current proposal, the Republican rhetoric is likely a preview of what’s to come in 2022 - a redux of some of the Tea Party’s most effective attacks during the 2010 midterms. Only this time around, the Republican claims that Democrats are secretly working to enrich their elite donors would actually be true – and it will be boosted by millions of dollars of television ads designed to enrage swing voters. Many of them are already frustrated about Democrats’ betrayals. Democrats now leaning into a tax policy easily caricatured as elitist threatens to turn that frustration into yet another midterm shellacking. David Sirota is a Guardian US columnist and an award-winning investigative journalist. He is an editor-at-large at Jacobin, and the founder of the Daily Poster. He served as Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaign speechwriter This article was originally published in the Daily Poster, a grassroots-funded investigative news outletLibya’s interim prime minister has registered as a presidential candidate, joining a bulky and growing list of candidates that includes Saif-al-Islam Gaddafi, the son of the former dictator Muammar Gaddafi, and Field Marshal Khalifa Haftar, a warlord. Abdul Hamid Dbeibah’s decision to run in the 24 December poll breaks a pledge that current holders of office in the interim government would not seek election so as not to abuse their position. Dheibah was the frontrunner in polls undertaken in August and has used his office to dispense largesse, including 372 economic and infrastructure projects all over the country, under the umbrella of “Return to life”. The programme has been especially directed at young people but has created a network of patronage from which he can draw in an election. His supporters say a previous pledge not to run, made on television to a UN body, was qualified. Next month’s vote is already turning into something akin to a circus with 62 candidates – all male but one – putting their names forward, including Gaddafi, who is seeking to make a dynastic comeback, and Haftar, strong in the east, who mounted a deadly but ultimately unsuccessful assault on the capital, Tripoli, in 2019. Gaddafi’s right to stand has been challenged by the Libyan military, a claim that will be resolved in courts and by the High National Electoral Commission. The international criminal court also has an outstanding arrest warrant against Gadaffi on two counts of crimes against humanity. Dbeibah, a Misrata-based businessman, has been surrounded by his own corruption allegations and his candidacy may yet be challenged on the basis it may breach article 12 of the electoral law, which requires candidates to stand down from public office three months before the election. While there are some serious figures determined to try to reconcile the country, the danger is that the divided electorates in the east and west are going to back partisan candidates that support their region or tribe. The legitimacy of the process will be challenged by factions if key figures are banned from standing. Social media is also full of allegations that various candidates are vehicles for foreign countries, notably Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Israel. Many of the candidates are expected to pull out closer to the planned polling day in deals designed to win them later public office, or a seat in parliament. Parliamentary elections are likely to be held at the same time and more than 1,000 have applied. Arguments over the distribution of resources and the use of identity politics to fuel division lay at the heart of the country’s decade-long crisis, the Libyan foreign minister, Najla el Mangoush, told a weekend conference in Bahrain organised by the IISS, a London thinktank. She warned that some political figures “feed on fear, demonising the other, defining people according to ‘us versus them’ to instigate the conflict.”. She spoke of “decades of poor education under the Gaddafi era in which Libyans were not informed of their history, and they were not able to establish a national identity”, adding: “In doing so, generations have suffered from intellectual as well as historical and religious gaps, which affected their identity, making them easy prey for extreme identity politics.”A few years ago the Washington Post attached a note to the bottom of a news feature on San Francisco district attorney Chesa Boudin and his then incarcerated father, declaring that the journalist, Deanna Paul, “has a parent who was formerly incarcerated”. The implication was that she was or could be biased. It seems like a gratuitous exposure of a private history and perhaps humiliation for the journalist that proceeded from the widespread assumption that a person who has experienced something firsthand emerges with prejudice or bias. This often comes up in jury selection – for example, the idea that someone who has been sexually assaulted will not be impartial in a trial about sexual assault (which given that about 20% of women, by conservative statistics, are survivors of sexual assault, would disqualify a lot of us, and a lot more women than men). But the opposite may be true. I came across the example about Paul’s byline when I was reading Clio Chang’s reporting in New York magazine on the case of another Washington Post reporter, Felicia Sonmez, who was “told that, by speaking up about her alleged assault, she had acted like an ‘activist’ and had ‘taken a side on the issue’, which in their view meant her reporting on assault could open the paper up to accusations of bias”. What is the other side than the victim’s side in sexual assault? Is it siding with the perpetrator? Is it not believing the victim? And how far do we extend this idea that to have experienced a thing is to have become biased? Its premise seems to be that someone who has not experienced a thing is not biased. I don’t buy it. A person may be more sympathetic to others who’ve undergone the experience, but they may also be more insightful: empathy is not our great social failing; obliviousness is. Someone who’s had a parent incarcerated may understand the criminal justice system and its failings and, well, injustices better than someone who’s lived their whole lives at a remove from it. A 2015 report declared that “44% of Black women and 32% of Black men have a family member in prison”, which would mean that by the standards levied on Deanna Paul that a lot of Black women would be considered too biased to be potential jurors or journalists, so their perspective is more likely to be excluded. Through that kind of exclusion, you begin to build the feedback loops that reinforce certain norms that are themselves biases or prejudices. There are many prejudices about those who’ve gone to prison, but good reporting and analysis in recent decades have exposed how unfairly arrests, convictions and prison sentences are allocated; they go disproportionately to nonwhite and poor people in this country. We don’t gather our prejudices from our experiences. We gather them from the society around us. Direct experience may dispel them. But one of the social prejudices these bad decisions about journalists and jurors reflect is the idea that the majority, the unaffected, are neutral. Neutrality itself is often a fiction – the idea of standing somewhere that is nowhere, rather than that we all have a position, a location, in relation to almost any topic. For example, ours is a society that had innumerable ways of blaming victims of sexual assault – why didn’t she resist, what was she wearing, why did she go there – and many among us tend to be dismissive of every sexual assault that doesn’t conform to the stranger with a gun leaping out in a dark alley scenario. It has also been routine to treat men as more reliable and objective than women, which when it comes to sexual assault means perpetrators might be believed more than victims. A victim of sexual assault might have shed these prejudices to better understand how it can and does happen. Alexandra Brodsky, a civil rights attorney at Public Justice and author of the book Sexual Justice, told me: “Ignorance of pervasive sexual abuse is, itself, a distorting bias, one that fools people into thinking that violence is rare, or that it is only committed by obvious monsters, or that it always appears in real life as it does in TV. Sexual abuse does not render its victims hysterical or unreliable; it endows them, terribly, with deep expertise. Besides, something tells me prospective jurors don’t freely admit when questioned that they’ve committed sexual harm. It cannot be that they, but not survivors, have the power to decide cases.” During the Weinstein trial last year, Mother Jones noted, the “difficulty of finding a dozen people who can weigh evidence of sexual violence without bringing in their personal biases and experiences”. But we all bring our biases with us, and those who have not experienced something may well hold strong opinions about it, and those may well be based on stereotypes, prejudices, or illusions that actual experience undermines. You could make a case that those who have been wealthy all their lives are at best ignorant about poverty and its causes and consequences, but we’re more likely to hear that someone who’s been on government assistance or homeless is biased in covering economic issues than someone who was born into luxury. I’ve seen the same argument used to suggest Black jurors are not impartial on matters of race. But why would anyone assume white jurors are unbiased, unless they suffer from the racist delusion that racism is a myth or whiteness is itself some kind of neutrality? Alas, many do. In the trial of the three white men accused of gunning down Ahmaud Arbery in Georgia, the defense attorneys have claimed the jury could be influenced by the presence of Black civil rights figures and preachers in the court. They said nothing about the influence of a white judge and white attorneys, including themselves. Though the county in which the trial is held is more than a quarter Black, 11 of the 12 jury members are white. We have, in other words, prejudices about who is prejudiced. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist. Her most recent books are Recollections of My Nonexistence and Orwell’s RosesSuddenly Champions League place looks possible for City Manchester City’s dominant 5-0 defeat of Aston Villa was their third win in eight league games. After suffering a tough 4-0 loss to Chelsea at the Academy Stadium and then a League Cup defeat to Manchester United on Wednesday night, the second-half goal-fest against Villa could be the start of a turnaround in the club’s fortunes. However, the biggest wins for Gareth Taylor’s under-pressure side this weekend came elsewhere. The defeats suffered by Brighton, Tottenham and Manchester United mean last season’s runners-up sit just five points off third and only two behind their derby rivals. Suddenly Champions League football seems tantalisingly close. If City can come back from the international break fired up by having closed the gap on the teams just above them, and hang in there until even a couple of their injured stars return to action, then claiming third is a real possibility. SW Match report: Manchester City 5-0 Aston Villa United need January reinforcements to halt their slide Marc Skinner was frank about the need for more spending after Manchester United’s 2-0 defeat to Arsenal. “Our players will need reinforcements if we’ve got tough games like this. It was always going to be tough going today, but I’m not overly concerned, we will keep investing,” he said. With the January transfer window on the horizon Skinner has the opportunity to put his stamp on the club’s recruitment and bring in players that will help enact his vision for the way the team should play. It is not just necessary from a tactical point of view : if United want to arrest their slide, having not won in four league games, they need bodies to help the stretched squad cope with the workload of three games in a week. What Skinner needs is time and patience and he said as much himself: “There was a gap [between us and Arsenal] in moments, but also we’ve been in the game long enough to know that comes from investment, continued investment and time.” Whether the club and fans can see enough of his bigger picture to afford him that time is the big question. SW Match report: Manchester United 0-2 Arsenal Can Carter turn the tide at Birmingham? Birmingham City sacked their manager, Scott Booth, last week and after another chastening day at the office, a 5-0 defeat against Chelsea, the club announced that Darren Carter would take over as interim manager. “It is a challenge that I could not turn down in all honesty,” he said. “It is a fantastic chance to prove our doubters wrong and build all the things I have talked about.” The Blues sit second from bottom so the pressure is there from the beginning and City looked low on confidence, defensively static on Sunday, surrendering too easily to Chelsea’s prowess. Worryingly, Carter’s first game in charge is against Manchester City after the international break. Chelsea, meanwhile, continued their terrifying form with the Fran Kirby and Sam Kerr show as strong as ever. The latter scored a first-half hat-trick and Kirby added two goals. RO • ‘The time was just right’: Kerr signs new two-year contract with Chelsea Arnold’s excellence ensures landmark win for Hammers West Ham won their first top-flight London derby against Spurs, who were shut out by the magnificent Mackenzie Arnold in goal for the Hammers. West Ham are now just two points behind fourth-placed Spurs after a victory that showed the importance of having a high-quality goalkeeper. Arnold was tested throughout the game and made great saves from Rachel Williams and Ashleigh Neville among others to secure the points. The Hammers manager, Olli Harder, was full of praise for the Australian international. “It’s the sign of a good goalkeeper when you’re not so busy,” he said. “But when you’re called upon and do it to a high level, Mackenzie does that. I’m really pleased for her.” Reading’s fast start accelerates climb away from danger Reading and Brighton had been on good runs of form prior to this meeting, both having gone three games without defeat. But Brighton were frustrated by a Reading team who were essentially gifted their first goal. Fliss Gibbons’s long-range shot was saved by Megan Walsh but the Brighton keeper parried it straight out in front of her. Natasha Dowie was quick to latch on to the rebound and fired home inside the opening three minutes. Emma Harries scored late on to seal victory over Hope Powell’s surprise high-flyers and continue Reading’s climb away from the foot of the table. RO Pointless Leicester fall victim to a late goal … again It’s becoming a depressing recurrence for Jonathan Morgan’s side, who conceded yet another goal late in the game. Everton’s Simone Magill cunningly took the ball around Leicester goalkeeper, Demi Lambourne to slot home the winner in the 81st minute. Lambourne did well after stepping into the shoes of Kirstie Levell, who will out be out with a long-term knee injury – in particular with a lovely close-range one-handed save from a Kenza Dali shot. But Leicester have now conceded seven goals in the last 15 minutes of games this season and conceded 19 in eight games overall. It’s a trend that continues to deny them their first points in the WSL. ROScreenwriter Laura Turner and director Philip Stevens are making their feature-film debuts with this intriguing, slightly stylised and quasi-theatrical piece: stark, oppressive, menacing, a historical drama with a slice of horror. It is set in 16th-century England on the remote Lincolnshire coast, a time when the Egyptian Act of 1554 effectively criminalised Romani and Gypsy people and those who harboured them. Stevens resourcefully uses the blank canvases of wild, empty coastline and forest to avoid the need for much specific period detail. David (played by Emmett J Scanlan from TV’s Peaky Blinders) is the aggressive bully who leads a small community of people farming salt from the marshes; he has made a deal with a Romani called Arif (Javed Khan) to get a boat to take him and his family away from England, taking half the payment up front and resentfully allowing Arif and the other Romani to camp nearby until the promised boat arrives. But David is getting ready to cheat the Romani and is all too ready to cheat his fellow farmers, too. Things are complicated further by David’s sister-in-law Patience (Hannah Douglas), a woman who is aphonic and whose gentle, inchoate, bird-like cries earn her the nickname “Lapwing”; she falls in love with one of the Romani, Rumi (Sebastian De Souza), which triggers a spasm of suspicious rage in David, in which his xenophobia and hatred of women fuse into a single paranoid meltdown. David and his relationship with his community are in fact slightly more central to the movie than you might expect from the premise and perhaps the film could have dramatised Rumi’s existence and inner life more than it does, but this is confident, distinctive work. • Lapwing is released on 26 November in cinemas and on digital platforms.Which would you prefer: a shopping bag of items you didn’t choose, or the money to buy what you need? Most people living in poverty and accessing food banks don’t get asked this question. Last week, the government released guidance about how local authorities in England should distribute the household support fund – a one-off pot of £421m set aside by the Department for Work and Pensions to help people on low incomes meet basic needs as the country recovers from the pandemic this winter. However, by suggesting that local authorities use food banks as delivery partners, and promoting the use of vouchers instead of cash to avoid the “risk of fraud” and recipients buying things outside the “policy intent”, the guidance normalises food aid, rather than empowering individuals to make their own decisions. Such an approach reveals the underlying belief of this government, and others before it, that people affected by poverty are incapable of managing their money. This pervasive and damaging attitude is an assumption based on prejudice. It also denies the structural causes of poverty, which have been shown time and again to be inadequate social security, rising living costs, lack of well-paid secure work and racial injustice. Alongside my work as a clinical psychologist in the NHS, I volunteer with the Legendary Community Club, a small team distributing food aid through local schools and youth service provider Youth First, in the south-east London borough of Lewisham. We are part of the Independent Food Aid Networkand are keen campaigners for a cash-first approach to food insecurity. This summer, in collaboration with the families we support at the LCC, we designed a small-scale study to look at the economic and psychological impact of receiving cash instead of food packages. Each of the seven families that took part was given £36 weekly – the approximate cash equivalent of their usual food package – for four weeks. Participants told us that the cash provided more choice, less waste and better budgeting opportunities. Increased flexibility was a key theme. “Sometimes I will do shopping, or one week I might not need shopping … and I need gas,” said one participant. Others highlighted the flexibility of cash over council-issued vouchers pointing out that it removed the embarrassment of using vouchers at the tills, and the chance of them being rejected. We know that visiting a food bank can be a humiliating experience: often, accessing food banks involves queueing and answering questions about why help is needed, which can make the process stressful and undignified. Cash allowed people to shop around and cater for specific needs such as allergy-safe or culturally appropriate foods. Choice and autonomy also emerged as important themes in the report. Participants were keen not to let food go to waste. “It was useful for me because my kids don’t eat everything … So the cash is more helpful … because I can buy exactly what I need,” said another participant. Being able to budget across needs allowed room for non-essentials and spontaneous treats, which had psychological benefits, as one mother explained: “When we come to pick up the money, sometimes I’ll bring [my son] with me. And he’d be like, ‘Oh, Mum, can we get ice cream today?’ And I’d be like, ‘Yeah, son!’ I feel good that I could get him something that he wants, not just the necessities.” Poverty is bad for our mental health, enforcing health inequalities among more structurally at risk people – families with children, lone parents, disabled people, migrants and racialised as Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic people. These are the same groups who have been disproportionately affected by Covid-19. It doesn’t take a clinical psychologist to work this out – the families told us the cash would be better before we even began, that cash provides a more efficient way to address poverty, and that they benefit psychologically from the choice it allows them. It’s obvious. That’s why the people who are being affected by a policy decision should be meaningfully involved in the solutions within local and central government. They know best, so why can’t we trust them? There’s a sad acceptance in our midst of food poverty and a normalisation of food banks, a clearly ineffective, undignified and unsustainable response to the fact that people don’t have enough money to afford food. It’s become acceptable to leave it up to volunteers to plug the gaping holes left by inadequate social security payments and wages; to unnecessarily transport surplus food produced by a wasteful system when it would be easier if food were affordable for all; and for people to have to jump through hoops to get handouts rather than afford to eat and to live with dignity. Now is the time for us to change the food-bank narrative and put a cash-first approach at the heart of both our local and national responses. A number of councils already distribute direct cash support to their residents – others must do the same. Dr Rachel H Tribe is a clinical psychologist and food bank volunteerHere is our Meet the Setter Q&amp;A with Tramp. It’s a fun exchange, as you’d expect, but it strikingly opens by telling us that “he has now contributed five [puzzles]”. Since a setter’s style settles over time, this is the first in a Checking In With series. Hello again, Tramp. We discussed length of clues last time we spoke. Same philosophy now? Anything else changed? My early clues tended to be quite lengthy and sometimes a little convoluted. I’ve listened to editors and posters on forums and tried to simplify where possible. I stick with a convoluted idea if it’s justified, but try to limit these in any particular puzzle. I used to write thematic puzzles where the solver required little, if any, knowledge of the theme. They took, on average, three times longer to write and I’m not sure the effort was worth it. Also, I started to run out of ideas for themes. I still write them occasionally, though. Good. And how have crosswords in general changed over the 2010s and 20s, do you think? The Independent has led the way in providing slots for new setters. There are more brilliant setters published regularly than at any other time. In fact, there are too many great crosswords to solve. Do you Guardian lot talk to each other about what you’ve got planned? The only setters with whom I communicate regularly are Vlad, as we test-solve for each other’s crosswords; Klingsor, as we share a love of puzzles and Wagner; and Dave Gorman, as I test-solve his puzzles. I see other setters at get-togethers but those stopped happening for a while, for obvious reasons. I have recently test-solved a couple of Monk’s Genius puzzles. He’s another top-notch setter. I have to pinch myself to think that I’m friends with such talented setters. Yes. How does a Jambazi puzzle for the Independent differ from a Tramp? Unfortunately, I haven’t written a Jambazi puzzle for some time. I have enough on my plate as it is and I struggle to write one every three weeks for the Guardian, although I have about 12 waiting in the wings. When one appears, I feel I need to replace it. I don’t think my puzzle style differs greatly between the papers. I drafted puzzles for the Times and the Telegraph, but the lack of response suggests that my style’s not for them. Have you developed any tricks? Sometimes you have a word that’s difficult to define and a trick gets you out of the hole. For example, “downed one” to define a bird, “being out of pocket” to define marsupial and “Faces chief” to define Rod Stewart. Usually, if you can find a decent definition, you’ve cracked it. What have you discovered about yourself through all this puzzle-setting? I’ve discovered that I’m decent at it. I’m never satisfied with anything I do, though, and I suffer from impostor syndrome. Pshaw. And you’ve been drawing during the pandemic … Yes. As a child, I was quite good at it. My brother and I used to attend weekly art classes in Wigan. We were only 10 years old when we started and we went for about four years. The other attenders were college students. After GCSE art was over, we never picked up a pencil again – until lockdown. For some reason, I decided to have another go. I’ve drawn Dua Lipa a few times. I keep tweeting her with my efforts but she never replies. Well, she’s busy too. We’ve been sharing YouTube links to music recorded during the pandemic; it would be smashing if you had anything to add. My brother and I used to save up our school dinner money and sneak into Wigan to buy Supertramp cassettes after art classes. Through crosswords I’ve become friends with Supertramp legend John Helliwell. Last year, my family and I visited John at home and he kindly gave me a copy if his new album, Ever Open Door, which was released during lockdown. Please could you play The Ballad of the Sad Young Men? Of course – many thanks to Tramp, and here’s to the next 10 years. • Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.David Longdon, the frontman and multi-instrumentalist with British prog rock band Big Big Train, has died aged 56. Longdon died in a Nottingham hospital on 20 November following an accident, the group said in a statement. No further details were shared. The band’s bassist and founder Greg Spawton said: “It is unspeakably cruel that a quirk of fate in the early hours of yesterday morning has deprived him and his loved ones of a happy future together and all of the opportunities, both personal and musical, that awaited him next year and beyond.” Steve Hackett, former guitarist with Genesis, paid tribute to Longdon: “He was a lovely guy and had a wonderful voice. He sounded fabulous singing on the vocal version of [Hackett’s song] Spectral Mornings.” Neal Morse of prog rock band Spock’s Beard, the group Marillion and Geoffrey Downes of Yes were also among those to pay their respects. Big Big Train formed in Bournemouth in 1990. When lead singer Sean Filkins and drummer Steve Hughes left the group in 2009, Longdon joined alongside Nick D’Virgilio, then drummer with Spock’s Beard. “It is as if we’ve known each other for years,” he told Dusk. “The creative ideas flow quickly between us and we’re old enough to appreciate that there is something very special not only concerning the music we’re making but also the chemistry between us.” He described joining the band as a turning point. “Until joining Big Big Train in 2009, I didn’t think the music stuff was going to happen,” he told Northern Life. “You get to a certain point and you think ‘OK, that’s it, it’s all gone!’” Their 2009 album The Underfall’s Yard marked Longdon’s first on-record appearance with the band. In 2019, he won male vocalist of the year in Prog Magazine’s readers’ poll for his work on the Big Big Train album Grand Tour. Their latest album, this year’s Common Ground, was about realising how much we need other people, he told Progarchy. “How we aren’t islands; we are sociable creatures. We do need each other, to a greater or a lesser extent; we depend on each other.” Longdon also features on the forthcoming Big Big Train record Welcome to the Planet, due for release in January 2022. The band said Longdon had been working on a new solo album at the time of his death. Born in Nottingham, Longdon grew up listening to classical music, country and opera. Discovering the Who aged nine inspired him to start writing his own music. He played keyboards, acoustic and electric six and 12-string guitars, bass guitar, flute, mandolin, accordion, percussion, dulcimer and psaltery. He formed a number of groups, including O’ Strange Passion and the Gift Horse, and played in the band of French chamber pop musician Louis Philippe. In 1996, he unsuccessfully auditioned to be lead singer in Genesis following the departure of Phil Collins. As well as recording with Big Big Train, Longdon released solo albums and also collaborated with the Charlatans, prog rock group the Tangent and Sound of Contact co-founder Dave Kerzner. In 2020, Longdon and Fairport Convention singer Judy Dyble collaborated under the name Dyble Longdon for the album Between a Breath and a Breath, released shortly after Dyble’s death from lung cancer. Longdon described the project as “a serious undertaking” given her health condition and their knowledge that it would probably be her final recording: “I’m proud of it; I think some of the songs I worked on with Judy are some of my best work. Longdon is survived by his partner, Sarah Ewing, and his daughters Amelia and Eloise. In an interview this summer, Longdon recalled writing the new Big Big Train song Common Ground about getting together with Ewing after a period of personal uncertainty, in the chalk hills and among the standing stones of Avebury in Wiltshire. “We were standing at this monument at a point where we realised we’d come together as a couple,” he told Progarchy. “This time in my life – I’m now 56. It’s time to get on it, because we don’t have forever! … It’s not about ‘will we find it?’ It’s: ‘You’d better find it and get on with it, because … we don’t get forever.’” The band said it would issue a further statement about its 2022 concerts – including their long-delayed debut US tour – and other activities in due course.If one image could sum up Serie A’s return from the international break then it was Luciano Spalletti, 62 years old, throwing himself face-first down on to the San Siro turf. The Napoli manager had nothing left, his emotions spent after seeing Dries Mertens flash a volley over the bar from six yards out in the 97th minute of his team’s game at Inter. Spalletti was floored, and so were the rest of us, on a weekend of dizzying drama. Two days in which the last two undefeated sides in Italy’s top league – in all of Europe’s top leagues – scored five goals between them but lost. A round of matches so eventful that José Mourinho having his bacon saved by a spectacular cameo from a teenager was relegated to a footnote. Where to start? At the Stadio Artemio Franchi, perhaps, where Fiorentina beat Milan 4-3. It was, all at once, not as close as that scoreline suggests, and somehow even closer. The Rossoneri were 3-0 down at one stage, and their final goal was a consolation in the fifth minute of injury time. Yet they created more chances than their opponents and were undone by self-sabotage. Fiorentina’s first goal was a gift, Ciprian Tatarusanu letting a corner drop from his hands before Joseph Alfred Duncan forced it home. So was their fourth, Theo Hernández dawdling on the edge of his box, responding too slowly to teammates’ warnings of Nicolás González closing in. The Argentinian picked his pocket and Dusan Vlahovic scored. Then again, Milan’s first goal was served to them on a platter, too, Giacomo Bonaventura somehow failing to notice that Zlatan Ibrahimovic was standing directly between him and Lorenzo Venuti – the intended target of his pass. Fiorentina’s high press and willingness to play out from the back had put them on top but their reluctance to ease up, even after their third goal, almost cost them. What a boring thought that would be to dwell on, at the end of an engrossing game. Better to enjoy the flair of Ricky Saponara, curling the ball into the top corner against his former club. Better to revel in the emerging talent of Vlahovic, who scored his 26th and then 27th goals of this calendar year – matching a club record held since 1960 by Kurt Hamrin. Saponara is a fun player to watch, possessed of rare technical qualities but unlikely, at 29, to ever deliver fully on the potential that persuaded Milan to sign him from Empoli back in 2013. As Fiorentina’s manager, Vincenzo Italiano, put it on Saturday: “Ricky is a particular kid, you always have to find the right words to stimulate him.” Vlahovic is something different: a 21-year-old pursuing excellence with absolute single-mindedness. He has been jeered and whistled by sections of Fiorentina’s fanbase this season after declining to extend a contract that expires at the end of next season. Yet he has carried on performing brilliantly, these latest goals moving him level with Ciro Immobile at the top of the Serie A scoring charts on 10 goals after 13 games. He is so much more than those numbers, a powerful, aggressive No 9 who can dominate in the air at 6ft 3in but also on the floor. Vlahovic’s first goal – Fiorentina’s third – on Saturday was wonderfully taken, taming Duncan’s chipped pass on the outside of his boot while sprinting at full pelt before rounding the keeper and finishing from an acute angle. His next career move remains the subject of speculation. Optimistic Fiorentina supporters found hope in the way he celebrated his final goal, pointing at the floor, but that gesture likely did not mean what they wished it would. All indications are that he intends to move on to a richer club with designs on the biggest trophies, though his first choice might be to depart at the end of the campaign, ideally after delivering Fiorentina back into European competition for the first time in five years. The Viola would prefer to sell soon than let him leave for nothing in 18 months’ time’, but only if someone is willing to meet their substantial asking price. They have fielded enquiries from several leading European clubs but the greatest fear for supporters is that Vlahovic will follow in the footsteps of Federico Chiesa and join their great rivals Juventus. For now, his goals have propelled Fiorentina to joint-sixth in the table. Their win was enjoyed by Milan’s title rivals as well. Inter and Napoli met one day later, knowing they had each been presented with an opportunity. The Partenopei had a chance to go clear at the top. A win would move them ahead of Milan and give them a 10-point advantage over Inter, the reigning champions. When Piotr Zielinski fired them ahead in the 17th-minute, finishing a move he had started by winning possession from Nicolò Barella, that was the way things appeared to be heading. But Inter roared back. Hakan Calhanoglu equalised from the penalty spot after Kalidou Koulibaly handballed and Ivan Perisic put his team in front before half-time with a header. Now they were the ones imposing themselves in midfield, cutting the supply lines between Fabián Ruiz and Zielinski. When Joaquin Correa served Lautaro Martínez to make it 3-1 after an hour, it felt like the game had been decided. It hadn’t. Napoli lost their best goalscorer, Victor Osimhen, shortly before Martínez struck, the Nigerian fracturing his cheekbone in a collision with Milan Skriniar. Yet Mertens came off the bench and scored a goal out of nowhere. Napoli ended the game on top, Mario Rui forcing a brilliant save from Samir Handanovic in injury time, before the Belgian’s close-range miss sent Spalletti to the turf. Inter clung on to win 3-2, closing the gap on Napoli and Milan to four points. It was a brilliant weekend for them, and a potentially catastrophic one for their opponents, for whom Osimhen will be out for at least a month. With the Africa Cup of Nations coming up at the start of next year, the striker might not play another club game before February. The timing could not be worse. This was the first of nine games in 32 days for Napoli. That run includes matches with Milan, Atalanta and Lazio. Then again, who knows what is coming next in a season full of surprises? Later that evening, with Roma struggling to break down a stubborn Genoa, Mourinho chose to leave Nicolò Zaniolo on the bench and throw an academy player, Felix Afena-Gyan, on instead. The 18-year-old struck twice to win the game, his second a blistering effort from outside the box. “I promised him a pair of shoes he likes that cost €800,” Mourinho told Dazn at full-time. “He came afterward to remind me.” A price worth paying, no doubt. That bill will come with happy memories attached, unlike the one for cleaning Spalletti’s tracksuit.The difference between Germany’s two sharply contrasting capital clubs has always been clear. Now it is even more so, just not in the manner that one ever expected. Beyond bragging rights, the fifth top-flight derby between Union and Hertha underlined that one is a professional, slick outfit that knows where it is going, that one has a plan and an identity – and neither of those, it seems, is the latter club. Hertha tried to find their poise, led by Kevin-Prince Boateng, who ushered the players to the away end for communion and dialogue with some unhappy travelling supporters, post-defeat at the game’s end. Unfortunately the image that will stick in the mind is that of Davie Selke throwing his jersey into the away section as a peace offering, and having it chucked straight back to him. It was unlikely to have been a particular personal slight to Selke, who had little time as a substitute in the closing minutes to rectify a situation that had already slid from the visitors’ control long before. It is simply a painful time for the “big city club” from Berlin (as the cruel jab from their detractors goes), rubbed in by this comprehensive and clear loss at an Alte Försterei sold to capacity for the first time in 20 months. While Hertha endure a “complicated” season, as Berliner Morgenpost’s Jörn Lange puts it, Union are flying high. Saturday’s 2-0 win took them back into the Bundesliga’s top five, seven points and nine places ahead of their near-neighbours. This midweek Union will enjoy a Europa Conference League trip to face Maccabi Haifa, while Hertha’s fate is probably an extra bit of training as they continue to try and claw their way out of the bottom section of the table. “The long journey, the waiting in the airport, the PCR tests, the two-hour bus journey,” lamented Union managing director Oliver Ruhnert of the club’s voyage to Israel. “It isn’t exactly a pleasure.” How Hertha fans must yearn for their players contemplating something similar. The irony that it has taken Union to bring European competition back to the Olympiastadion – borrowed for the group stage home matches with the Försterei not meeting Uefa mustard – is lost on nobody. The match itself was a confirmation of what we already knew, with Taiwo Awoniyi’s precise finish after Marton Dardai’s slip and a driven cross-shot by the Berlin Beckham, Christopher Trimmel (albeit one that a different VAR team might have discounted, with Timo Baumgartl stood right in front of goalkeeper Alexander Schwolow) in the first half-hour being symptomatic of exactly the sort of ways one could envisage the hosts getting after their guests. Union just did what they have made their infuriatingly effective calling card: being compact, canny and giving little away. They are Hertha’s current nightmare opponents, in short. Yet those visiting fans’ reaction told just how unwelcome the lack of even temporary relief from the truth was. The reality is that Union have picked up a combined total of 22 more Bundesliga points than Hertha since their 2019 promotion, despite an investment north of €300m into the latter’s playing budget in that time from wealthy benefactor Lars Windhorst. “The impression,” as Lange wrote, “is that Hertha can currently learn more from Union than the other way around.” While Hertha have flexed their financial muscles, Union have built steadily and improved as footballing Wombles, uncovering useful bargains and palatable risks that have meshed into a cosmopolitan team of enterprise and character. So the experienced Genki Haraguchi and Rani Khedira man the decks in midfield while the livewire Awoniyi leads the line, aided and abetted by the flamboyant Max Kruse. Kruse is not an obvious Union player, turning up for training in a flash sports car, but he is embraced for his differences and is revelling in the ability to be himself. “I feel good here,” he told Sky afterwards, prompted on the subject of his expiring contract and with his 34th birthday arriving in March. “I won’t make many changes from now.” With rising Covid numbers, some questioned whether this occasion should have been allowed to be so well attended, even with Union planning stringent entry measures. It was certainly a moment to be cherished for those from Köpenick, just as Kruse makes the most of every minute here. Two months from now the pair will meet again, in a midweek DfB Pokal tie at the Olympiastadion. Unless large and unforeseen changes are forthcoming it will be wealthy Hertha, rather than thrifty Union, playing the role of the upstart once again. Talking points • “Thank you Bayern,” wrote Walter M Straten in Bild, “for trying to start an exciting title fight.” Friday night’s defeat at Augsburg, “the first day as Bayern coach that I’m really pissed off,” in the words of Julian Nagelsmann, was a delight to neutrals and as much as Markus Weinzeirl and his staff deserved their ecstatic celebrations at the end, it felt as if the champions had really taken their eye off the ball, exemplified by Marcel Sabitzer’s concession of the ball in the lead up to André Hahn’s smart header, which proved the winner. • The game itself was overshadowed by the continuing discussion over the absent Joshua Kimmich, who is being docked his pay (an estimated €380,000 per week) while quarantining due to his non-vaccinated status in the first big move of Oliver Kahn’s stewardship. Moreover, four more first-teamers were revealed to be in the same boat on Sunday – Serge Gnabry, Jamal Musiala, Eric Maxim Choupo-Moting and Michael Cuisance – in a situation Bayern will hope to bring to a speedy conclusion before Der Klassiker on the first weekend of December. • This wasn’t the most bizarre Covid-related story of the weekend though, with Werder Bremen coach Markus Anfang leaving his post on the eve of the big game with Schalke (which ended in a 1-1 draw) after an investigation was opened into him allegedly forging a vaccination certificate. • It’s small beer in comparison, but Jesse Marsch is beginning to feel the heat at RB Leipzig after a wretched performance in the 2-0 defeat at Hoffenheim. “I can accept defeat,” fumed the American coach, “but not showing less desire than the opposition.” His team face a crucial Wednesday trip to Club Brugge as they attempt to salvage something from their disappointing European campaign – and they face the next three home games, including the forthcoming visit of Manchester City, behind closed doors after the state of Saxony announced new measures to combat rising Covid infection levels. • Borussia Dortmund are now only a point behind Bayern, remarkably, after beating Stuttgart via a late Marco Reus goal. With Freiburg and Leipzig losing plus Wolfsburg being held at Arminia Bielefeld, it was a good weekend for Marco Rose, who was also delighted with Donyell Malen’s first Bundesliga goal. “That was a benchmark for Donny,” said the coach, enthusing over the Dutch striker’s all-round display, though he will be conscious that former Stuttgart goalkeeper Gregor Kobel again had to contribute – and that BVB only have one Bundesliga clean sheet this season.Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them star Eddie Redmayne has described his participation in the trans drama The Danish Girl as “a mistake”, adding that he “wouldn’t take it on now”. Speaking to the Sunday Times, Redmayne agreed that the criticism he received for appearing in the film was justified, saying: “I made that film with the best intentions, but I think it was a mistake.” He added: “The bigger discussion about the frustrations around casting is because many people don’t have a chair at the table. There must be a levelling, otherwise we are going to carry on having these debates.” The Danish Girl, released in 2015, starred Redmayne as Lili Ilse Elvenes (AKA Lili Elbe), a painter and one of the first known recipients of sex reassignment surgery in 1930. Elbe died in 1931, after her fourth operation. The Danish Girl received considerable criticism at the time, both for Redmayne’s portrayal of Elbe in the film – which trans writer Carol Grant described as “regressive, reductive, and contribut[ing] to harmful stereotypes” – and for failing to cast a trans actor in the leading role. On its US release in November 2015, Redmayne defended his casting by saying: “I hope – as an actor one hopes – that one should be able to play any sort of part if one plays it with a sense of integrity and responsibility.” At the Venice film festival in 2015, where The Danish Girl received its world premiere, the film’s director Tom Hooper acknowledged the film industry had a “problem” with trans characters and actors, and that after reaching out to trans acting communities, the film had included “40 or 50 trans supporting artists”, and added: “I’m pleased we achieved what we did, but I’m sure there’s more to do.” In June 2020, Redmayne publicly disagreed with Harry Potter and Fantastic Beasts author JK Rowling after her controversial statement on trans and women’s rights, saying: “I disagree with Jo’s comments. Trans women are women, trans men are men and non-binary identities are valid.” He later said he was alarmed by the “vitriol” aimed at Rowling and that the social media reaction was “absolutely disgusting”.Christmas shopping has snuck up on us once again. After years of panicking about what to give various relations, heroic teachers and lovely workmates – and with an inherent dislike of buying random, carbon-producing tat – I now invariably turn to food or experiences, with the logic that fun times and good food are always appreciated. For food, think luxurious treats such as cheese, chocolate or olive oil, or heartfelt, homemade delicacies. This trio of chilli treats should delight any foodie and be pleasing to make – just don’t forget the packaging! Ancho relish A deeply flavoured, rich chilli relish that is delicious drizzled over grilled vegetables, lamb chops, slow-cooked chillies or tacos. Prep 15 min Macerate 1 week Makes 1-2 small jars 8 ancho chillies, stems and seeds discarded 6 baby shallots, peeled and finely chopped 5 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped 150ml good-quality red-wine vinegar 300ml extra-virgin olive oil Put the ancho chillies in a food processor and blitz to the size of small confetti. Transfer to a lidded plastic box, mix with the remaining ingredients, then season to taste, cover and leave to macerate in the fridge for at least a week – the longer the mix is left, the better it will taste. Transfer to jars, where it will keep for several months. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Chinese chilli oil Prep 10 min Cook 5 min Makes 2 jars or bottles 2 tbsp chilli flakes 5 star anise 1 cinnamon stick 2 tbsp sichuan peppercorns 3 bay leaves 600ml peanut oil 3 tbsp sesame oil Put the chillies, spices and bay in a heatproof bowl. Pour the peanut oil into a heavy-based pan and, heat until it just begins to smoke (keep your eye on it so it doesn’t burn), then turn down the heat slightly and leave it for a further 20 seconds. Take off the heat, leave for three minutes to cool slightly (to 110-120C), then pour over the chilli mix in the bowl. Add the sesame oil and leave to cool. Strain into a jug, discard the aromatics and, then pour the oil into glass bottles or jars and seal. Leave for another hour to infuse, then the chilli oil is ready to use. It will keep for a month in the cupboard. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Chiltatis (the Mexican dukkah) A nutty, gently spiced, seasoned seed sprinkle to throw over salads, soups, pasta dishes and more. Prep 10 min Cook 5 min Makes 3 jam jars 300g pumpkin seeds 20g fennel seeds 15g coriander seeds 10g thyme leaves 15g hot smoked paprika 7g garlic granules 30g soft brown sugar 15g salt Zest of 2 limes 1 tbsp ancho flakes 150g blanched roast hazelnuts Put the pumpkin seeds in a large frying pan over a medium-low heat and toast, shaking the pan, until they begin to colour and pop. Remove and leave to cool. Put the fennel and coriander seeds, thyme, paprika, garlic, sugar, salt, lime zest and ancho flakes in a food processor and blitz until medium fine. Add the hazelnuts and pumpkin seeds, and pulse/blitz a few times to create a toasted seed mix with texture. Transfer to clean, sterilised jam jars, seal and decorate with cool string and tags, or beautifully written labels. This will keep for one to two months. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoAhead of Black Friday, we’d like you to tell us about the ways you have challenged consumerism or turned your back on it altogether. Are there certain items you have given up buying (maybe new clothes, disposable nappies, or drinks that come in plastic bottles)? Are there items you only now buy second hand? Have you found innovative ways to make your own goods from scratch, swap items with others, or repair those that would once have been destined for the scrapheap? Perhaps you have you made a point to avoid items that have lots of unnecessary packaging? Or are there websites that you have stopped buying from? Tell us about a specific way in which you have challenged consumerism, how it has changed your life and why you would recommend it to other readers. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Daði Freyr has a question. “Who here thought we’d be six people in green jumpers doing a dance?” he asks, eliciting some cheers, a few laughs and enough shuffling of feet to suggest that some people, at least, expected precisely that. Such is the lot of the viral hitmaker. At the height of lockdown last spring, the video for Daði’s Icelandic Eurovision entry Think About Things, released with his green jumper-clad band Gagnamagnið, blew up, its homespun choreography held aloft by TikTokkers and celebrities as a sort of Agadoo for our plague year. But with its purpose as a makeshift communal experience served, its Berlin-based creator seems keen to spit in the eye of expectation. Flanked by a tireless percussionist, her cymbal splashes generally delivered mid-pogo, and a guitarist with disco stabs on tap, Daði toys with syrupy psych-pop, trop-house and sophisticated hooks that undercut the one-hit-wonder narrative. Standing a little under seven feet tall, clad in an enormous white T-shirt, he bounds between laptop and keyboards, barrelling through the sub-genres like a pop magpie. Think About Things trades its somewhat cheesy recorded brass for brazen bass and a squalling synth lead, a template that also wrings added grit from the glitchy Næsta Skref. Kemur Þér Ekki Við, from his 2019 Icelandic-language LP &amp;Co, is beefed up to Chvrches levels of melodrama, its muscular synth riff offset by an addictive countermelody. There are also jokes. So many, in fact, that at times this is more panto than pop show. “One and a half years it took us to come here. That’s on me,” Daði quips. During 10 Years he plays a single note keyboard solo, nodding approvingly at his work. To pull off this blend of silliness and self-parody is high-wire stuff, and Daði walks it confidently. You can only mess about if you’ve got the songs on a string; the show needs to be funny without becoming the punchline. Daði Freyr wears a few targets on his back – if Eurovision doesn’t do it for you, train your sights on TikTok fame or Christmas songs – but tonight the hits are his. Daði Freyr is on a UK tour until 26 November.As Christmas approached in 2020, it was not a Dickensian spirit but the spectre of Covid that haunted households up and down the UK. With cases soaring, government-approved plans to allow three households to mix for five days in England were scrapped within weeks of being made, while scientists urged families to connect over Zoom or host drinks on the pavement rather than meeting for a hug. “There is no point having a very merry Christmas and then burying friends and relations in January and February,” Gabriel Scally, a visiting professor of public health at the University of Bristol, said at the time. Twelve months on, there has been little word from the UK government about how to safely celebrate Christmas 2021. But scientists say caution remains crucial. “Rates of transmission are still very high, numbers of Covid weekly deaths continue at around 1,000, the NHS is described by those running it as ‘hitting breaking point’ and ‘unsustainable’, with Covid cases taking up hospital beds with the potential to tip the NHS into crisis. And we haven’t yet hit winter,” said Prof Susan Michie of University College London, a member of the government’s Covid-19 behavioural science team and the Independent Sage group of experts. Michie added the current situation was unstable and could change quickly – for better or worse. “In these circumstances, my advice would be to delay planning Christmas as long as possible,” she said. However, for those already tackling yuletide logistics, experts say there are measures that should be taken to reduce the risks. “These include all those we considered last year – thinking about the vulnerability of those you are visiting; maximising the chance that you are not infectious [for example] by testing, restricting contact beforehand; and making indoor spaces as safe as possible in terms of ventilation, limiting numbers and crowding, and using sanitiser and face masks,” said Michie. “The Delta variant is highly contagious, with many people now catching it despite double vaccination and cautious behaviour.” According to the latest data, more than 88% of people aged 12 years and over in the UK have received at least one Covid jab, with many now eligible for a booster. However, a substantial number remain unvaccinated. “Get vaccinated if you have still not done so, and get boosted if you are eligible,” said John Edmunds, a professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine who sits on the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage). Dr Elise Paul, of the Institute of Epidemiology and Health at UCL, agreed. “Getting the vaccine as well as a booster if you are called is the most important thing you can do to protect loved ones and those who are more vulnerable than you,” she said. But, Paul added, other measures remain important. “I would say that although the primary benefit of the vaccine is that it greatly reduces the likelihood of severe illness and death, even those who have been fully vaccinated can still fall ill from and therefore transmit the virus,” she said. “The best advice I can give is to continue to take recommended precautions: lateral flow tests, proper ventilation, thorough and frequent hand washing or sanitising. These are especially important when family and friends who may be more vulnerable are present.” Edmunds also backed the use of testing. “Use a lateral flow test before all risky events, such as work parties or visiting elderly relatives,” he said. “Only attend if you are negative.”The message was deleted within seconds of appearing on the Chinese social media network Weibo. But it has reverberated around the world ever since. Posted on the Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai’s account, it accused the 75-year-old former Chinese vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of sexually assaulting her after inviting her to play tennis at his house. Later, the post added, they had an “on-off” consensual relationship but now the former world doubles champion wanted the world to know what had happened. “I never consented that afternoon, crying all the time,” it went on. “Like an egg hitting a rock, or a moth to the flame, courting self-destruction, I’ll tell the truth about you.” Shortly afterwards, Peng vanished from public view. It was only after a concerted global demand for proof she was alive and well, led by the Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) and backed by players such as Serena Williams and Andy Murray, that a few grudging clips emerged. At the weekend a video call with the International Olympic Committee (IOC) president Thomas Bach surfaced, in which Peng said she was with her family and wanted her privacy respected. For many in sport, it’s not enough. So long as she is in China, they argue, it’s naive to assume she can speak freely or is not in danger. But now her case begs bigger questions. How on earth can the Winter Olympics – already dubbed the “genocide games” due to the systematic atrocities committed against China’s Uyghurs and other largely Muslim ethnic minorities – go ahead normally in Beijing next year if this is how China treats its own Olympians? Sebastian Coe, the former athlete and Conservative peer turned smooth international sports administrator, made the case on Radio 4’s Today programme for business as usual despite China’s appalling human rights record. Shouting from the sidelines might make people feel good but was less effective than quiet diplomacy behind the scenes, according to Coe, who was elected to the IOC last year. Sport was, he insisted, the ultimate in soft power; a means of keeping the conversation going with recalcitrant countries. It’s more honest than the traditional pretence that the Olympics is loftily above politics – Coe confirmed that there were conversations in the margins of the London games about British foreign policy in the Gulf – but with a country as powerful as China, there’s minimal evidence that it works. Smaller pariah states weakened by economic sanctions may well be looking for a face-saving excuse to reenter the fold, which sport can provide. But most of the countries now agonising over instigating diplomatic boycotts – meaning athletes could still compete but ministers, heads of state and ambassadors would not attend – need China more than it needs them, for everything from trade deals to climate agreements to loans. Coe trumpeted the IOC’s ability to get Peng produced for the cameras as if this was a triumph for its “softly softly” strategy over the WTA’s more direct threats to pull tennis tournaments out of China. But there has been no promise to investigate the allegations made, let alone any guarantee that the next woman telling an inconvenient story won’t be silenced; China is not essentially going to change its way of doing business. Perhaps the most interesting threat to the IOC’s strategy, however, comes from angry and distressed athletes. When TV cameras turned to the French doubles player Nicolas Mahut after he and his partner won a tournament in Turin at the weekend, he whipped out a red marker and wrote “Where is Peng Shuai?” on the lens. Players’ refusal to let this politically awkward argument go is strikingly reminiscent of footballers’ determination to take the knee in protest against racism, which the IOC also originally opposed before giving in. And it foreshadows a dilemma for athletes preparing for next year’s winter games. How will it feel to stand on a podium in Beijing, worrying that you’re part of something designed to “sportwash” China’s record by projecting its preferred image across the globe? After a summer Olympics that saw athletes responding thoughtfully to the long shadow cast over sport by Larry Nassar, the American coach who systematically sexually abused young gymnasts, what price a winter one brushing alleged rape under the carpet? The gung-ho new foreign secretary, Liz Truss, is said to support a tougher line on China. The European parliament voted in July for a diplomatic boycott, and senior Tory backbenchers want Britain to join one. Downing Street must recognise how obscene it will look to fly ministers or royals out to glorify the “genocide games”, and how myopic it seems to decry “cancel culture” on western social media while overlooking the infinitely more fundamental and frightening cancellation of dissident voices by repressive regimes. But it should be aware, too, that where politicians fail to take a stand, then athletes may feel increasingly compelled to do so. One way or another, next year in Beijing cannot be business as usual. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist“Corporate” Democrats in the Senate imperil Joe Biden’s Build Back Better Act, a leading House progressive warned – but not just Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the targets of most leftwing ire. Such Democrats, Rashida Tlaib of Michigan said, are influenced by donors who “don’t have the best interests of the American people in mind”. At the same time, the New York Times reported that Manchin and Sinema are increasingly receiving money from corporate and conservative donors. The president’s domestic spending package is worth $1.75tn and seeks to increase spending on social programs and healthcare and to combat the climate crisis. After months of negotiation, and after Biden signed into law a $1.2tn bipartisan infrastructure bill, the House of Representatives passed Build Back Better on Friday. There was no Republican support and there will be none in the Senate. That gives Manchin of West Virginia and Sinema of Arizona huge influence, in a chamber split 50-50 and controlled by the vote of Vice-President Kamala Harris. The two senators have already pressured the Democrats to cut the cost of the spending plan in half. Tlaib is one of the first Muslim women in Congress, representing the third-poorest congressional district. In an interview broadcast on Sunday, she told Axios she was “fearful” that “corporate Dems” would “guide this agenda. It’s gonna be the people that are gonna continue to profit off of human suffering. “I know that they’ve been influenced and guided by folks that don’t have the best interests of the American people in mind.” Tlaib said she was referring to Manchin and Sinema, “but I think there are some others that ... have issues with the prescription drug negotiations there. “And so I can’t say it’s just those two. They seem to be leading the fight, but I wouldn’t be surprised if folks are hiding behind them.” Manchin has spoken regularly, mostly painting the spending plan as too expensive. Sinema is less vocal but on Friday she gave an interview to ABC15, an Arizona station. Saying she was “a workhorse, not a show horse”, she said she welcomed progressive criticism. “I appreciate the first amendment,” she said. “So I appreciate when folks are willing to tell me they agree with me or disagree with me. If they want to protest, if they want to offer things, all of that is welcome. “So I guess my message to folks would be keep telling me what you think. I appreciate it. And I’m going to keep doing the work and delivering results for Arizonans.” Sinema said she would not “bend to political pressure from any party or any group”. In terms of financial pressure, the New York Times reported on Sunday that Manchin and Sinema were attracting support from “conservative-leaning donors and business executives”. Kenneth Langone, a Wall Street billionaire, usually gives to Republicans but has praised Manchin and promised to fundraise for him. Langone told the Times: “My political contributions have always been in support of candidates who are willing to stand tall on principle, even when that means defying their own party or the press.” Stanley Hubbard, a billonaire Republican donor who has given to Sinema, said: “Those are two good people – Manchin and Sinema – and I think we need more of those in the Democratic party.”British Airways could move flights away from Heathrow if the airport is allowed to increase charges by 50%, the airline’s owner has warned. The International Airlines Group chief executive, Luis Gallego, said it “would not be alone” in taking its business elsewhere, undermining the global competitiveness of the UK. IAG, which also owns Aer Lingus and Iberia, is the biggest operator at the London hub and has led objections to proposed increases in landing charges. The price for each passenger could rise by up to 56% by 2023, from £22 to £34.50, under a decision by the CAA, the aviation regulator, which airlines say would be passed on in higher fares. Gallego said Heathrow was currently a big advantage for a “Global Britain”, but was already significantly more expensive than European competitors. Speaking at an airline conference in London, he said: “Heathrow’s leading position is not inevitable. The reality is more than 40% of the people who use Heathrow are connecting passengers … and could easily go via other, more competitive hubs.” He added: “If the rise in landing charges goes ahead I know IAG would not be alone in reconsidering our airlines’ use of Heathrow.” Willie Walsh, the director general of the global airline body Iata and a former IAG boss, later told the conference that the regulator was allowing Heathrow to “shoot everyone in the foot” as the UK aviation sector started to recover from Covid restrictions. Walsh said: “By pushing up the charges to such a high level you’re actually pushing people away from Heathrow, which will undermine significantly the recovery of the industry in the UK.” Heathrow hit back by highlighting the steep rise in airline fares. A spokesperson said: “Passengers know when they’re getting a raw deal. A £10-15 increase in airport charges is not comparable to pushing up economy-class tickets to the US to over £2,000 this Christmas, which is what some airlines are doing.” She added that the airport had not received the state aid given to other European airports during the pandemic, and the charges would help investment for passengers. She said: “Heathrow passengers want a reliable, quality experience. Just as Aldi offers great food, plenty of Brits are still very happy to shop at Waitrose and appreciate the value for money they get.” Heathrow has lost £3.4bn during Covid, and while the resumption of transatlantic flights has boosted passenger numbers, last month they remained less than half of pre-pandemic levels. Separately, the UK’s competition regulator is examining the proposed €500m (£420m) takeover of Air Europa by IAG, adding another potential hurdle to the long-trailed acquisition. IAG first announced its intention to buy the Spanish airline in late 2019 for €1bn, but in January it announced a renegotiated deal at half that price as Covid led to enormous losses among airlines. IAG owns both Iberia, Spain’s flag carrier airline, and Vueling, meaning that it has a significant crossover in their networks’ crossover with Mallorca-based Air Europa. The takeover would allow IAG to target the South American market as well as potentially setting up Madrid as a hub airport. The deal was planned by Walsh, who left just as the pandemic was hitting. The UK’s Competition and Markets Authority has invited comments from the companies on whether the deal “may be expected to result, in a substantial lessening of competition” within the UK. The companies have a week to submit their views on the merger, and the CMA has until 19 January to decide whether to pursue a phase 1 investigation to decide whether the merger will reduce competition. The takeover is already under investigation by the European Commission. In the UK, Air Europa flies from London Gatwick to a range of cities in Spain and from Edinburgh to some South American destinations. Iberia and Vueling fly some of the same routes. The British union Unite, which represents some ground crew, has previously expressed its opposition to the deal, on the grounds that IAG was pushing through cost savings to the detriment of staff while also spending £420m on a takeover. “We will collaborate with the CMA. The London-Madrid route is highly competitive and is already part of the European Commission [investigation] process,” IAG said on Monday.When you are the most powerful, popular artist in the world, you can insist on anything. And so Adele has persuaded Spotify to hide its shuffle button, to encourage listeners to listen to her new album 30 – and, presumably, every other album – in the order intended by the artists. “We don’t create albums with so much care and thought into our track listing for no reason,” Adele said. “Our art tells a story and our stories should be listened to as we intended.” I am of the generation that still cleaves to the notion of albums as the greatest and most convenient expression of a musician’s imagination: that 40 minutes is pretty much the ideal length to explore most of the things, musically and lyrically, an artist might have to say, without the risk of boredom. With an album, I am getting what I tell myself is the least mediated version of the artist’s vision. My natural inclination is to take Adele’s line. I think of those albums that are perfectly sequenced and marvel at them: how Sgt Pepper opens with its blistering title track and moves to its strange and profound ending, with the vast fading piano chord that concludes A Day in the Life. I think of how Radiohead got so mired in the sequencing of Kid A that they nearly broke up over it. I think of the brilliance of the ordering of Bruce Springsteen’s Darkness on the Edge of Town, in its two-sided LP version – side one concluding with Racing in the Street, its emotional centrepiece, before restarting with The Promised Land, then ending for good with its devastating title track. I don’t think any reordering could improve those albums (except removing Within You Without You from Sgt Pepper’s, but that’s by the by). Paradoxically, the true genius of sequencing is often clearest when the artist isn’t trying to tell a story through the music, and the sequencing itself has to do that heavy lifting, which is usually on a greatest hits compilation. The obvious thing to do with hits is to sequence them chronologically, which suits the trainspotter, but rarely makes for the most rounded album. Think instead of Queen’s Greatest Hits, which isn’t the UK’s bestselling album ever solely because lots of people love Queen, but also because it’s a perfectly sequenced album that begins and ends in triumph – Bohemian Rhapsody and We Are the Champions – and which never lets its momentum sag, but without ever turning into a boring churn. Unusually for a greatest hits, the compilers weren’t afraid to let deeper cuts – that four-track run of Now I’m Here to Flash on side two – do plenty of work, which gave it (insofar as was possible) a sense of discovery, especially for younger listeners. Great sequencing can cover up weaknesses. Take The Queen Is Dead by the Smiths, an album that should, really, be horribly unbalanced, divided between overpowering epics and throwaways. The positioning of the big, emotional tracks – first and third on side one, fourth on side two – gives the whole thing an emotional heft it shouldn’t really possess. (It’s also a record with a very unusual sequence: its two hit singles are both on side two, to shore up a side that has to contend with Vicar in a Tutu and Some Girls Are Bigger Than Others). The truth is, though, that Adele is fighting a losing battle. The reason Spotify enables listeners to shuffle songs in the first place is that people like to do it, and understanding listener habits has encouraged artists and labels to sequence albums differently. In fact, some long and musically diverse albums such as Drake’s Certified Lover Boy almost seem to hand the job of sequencing to listeners, tacitly acknowledging they will cherry pick their own favourites on to a leaner playlist. There was once a formula for sequencing. As soon as albums became pop’s lingua franca, people realised there was a way to maximise their impact: open big, keep up the mood for a couple of songs, slow it down, close the side with a statement track. Repeat on side two. These days the formula is even simpler. For almost any artist trying to compete commercially – that is, all but the top echelon of stars, and those for whom commercial imperatives do not matter – albums have to be front-loaded. Labels now have access to unimaginable data, and “skip rate” has become vital – is the listener listening for the 30 seconds necessary for the song to earn royalties from streaming? It is now in labels’ (and artists’) interests to get the grabbiest, hookiest tracks at the top (a process that has also changed the nature of songwriting, by getting writers to throw everything at the opening). As the music manager Barry Johnson told Rolling Stone of an album by his charges EarthGang: “We had this whole conceptual album with skits and everything, and we had some of our biggest songs at the end of the album. They [Interscope] were just like, ‘What if people don’t get to the back of the album? Attention spans are so short, if you don’t catch people right off the bat, they might not hear the hits at the end. So how about putting the bigger songs up front?’” That’s what Adele is fighting by sticking up for the primacy of the album as an entire listening experience: the right for artists to make the albums they want. 30 begins moodily and sadly, and it’s not until track four that we get an uptempo number – an eternity in modern pop-album sequencing. This is not just about telling the listeners to eat their greens. It’s a reminder that in a world where the head of Universal can make more in a year than all British songwriters combined, that there would be nothing to promote and sell without the storytelling and imagination of the artists themselves. What are the best examples of album sequencing? Share your thoughts in the comments below.Bulb Energy has been the latest casualty in a series of energy suppliers to collapse since the start of September after a record increase in energy bills. With about 1.7 million customers, Bulb was the biggest of the 21 suppliers to fail yet. We would like to hear what customers think about its collapse. How have you been affected? What was your experience as a customer of Bulb? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.This confident debut feature from Serbian writer-director Milica Tomović fits squarely into a rich but niche subgenre: comedy-dramas that unfold over the course of a party in a cramped apartment where multiple generations squabble and celebrate, revealing submerged secrets as the night wears on. Former communist countries are especially good at this sort of ensemble panorama, perhaps because of the way housing shortages and an assortment of other factors conspired to cramp multigenerational households together in small, brutalist buildings. Meanwhile, the deep bench of acting talent available surely helps when making fluid films like this composed of overlapping, semi-improvised dialogue that push the story forward by subtle degrees. Celts harks back to the early 1990s, just before Yugoslavia implodes into civil war. In a Belgrade suburb, frustrated and barely coping mother Marijana (Dubravka Kovjanic) organises a party to celebrate her daughter Minja (Katarina Dimic) turning eight. The festivity is themed around Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, a franchise then so popular that Minja’s entire class can sing the theme tune in English. Minja’s grandmother (Olga Odanović) struggles to find enough money to buy margarine to make a birthday cake (butter, unfortunately, costs 6 million dinar), while her father Otac (Stefan Trifunovic) borrows a three-legged mutt from the family next door for the day to make up for the fact that they can’t afford a new puppy. As the guests pile into the house, the kids run riot in the living room; the adults – an eclectic mix of fellow parents as well as aunts, uncles and friends – gather in the kitchen to argue about politics, art and the nation’s future. Tomović and her team take pains to drop period details into the clothes, decor and pop-culture allusions, but you have to wonder if it’s historically plausible that everyone, even in this somewhat arty milieu, would have been so casually accepting and unfazed by Marijana having not one but two gay siblings. Even so, the drama around one of them – stroppy lesbian English teacher Ceca (Jelena Đokić) flaming out when her ex-girlfriend (Nada Šargin) shows up with a new squeeze – is pretty entertaining and makes for some good bitchy zingers. Other story strands are less well developed and towards the end it feels like there are one too many narrative balls in the air; nevertheless the film’s ambition is impressive. • Celts is released on 29 November on digital platforms.Eleanor Popa used to sleep in a six-berth caravan on the site of Sharrington Strawberries, a 16-hectare (40-acre) strawberry farm in Melton Constable, Norfolk. Now, there are only four people in her caravan: everyone else has left to work in EU countries. “My friends,” she says, “they went home, or to work in Spain and Germany. A lot of them did not come back to work this year.” Popa, who is from Bulgaria, has been a fruit picker for two years. “It’s hard work,” she says. “We have to get up early and pick. It’s 6am in the summer. Now we get up at 7.30am. And we work in tunnels. Sometimes it’s cold, sometimes it’s hot. Sometimes it’s windy. It can be boring.” Picking strawberries is skilled work. “It took me a month to learn how to pick the fruit,” she says. Because Sharrington Strawberries grows its fruit in the soil, which makes for a better product, pickers bend double, or squat, for most of their shift. (Many farms grow their strawberries on tabletops, which means they are easier to pick, but less flavourful.) Each strawberry is hand-picked: no one has yet developed a machine to pick strawberries. Popa cuts through the calyx, the whorl of green, leafy material at the top of the fruit, being careful to keep it intact, otherwise the berry will quickly rot. “The quality is important here, and you need to go fast,” she says. Her supervisor directs her where to pick, and checks each strawberry for quality control. Normally, she would work an eight-hour day, but now, owing to labour shortages at the farm, it’s often closer to 10. “You feel tired at the end,” she says. “Your back hurts. When it rains, it’s hard. And when it’s hot, it’s hard.” Popa has two children, a boy and a girl, and misses them dearly. But she stays, because “the money here is good”. It’s a solitary and often boring existence. In the evening, the farm workers play cards or watch TV in their caravans. Sometimes they go to the beach. Popa’s boss, Simon Turner, 64, is at the end of his tether. “It’s horrendous,” he says. “Brexit has killed us. It’s going to destroy us. My business survived Covid, but I don’t think we’ll get over Brexit.” Turner is working 20-hour days to try to stay on top of things. “I’ve been running this farm for 40 years,” he says, “and this is the worst it’s ever been.” The strain shows in his voice. “When you put your life’s work into building something from nothing,” he says, “for it to be destroyed by something beyond your control sucks.” The issue is that Turner cannot recruit British workers, and EU citizens can’t get into the country. The pay is decent: Popa tells me that she earns between £2,000 and £2,500 a month, after tax, depending on how much she picks. But it’s backbreaking, exhausting work, and UK workers don’t want to do it. “It’s too hard,” says Turner. Last year, he recruited 88 British staff under the government-backed Pick for Britain campaign. “Most of them didn’t last three hours,” he says. “Imagine the paperwork, to put 88 people on the books.” Only two people stayed for more than a few days. Turner has put up rates as much as he can, but the business is teetering on the brink of collapse. “We’ve probably lost 20% of our crop,” he says, “because we didn’t have the workers to pick it. If we lose much more we won’t be able to cope.” He is desperate for the government to allow EU workers to re-enter the UK. “These are good people and we pay them fairly,” Turner says. “But Brexit has made it so difficult that they don’t want to come.” It is a similar picture nationwide. “Farm businesses have done all they can to recruit staff domestically,” says Tom Bradshaw, vice president of the National Farmers’ Union (NFU), “but even increasingly competitive wages have had little impact because the labour pool is so limited, instead only adding to growing production costs.” The government increased the seasonal workers pilot, which allows fruit pickers to enter the UK, by 30,000 places in December 2020, but many in the sector say it is not enough. The NFU is calling for a short-term Covid recovery visa, alongside a permanent seasonal workers scheme. “It would be an effective and frankly vital route to help the pressing needs of the industry today,” says Bradshaw. Unless the government U-turns to permit these temporary visas for EU farm workers, Turner is looking at closing down his farm next year. “It may be that next year is our last year and we lose a ton of money,” he says. And it’s likely that this year will be Popa’s last in the UK. “I will miss the UK,” she says. “It’s a nice country. The people are nice.” But all her friends are in Spain, or Germany, picking fruit, so she’s probably going to head there and join them next year. “It’s easier to travel there,” she says. “The documentation is easier, and the money is similar. And it’s closer to Bulgaria.”The social and economic burden of Covid-19 has fallen disproportionately on women around the world, the Red Cross has warned, in a stark analysis of the impact of the pandemic. Women were particularly affected by loss of income and education, rises in domestic violence, child marriage and trafficking, and responsibility for caring for children and sick relatives, according to a comprehensive report published by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) on Monday. “In a crisis, it is always women who pay the highest price,” said Francesco Rocca, president of the IFRC. “It’s too long that we’ve been talking about this … it’s urgent.” It was vital that the uneven socioeconomic impact of Covid was taken into account in recovery plans and could inform how the world tackled other crises, including the climate emergency, said the report’s co-author, Teresa Goncalves. “We can still recover better,” she said. The survey examines how the pandemic collided with existing factors, including poverty, migration, conflict and extreme weather, bringing together detailed anecdotal reports from Red Cross national societies with data from the World Bank and the UN. Of the 38 countries that took part, 31 of them, or 82%, identified women as disproportionately affected. Urban poor and migrants and refugees were also identified as particularly at-risk groups. Although globally absolute job losses were higher for men due to their higher participation in the labour market overall, relative job losses were higher for women. Along with young people and migrants, women are over-represented in casual work and dominate sectors critically affected by the pandemic, such as retail, domestic work and tourism. The report highlights several countries severely affected by the blow to tourism including Spain, the Philippines and Jamaica. In Jamaica, as in many parts of the world, women make up a large proportion of people indirectly making a living from tourists. Female street vendors were hard hit, for example, said Kevin Douglas of the Jamaican Red Cross, especially at craft markets and in small villages reliant on a stream of visitors, such as Middle Quarters, a small village where women normally line the street competing to sell peppered shrimp. Radhika Fernando, of the Philippine Red Cross, described a “shattered” tourism industry: “We are not getting anyone here.” Women in the Philippines were expected to take on greater responsibility for caring for children and relatives, she said, as well as home-schooling responsibilities throughout what is thought to be the longest Covid school closure in the world. This trend was echoed throughout the report, in richer and poorer countries. In Spain, for example, where among people accessing Red Cross services, 18% of women had lost their jobs compared with 14% of men, women also took on the bulk of unpaid labour at home. José Sánchez Espinosa, of the Spanish Red Cross, said: “We are working to change attitudes. We tried to convince men that they have to share the burden of the caring of the families.” Almost all Red Cross societies surveyed, including Spain, reported increased demand for mental health support, with women often disproportionately represented. Migrants, refugees and internally displaced people were uniquely affected by the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic, the report also found, intersecting with the challenges facing women. In Colombia, nearly half of the 1.8 million people who have fled Venezuela are women and girls, who are “doubly vulnerable”, said Diana Cruz, a migration community engagement officer for the Colombian Red Cross. Shantytowns, home to high numbers of displaced Colombians and Venezuelan migrants in Bogotá and elsewhere, faced waves of evictions in police raids last summer, she said. “It is very hard when you hear mothers telling you: ‘We’ve lost the roof over our heads. I’m alone on the street with my daughter.’ They are worried about rape or sexual abuse. This happened in the middle of the pandemic,” she said. Lockdowns around the world brought increases in domestic violence. In Colombia there were about 73,000 victims of domestic violence in 2020, more than 40% more than the previous year, though the number of cases is likely to be far higher, particularly among undocumented migrants deterred from reporting for fear of being deported. Migrants and refugee women also suffered unique challenges in Lebanon, compounded by the economic emergency. “There’s been an increase in child marriage as a way out, especially in refugee families that don’t have any security,” said Rana Sidani Cassou, head of communications for the IFRC in the Middle East and north Africa. In Afghanistan, the Afghan Red Crescent Society (Arcs) responded to a rapidly changing situation, with the pandemic coinciding with the Taliban’s rapid takeover this summer and now one of the world’s largest food crises, as half the population face hunger. Dr Mohammad Nabi Burhan, acting secretary general for Arcs, said: “From the beginning of the pandemic … so many people who were earning a daily wage, working on the streets in cities, lost their jobs. The impact was huge on the general population, and women are always more vulnerable.”rcs School closures have bled into an uncertain situation under the new government. “I strongly hope schools for girls will start, because they have to be educated,” said Nabi. Kenya was an example of a country where Covid had collided with the climate crisis and poverty, to the particular detriment of women and girls. Dr Asha Mohammed, secretary general of the Kenyan Red Cross, said she was “shocked” by the impact of school closures on girls, with an increase in teenage pregnancies and child marriages. With drought in the north, some families in rural areas had resorted to marrying off their daughters in exchange for cattle, she said. “It feels like a zero-sum game. You put efforts in one area to bring girls back to school after Covid closures and then there’s another disaster.” Mohammed has just returned from Cop26 in Glasgow, where she made the case for lessons to be learned from Covid. “The only difference we will make is if we have interventions that clearly target women and girls. If we don’t make them resilient to these disasters, it will not help.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The former health secretary Jeremy Hunt has urged Conservative backbenchers to back the government’s changes to social care funding, despite describing parts of the plan as “a really big disappointment” and “stingy”. Hunt, who chairs the Commons health and social care select committee, told colleagues it was better to vote through the plans in parliament on Monday evening in the hope that governments will in future make them fairer for people with fewer assets. The Department of Health and Social Care caused alarm on Thursday when it revealed it would calculate the £86,000 cap on lifetime care costs in a way that could leave tens of thousands of England’s poorest pensioners paying the same as wealthier people. No 10 said it would not change course on the plans, set to be put the House of Commons on Monday evening, despite a sizeable backlash from Tory MPs. “We will continue to listen to views put forward by people who are invested in this policy, but we continue to believe that this is a system that is necessary, fair and responsible,” Boris Johnson’s spokesperson said. Downing Street said it could not fully guarantee that people may have to sell family homes to pay for care costs, saying it could not “predict individual situations”. Several Tory backbenchers have indicated they will oppose the plan, including the former justice secretary Robert Buckland. People living in areas of the north and Midlands where house prices are lower will be hardest hit, threatening Tory support in “red wall” seats. The Bury South MP, Christian Wakeford, said there was widespread concern about whether the plans were adequate. “To move the goalposts after we’ve already been introduced this, it’s not something I’m particularly comfortable with it,” he said. “Especially when one of the main messages for introducing this levy [to pay for the policy] was: ‘You won’t need to sell your house for care’, to get to a point where unfortunately you might need to and [it’s] arguably our least well-off in society, our least well-off voters – again, it’s not something I’m particularly comfortable with,” he told Times Radio. Hunt told a conference of council bosses on Monday: “It is very disappointing that the way the cap is going to be calculated is going to be changed, which means it is going to be a less-progressive measure than was hoped for and will help fewer people with lower asset levels than had previously been hoped for. “But to people who are thinking about voting against the government, all I would say is that once this cap has been introduced at this current level it will be entirely open to governments in the future to change the way the cap is calculated to make it more progressive going forward. The really important thing is we have a cap, which we didn’t have before.” The government is proposing a cap on care costs in England of £86,000, but said last week that council contributions to care fees would not go towards the cap, which means poorer people who get means-tested help would end up paying the same as richer people if they needed care for a significant amount of time. It would save the government £900m a year by 2027 but would leave many poorer homeowners exposed to “catastrophic costs” including the need to sell their homes, analysts have said. Hunt said it was a “slightly more stingy cap” than had been hoped for, but it was “a step in the right direction”. However, he said he was “very worried” about near-term funding for social care, pointing out that the £1.8bn extra over the next three years announced in September was well short of the £7bn extra his committee of MPs believed was needed. He said social care was “very battered and bruised”. Speaking at the same event, the care minister, Gillian Keegan, defended the changes to a currently “fundamentally unfair” system that did not cap care costs. She said it “will end those uncontrolled and catastrophic costs that some families endure”. But on Monday a government minister was unable to guarantee that some people would not have to sell their homes despite an earlier promise that changes would protect against that. The business minister Paul Scully told Sky News: “There will be fewer people selling their houses, and hopefully none.” He said: “I can’t tell you what individuals are going to do. What I’m saying is the social care solution is all about getting a cap above which you do not need to pay – that gives people certainty.” Sir Andrew Dilnot, the economist who drew up care cap proposals that were legislated for in 2014 but never implemented, said on Monday: “For those with assets of, say, less than £100,000, we are not tackling catastrophic costs … for the less well off, although we are for the better off.” He has said that anyone with assets of below £186,000 could be less well off than expected if they needed old-age care – potentially affecting hundreds of thousands of people. The shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, described the proposal as “daylight robbery”. “If you live in a £1m house, perhaps in the home counties, 90% of your assets will be protected if you need social care, but if you live in a £80,000 terraced house in Hartlepool or Mansfield or Wigan, for example, you lose nearly everything,” said Ashworth. “That is not fair. That is not levelling up. That’s daylight robbery.”If you are a fan of horse racing whose heart sinks when the sport sets off on one of its regular civil wars, the front page of Monday’s Racing Post was not an ideal way to start the week. What promises to be the latest outbreak of internal squabbling over money and influence, however, does at least come with a novel twist. Under the headline “Radical new plan for racing structure revealed”, the trade paper reports that the two sides in the sport’s eternal struggle over prize money – the Horsemen’s Group (THG) and the racecourses – are plotting to unite against the British Horseracing Authority (BHA) in the middle. Their aim is to weaken the BHA’s role in the three-cornered Tripartite Agreement, which determines how major decisions are taken. We are two paragraphs in and already the acronym count is rising. But this being racing, of course, that is just the start. In the HG trench, the battalions include the Racehorse Owners Association (ROA), National Trainers’ Federation (NTF), Professional Jockeys’ Association (PJA), Thoroughbred Breeders’ Association (TBA) and National Association of Racing Staff (NARS). In the other, there are the track owners, including Jockey Club Racecourses (JCR), Arena Racing Company (ARC), the big independents like Ascot, Goodwood and York, and the small independents who just try to keep going from one season to the next. And somewhere in the middle is the BHA, whose board includes several independent directors who are not nominated by, or beholden to, any of the factions involved. For the last 18 months or so, as the pandemic wiped hundreds of millions of pounds from racing’s balance sheet and tracks had no certainty on when full crowds might return or whether ticket sales would ever recover to pre-Covid levels, an uneasy truce has prevailed. But now the crowds are back, and in significant numbers too – and the first response from both sides is apparently to train their sights on the BHA. Their plan, which the Authority’s Board is likely to see for the first time on Tuesday, envisages a future for the BHA only as a regulator and little or nothing more. THG and the tracks would instead take a more dominant role in commercial decisions, on prize money for instance. The catalyst for this attempt at a both-sides-against-the-middle putsch appears to be the recent breakdown of talks between ARC and THG over prize money at ARC tracks, which mostly operate a quantity-over-quality business model which provides constant (and very valuable) turnover for the betting industry. An extra £5m in prize money was apparently on offer, but the deal fell at the final hurdle when the NTF and PJA withdrew support, due to concerns, among other things, on how a proposal for nine-race cards throughout the winter might work in practice. Under the proposed new power structure, the £5m contract would presumably have been pushed through, despite the objections of two important stakeholder groups. But the simple fact that THG could not get all of its various constituent parts to support the deal is clear evidence that the situation is nowhere near as straightforward as some of the major players would have you believe. From top to bottom, everyone in racing wants the sport to prosper. But some at least on the Horsemen’s side will always demand more prize money, and forever insist that they are being short-changed, regardless of the fact that no one is ever forced to own a racehorse. And some of the time, they probably are, because tracks, for their part, have a clear interest in staging the show as prudently as possible, not least if, as is the case with ARC, they have shareholders to answer to. There is the Jockey Club’s role to consider here too, as it has a size 11 in both camps. On the one hand, its members include many of the most powerful owners in the game. On the other, it also owns – via JCR – many of the most important tracks, including Cheltenham, Aintree and Epsom. And even within all the individual interest groups, there will be big differences in the needs and interests of individuals according to the level at which they operate. The interests of a 10-horse trainer at the bottom of the pyramid, for instance, are likely to be far more closely aligned with those of a jockey or owner at the same level, than they are to those of a trainer with a 200-horse string in Newmarket. For them, a more equitable distribution of the prize money we already have may well be more significant than a big boost that will largely go to those who are already at the top of the pile. Such is the complex web of both complementary and competing interests to which the BHA is expected to bring some measure of order (so that the rest of us can get on with the racing). It is not perfect, of course, and could easily feel like a brake on progress to some, but the lights on our rickety 250-year-old machine are still on and the wheels continue to turn. The tail end of the most difficult 18-month period that any of us can remember may not be the best time to start fiddling about under the bonnet.Major authors including Kamila Shamsie, Monica Ali and China Miéville have backed Sally Rooney’s decision not to sell translation rights to an Israeli publisher, describing it as an “exemplary response to the mounting injustices inflicted on Palestinians”. Rooney turned down an offer to sell Hebrew translation rights in her new novel, Beautiful World, Where Are You, to the publisher Modan, which had published her previous two books, and which had put in a bid. The bestselling Irish novelist said last month that she supported the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions movement (BDS), which works to “end international support for Israel’s oppression of Palestinians and pressure Israel to comply with international law”, and that she did not feel it would be right to collaborate with an Israeli company “that does not publicly distance itself from apartheid and support the UN-stipulated rights of the Palestinian people”. While two Israeli book chains subsequently announced that they would pull Rooney’s books from their shelves, the novelist’s move has now been backed by 70 writers and publishers. In a letter organised by Artists for Palestine UK, a cultural network “standing together for Palestinian rights”, names including Kevin Barry, Rachel Kushner, Geoff Dyer, Pankaj Mishra, Carmen Callil and Ahdaf Soueif said they supported Rooney’s decision. “Palestinian artists have asked their international colleagues to end complicity in Israel’s violations of their human rights, and this for many of us is a clear ethical obligation,” the authors write. “Sally Rooney’s refusal to sign a contract with a mainstream Israeli publisher – which markets the work of the Israeli Ministry of Defence – is therefore an exemplary response to the mounting injustices inflicted on Palestinians.” The letter points to Human Rights Watch’s conclusion in April that Israel is committing the crimes of apartheid and persecution. It also highlighted the fact that Rooney was one of more than 16,000 signatories to A Letter Against Apartheid in May, calling then for “an immediate and unconditional cessation of Israeli violence against Palestinians”. “Like her, we will continue to respond to the Palestinian call for effective solidarity, just as millions supported the campaign against apartheid in South Africa,” say the writers, who also include Courttia Newland, Andrew O’Hagan, Nii Ayikwei Parkes and publisher Alexandra Pringle. “We will continue to support the nonviolent Palestinian struggle for freedom, justice and equality.” Shamsie, the British-Pakistani winner of the Women’s prize and a signatory to the letter, has previously had a literary prize withdrawn over her support for the BDS movement. She has said that she will not allow her work to be published in Israel “on the basis that there is no Israeli publisher who is completely unentangled from the state”, and that she does “not want to cross the picket line formed by Palestinian civil society, which has asked everyone who wants to change the situation to not cooperate with organisations that are in any way complicit with the Israeli state”. The Palestinian Campaign for the Academic and Cultural Boycott of Israel, a founding member of BDS, said it “salute[d]” the authors who had supported Rooney in her “decision to stand in firm solidarity with the Palestinian struggle for freedom, justice and equality by turning down a contract with a publisher that is complicit in Israel’s apartheid regime”.Men’s meaty diets are responsible for 40% more climate-heating emissions than those of women, according to a UK study. The research also found a quarter of diet-related emissions were from “optional” food and drink, such as coffee, alcohol, cakes and sweets. The scientists said policies to encourage sustainable diets should focus on plant-based foods but switching drinks and cutting down on sweet snacks presented further opportunities. A second study found in western countries, vegan and vegetarian diets were about a third cheaper to buy than regular diets, which the researchers said contrasted with the perception that they were the “preserve of a privileged middle class”. Food production causes 30% of greenhouse gas emissions, and previous studies have shown that meat-eating in rich countries must be sharply reduced in order to tackle the climate crisis, largely caused by the methane and deforestation associated with cattle. But these studies have looked at the average emissions of broad food categories. The new study, published in the journal Plos One, analysed the emissions linked to more than 3,200 specific food items and examined the diets of 212 British people, who recorded their food and drink intake over three 24-hour periods. It found animal products were responsible for almost half of the average diet’s greenhouse gas emissions: 31% from meat and 14% from dairy. Drink caused 15% of emissions and 8% came from cakes, biscuits and confectionery. The research also showed that non-vegetarian diets created 59% more emissions than vegetarian diets. Men’s diets had 41% more emissions, largely due to eating more meat but also due to more drinks. “We all want to do our bit to help save the planet,” said the scientists, led by Holly Rippin, at the University of Leeds. “Working out how to modify our diets is one way we can do that. There are broad-brush concepts like reducing our meat intake, particularly red meat, but our work also shows that big gains can be made from small changes, like cutting out sweets.” Rippin said the research did not assess why men ate more meat. “But we can speculate that it could be because men generally eat more food than women,” she said. “We could also speculate that men may eat more traditional meat-based diets.” Another recent study found that men’s spending on goods caused 16% more emissions than women’s, despite the sum of money being very similar, mostly due to higher spending on petrol and diesel for cars. The scientists’ database also includes 40,000 branded food items, and they said that future research could allow people to cut their food emissions by swapping brands. The study analysing the costs of different diets was published in the journal The Lancet Planetary Health. It compared seven sustainable diets to the current typical diet in 150 countries using food prices from the World Bank. It found that in high-income countries, vegan diets were the most affordable, reducing food costs by 21-34% compared to average diets, depending on specific food choices. Vegetarian diets were a close second, with 27-31% reduction in cost. A flexitarian diet, with low amounts of meat and dairy, reduced costs by 14%, but fish-based pescatarian diets actually increased costs by 2%. The study focused on whole foods and did not include highly processed meat replacements or eating at restaurants or takeaways. “We think the fact that vegan, vegetarian and flexitarian diets can save you a lot of money is going to surprise people,” said Marco Springmann, at the University of Oxford, who led the second study. “When scientists like me advocate for healthy and environmentally-friendly eating it’s often said that we’re sitting in our ivory towers promoting something that is financially out of reach for most people. This study shows that it’s quite the opposite. These diets could be better for your bank balance as well as your health and the health of the planet.” A recent survey for WWF found that more than 70% of Britons believed people should eat food that was better for the environment, but 65% said sustainable options were too expensive. Current average diets in rich nations do not align with nutritional guidelines, with meat-eating higher than recommended levels. Both the new studies confirm previous work that healthy diets are also lower-emission diets.For the past 12 months, the Guardian has tracked the journey of a group of young people from across the UK, capturing their intimate feelings and experiences as the pandemic upends their lives. Here they tell us how the past year has affected them – and transformed their futures. Aadam Patel, 22, lives in Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, with his parents, Musa and Zubeda, and his brother and two sisters Since lockdown ended, I’ve kind of exploded. It feels incredible to be able to get out there again and apply for the jobs I want. I’ve learnt that there’s no point in wasting time; I’ve got to do what I want to do, and do it now. It’s a bit crazy, given how bad things are for so many people, but I’m actually living the dream at the moment. I was really lucky to get a job in the law during lockdown, but sports and sports media has always been my passion, and I’ve managed to get a job with the English Cricket Board’s 100 Rising programme. I’m a Rising Reporter and I’m having the time of my life. The law firm actually offered me more money to stay, but I’d been working from home for 10 months and I’d had enough of being stuck in a bedroom, so I turned them down and took a cut in salary to join the 100 Rising programme, and now I’m out and about all the time. I’m working weekends, late nights and early mornings, and have never been happier. Working from home just doesn’t work for people my age. You need all the opportunities that come to you simply because you happened to be in the right place at the right time, when someone needs something done. You need to learn all that stuff you absorb just by being in the room as someone who’s been smashing it out for God knows how long. I don’t think there was anything wrong with asking my generation to sacrifice the last 18 months of our lives for the good of the elders in our society. But I’ve got a kind of a ruthlessness about me now. I’m grateful for absolutely anything that comes my way and I’m going to make the most out of whatever it is. I don’t want to waste any more time. The lockdown hasn’t affected all my friends in the way it’s impacted me: I’ve got friends who have got too comfortable working from home. It’s taken away their drive and energy; they’re happy now, just being safe and paying the bills. I’ve probably never needed to rely on my faith as much as I have in the past couple of years. I’ve always known the power of religion, but the pandemic really allowed me to dig down into it more deeply. It’s helped me deal with losing people to Covid as well as all the other negative impacts of the disease. It’s also helped give me a mindset where, whatever happens in the next few years as a result of the pandemic, I know I can get through it because I’ve got through everything up to now. As much as I don’t want a lockdown to ever happen again, I’m thankful for what it’s taught me; this knowledge that there’s no point in wasting time. That I’ve only got one crack at every year of my youth. I might have lost my 21st year, but I’ll never be 22 again, so I’m going to make it count. Oliwia Charowska, 17, lives with her younger brother, Marcel, and her parents, Joanna and Adrian, in Bromley, south-east London Covid has formed the person I am and the adult I’m growing into. The UK started talking about Covid when I was 15, which is when you normally start having all those “real” teenage experiences. Now I’m applying to universities and in January, I’m going to be 18 – I’m going to be an adult. It sounds wrong to say this, because I know this has been a dreadful time for so many people, but if I look at my self-development during these formative months, it’s been positive for me: Covid has made me grow up pretty quickly and has changed my perspective on almost everything, from being more appreciative of the people around me to taking control of my own decisions. It has sharpened my interests: I took on politics as an extra A-level because I became more politicised during the lockdown, and now I’m applying to study that at university. That’s entirely because of Covid. It’s not just me. All my friends are going to be different from young people entering adulthood at any other time because we had our formative teenage years taken away from us. In some ways, we’ll be more mature and wiser, because we’ve had to grow up very quickly in this dystopian time. But in other ways, we’ll be very naive grownups because we haven’t had all those experiences teenagers normally have in the run-up to adulthood. Maybe we’ll learn the same lessons, just later than previous generations. I don’t know. My education is a worry. I’ve got my A-levels this year and the school doesn’t know yet what form our exams will take. It says it knows as much as we do from reading the newspapers. But what’s concerning me even more is that these will be the first real exams I’ve ever taken, so I don’t know how to prepare for them or sit them. How could I know? I’ve never had to do a real exam: I didn’t take my GCSEs because of the pandemic, so the last real exams I took were my Sats in year 6, when I was 10. I feel I’m behind on my learning, but I know others who are much more behind than me. I’ve got a computer and have been able to continue with online learning throughout the pandemic. But I’ve got friends who don’t have access to computers or their teachers couldn’t figure out how to do online lessons properly. It’s been really tough for people my age. Not just academically, but emotionally as well. Everyone I know of my age group feels very let down by their decisions regarding our education over the past 18 months. It is very disheartening. And it’s not just my generation that are affected: the decisions being made now about our education will impact the future of society and how well equipped it will be to function in the future. We’re society’s future doctors, future accountants and future business leaders. For a country to prosper, you need people who feel supported by the government, who are well equipped to then take on and manage future generations. Knowing that the government’s decisions won’t support me means that I’ve got to go out there and find alternative solutions to be able to do that myself. It makes me want to go into politics because I don’t want any other young generation to feel their government has not supported them. But not everyone is going to do that. Other people my age are disheartened. And that leads to alienation, and that is very bad for the future. Bethan Rogers, 20, has eight siblings and moves between the homes of her mother, Serena, and her father, Dylan, in Llanarmon-yn-lâl, north Wales In a funny way, Covid has turned out to be really good for me. Before it hit, I assumed I’d spend my life working in the local pub. I had very little confidence in myself, or my goals for the future. When the pubs were closed during the pandemic, I lost my job. My confidence – which has never been great – collapsed and I had problems even leaving the house. But then I found work as a carer, helping people who have come out of hospital regain their independence. The job has transformed me. It’s given me so much confidence. I have to take the lead with the service users to get them better, I have to interact with managers, and I have to have regular training with other carers – and socialise with them too. There’s a career structure to my new job, as well as training, and better pay than working in a pub. It’s helped me think about the future. My confidence still isn’t as good as other people’s, but I’m so much better than I was. I’m now thinking that I might do a university course in law next year. I’m able to think like this partly because I’ve got all this new, extra confidence in myself, but partly because the courses are now all online, thanks to Covid. I learn better online; I can’t take information in when it’s given to face-to-face lectures and learning. So yes, my life is pretty good now. I’ve got a stable job, I get on well with my colleagues, the managers and the service users. But a lot of people my age have become a bit stuck because of Covid. They haven’t been able to work to even raise the money for a laptop, let alone to move out of home. All the work around here has dried up: the farms are struggling so much that they can’t afford to employ people on short-term work, or are paying them much less than they have done before; prices have gone down so much that they’re selling cows for £100 where they used to sell them for £150. But they’re having to pay out the same to raise that cow, so they’re really struggling. Another impact of that struggle is that people my age now don’t want to work on the land because they see how thankless it is. It’s really noticeable – I’ve got a friend who started at the agricultural college in September and they’ve had to combine courses because so few people enrolled there this year. A lot of people are still scared of Covid. Every time you see it on the news, it’s people dying and in ICUs. So I think a lot of the younger generation are opting to work from home where they can, so they don’t have to go out. We had to stay at home for almost two years and we’ve got used to it. Loads of people I know are really reluctant to go out. They say they don’t want to put themselves at risk of infection, but I think there’s some depression creeping in, to be honest. There’s a lot of anxiety, a lot of young people struggling behind closed doors. The son of a care support worker and a Congolese-Rwandan refugee, Dylan Kawende, 24, is from north-west London and is studying at St Edmund’s College, Cambridge For me, Covid has been the best of times and the worst of times; it’s made me more vulnerable, but also more vocal. It’s been an arduous experience and has forced me to be a lot much more introspective than I normally am. That’s a blessing and a curse because, while being introspective allows you to ask yourself meaningful questions, it can also allow self-doubt to creep in. It’s made me a lot more humble: I recognise that I have my limits and I need to lean on others – but it’s also made me a lot more vocal and outspoken about issues that I care about because I’ve seen that institutions like the UK government has not done enough and are not being held accountable enough. Young people have disproportionately been affected by Covid. The failure of the government to recognise and care about that has greatly diminished their faith in society and their faith in government. We feel betrayed, used, exploited and – for some – that becomes perfectly justifiable grounds to just do whatever we want. To feel so alienated and abandoned by government fosters a kind of nihilism. It’s quite poisonous and toxic. Because everything feels like its collapsing specifically for our generation, it’s no wonder young people try to avoid the mainstream news. I see students around me, as well as my cousins from 16 and older, all doing this. They get all their information from social media, which means what they think they know is typically very skewed. That’s not surprising given what we know about Facebook’s algorithms pushing people ever further into extreme opinion groups, but it is hugely problematic; my cohort aren’t getting enough information to have a healthy understanding of these issues, and that’s a recipe for disaster. It leads to a kind of epidemic of false, or partially false, information, and the consequences of that are too many to count. I see it myself in family chats and university WhatsApp threads: people who I thought were serious, political and thoughtful, passing on conspiracy theories about all sorts of things. The polarisation is pretty extreme; when I try to engage with these critical discussions with friends and family, I’ve been classed as arrogant, and that’s not healthy. I don’t want to be called names by people who are meant to be closest to me. Then there’s the societal fallout. It becomes very difficult to organise society if we’re forming into tribes which can’t or won’t debate with each other. The outcome of this could be actual physical conflict, but even if it’s less severe, the environment becomes very toxic. But there are positive signs. Because of Covid, I’ve set up a scheme, Dare to Dream. It’s pro-bono coaching by me for a primary school in Hackney. What I’ve realised is that my generation, right from the youngest member up, has been politicised by Covid. We’re not buying into this myth that we don’t get it and that we don’t really understand these complex issues. We get it perfectly – and we don’t believe the adults in positions of responsibility who pretend to be surprised when the public objects. Aryan Nair, nine, lives with his parents, Rakesh and Swetha, and younger brother in south London It was my birthday in September. Last year, it was the pandemic and I had no party. It was really boring. But this year, two of my friends had birthdays at the same time and we had a pinball party all together. The whole class came and it was really fun. Seeing the piles of presents was so exciting. My favourite present was a painting kit. I got a lot more interested in art during lockdown because it was pretty much the only thing I could do when my parents were working, my brother was at nursery and I was all alone. I’ve painted a lot of volcanoes with my new kit. Lots of explosions. The other thing I got into during lockdown was playing football. I played it for myself for hours in the garden when I was all alone during the day. Now I’m really good – when I wasn’t before – and that’s helped me make friends in my new school. It’s really helped me fit in. Being back at school seems a lot more fun now we’ve been at home for two years. It’s been so long since I’ve had proper lessons or played with anyone I know that I don’t care that I have to do learning; I just want to be in school to see my friends. The pandemic hasn’t really changed me except that I’m cleaner now. I’m not worried about hygiene, but I’m worried that if I get Covid, I won’t be able to go to school, and it would be so boring to have to be at home again. I don’t talk about the pandemic with my friends. We don’t want to remember how boring it was to be at home for so long. My mum still works from home, but my dad goes into work for two days a week now. I don’t like it when he’s not here any more. He used to be away a lot before the pandemic and I didn’t think about it, but now I’ve got used to him being around all the time and I really like it. The house feels empty when we’re not all in it together. After I got into football and lockdown ended, I became interested in lots of different sports. I do triathlons now: cycling, running then swimming in the lake near where I live. I do tennis and cricket too. I’m a lot more sporty now. It’s really weird looking back at the pandemic and thinking that, for more than a whole year, I was just inside my house and the garden. It was really awful. I was bored and I was lonely. I don’t want to do it again. I want to have the vaccine because then I have a small chance of getting Covid but I’ll do whatever my parents say. I think they want me to have it, which is good. Nairn McDonald, 25, lives in North Ayrshire with his mother, Lindsay, and two younger brothers I don’t think we’re the Covid Generation – I think we’re the Forgotten Generation. We’re disfranchised, disengaged, and without hope of any of it getting any better. A few months ago I really crashed out. I was applying for charity job after charity job but wasn’t even getting to the interview stage; because so many charities have closed down since Covid, I’m up against people with decades of experience. I don’t stand a chance. I stopped applying altogether. I was utterly hopeless and couldn’t bear the constant rejection. Then I began to look around and realised that almost everyone my age was going through the same thing. That made me feel less hopeless in one way – I realised it wasn’t my fault – but more hopeless in other ways; everyone in my generation is struggling. The only jobs any of us can get – no matter how qualified we are – are seasonal shifts and low-paid work. Any job that would be a first step in a career is just not being offered to my cohort. I know people with master’s degrees working in supermarkets. An example of how we’re being passed over is that my little brother, still a year off finishing his university course, is already receiving emails from companies offering him placements and employment. He’s doing the same degree as me at the same university – and here I am, with the degree and dying to do the job right away but I’m being passed over for someone who won’t be able to start for a full year. Employers would rather wait a year for a fresh graduate than take on someone qualified but who’s been waiting around for two years, stuck and becoming deskilled through no fault of their own. I find that profoundly depressing and utterly disappointing. In August, I was contacted by Leaders Unlocked and offered a job for one day a week. Even though it’s just one day a week, I now feel energised – like I’m contributing to society, doing something for other people and just that bit more hopeful about getting something else on the back of it. But around me, I see young people my age just giving up. They’re hopeless about their futures. We were told that if we went to university and worked hard, we’d get a good job, be able to afford a mortgage and to start our own families. But that’s not what’s happening: I can’t even afford to rent around where I live because prices have shot up. Life is absolutely dire for everyone I know of my age. Everyone I know is completely alienated from the mainstream because there isn’t a single political party who understands what we’re going through. Even those who, before Covid, were highly political and active in mainstream politics have fallen into a feeling of being totally disfranchised. There’s either a quiet resignation and disillusionment, which leads to people fragmenting into their own little groups and spending their time on social media, or it leads to anger. I know loads of young people who are so hopeless about mainstream politics that they feel their only chance to be active is through direct action. They feel that if we want things to change, we have to do it ourselves, through direct action, protest and disruption. There’s no point in waiting and hoping that the government or institutions will do it for us. Sanjana Parashar, 14, lives with her parents, Prasanjit and Shally, in Beckenham, Greater London, and one younger sister I’m normally a bit nervous of things, but because I was stuck in the house for so long during the pandemic, I’m really enjoying things that previously would have made me a bit anxious. We went to Wales for a holiday in the summer and I didn’t get nervous at all – I just found it really refreshing and exciting. It’s exciting too, because I’m now able to go out with my friends after school and get some food with them. It’s so much fun to be able to do little things like that: just to watch a movie or go to a mall in the high street. I am really cautious about cleanliness, though, and what I touch. It’s a real eye-opener to think what the world was like before, when no one really cared and just touched everything without thinking about it. So many surfaces are so dirty; they’re never cleaned. It’s quite glorious to think our bodies were able to cope with that. My parents are worried about cleanliness too. I’ve stopped going swimming, which I loved, because they didn’t think it was safe enough. I think they’re right; swimming pools are quite dirty because they don’t change the water very frequently. So now I play tennis, which I’ve taken a liking to. It’s a good exercise to develop my muscle endurance. I know that a lot of people have lost their lives in this pandemic and that, on top of everything else, has made me so grateful for the life I have. I don’t take it for granted any more. I feel very lucky to be at school. I used to hate having to get up so early but now I’m so grateful to have the opportunity to go to school. In India, where my cousins live, they still can’t go to school and I don’t think I could cope, if I was still having to home-school. It’s hard to imagine that I’ve been home-schooling for two years. I felt the information didn’t really sink into my brain. Having said that, I don’t think home schooling has impacted on my education very much. I think all students have lost a bit of knowledge, but I feel I’m up to speed on my subjects now, which is good because I’m getting closer to my GCSEs. At the start of the pandemic, I didn’t think the government could handle it well. I was a bit pushy – I was questioning a lot. But now I’ve seen that they’ve handled it quite well. It’s amazing that they’ve got so many people vaccinated in such a short period of time. I’ll get my vaccine as soon as I can. Jack Payne, 20, is from Sea Mills in Bristol, where he lived with his mother, Tracey, and brother and sister. He now lives in a student hall in Clerkenwell, London My family is in this weird sort of limbo because although for lots of people now Covid isn’t a thing any more, my uncle and grandad are still really vulnerable. They’ve both been double-jabbed, but there’s still a risk that could be deadly. It lends itself to this general air of anxiety and concern. I’m also anxious because Compassionate Conservatism is coming to an end and that’s really bad timing: I’m expecting to see this record rise in unemployment on top of a future pandemic and a dreary economic future for young people aged 18 to 30. The country is so turbulent now, with graduates not necessarily getting jobs, that I’m already anxious about what world I’ll be graduating into in two and a half years’ time. What will “normal” look like when I go out into the world? What will a post-Covid workplace look like? Will there be anything like “community” left? The world is in a state of flux. I should be preparing myself for it, but I don’t now what I should be doing. I have so many questions – and they’re all very big questions – but there’s no one to ask because I don’t think there are any answers. It could be exciting, but not with the current government. They should be building hope and opportunity. Rebuilding Britain should be an exciting thing. But the government has handled Covid terribly. They haven’t acted with integrity in the slightest. But they’re riding high in the polls regardless of all that – regardless of the fact that we’ve got documented, publicly available evidence of all that. It shows that Labour aren’t an effective opposition. Keir Starmer seemed to have a plan at the Labour conference, but they’re ineffective, and it’s my generation who are going to reap the effects of that, disproportionately so. Young people are angry and anxious. Everything’s going wrong, from the climate crisis to housing – how could housing prices, already out of our reach, have continued to skyrocket during the pandemic? It’s all brewing and it’s all going to come down on the heads of my generation. The government has misunderstood young people. We followed their rules for two years and lost a lot of our lives as a result. We should be given more credit for that. Our lives were turned upside down before they’d even begun but the government hasn’t shown any consideration or even awareness of what we’ve given up and gone through. When we do protest, it’s dismissed as middle-class virtue signalling – like the climate protests. Direct action is the only way young people feel they can get their voices heard, and now Priti Patel is talking about shutting that form of expression down too. I think the government realise that young people hate them in disproportionate numbers, which is why they’re trying to introduce measures to stop us voting. Again, pushing us out of the democratic process. It’s paradoxical: the government is only interested in older people, but a country needs younger people to flourish. I can’t see how this country can flourish if this government stay in power. I can’t see how I can flourish. Holly Ronicle, 11, lives with her younger brother, Noah, between the homes of her father, James, and mother, Emma, in York Life is really getting back to normal now, except things keep being cancelled; I was supposed to have a sleepover with friends last week, but one of their sisters got Covid and it had to be cancelled. And there was another party too, which didn’t happen at the last moment because someone tested positive for Covid. I’m nervous that school will get cancelled again too. I’m OK with home learning because I know how to do it now, but I’d rather not have to do it. I like going to school and learning that way, with all my friends. I don’t want to have to shut myself up at home again. I moved to senior school in September and the Covid precautions aren’t too bad. We have to use hand gel a lot and wear masks when moving around the school. Some kids wear their masks in lessons too. It’s not “cool” or “not cool” to wear masks when you don’t have to, it’s just something people choose or don’t choose to do. Some kids personalise their masks. I wear one my mum made for me. It’s got pictures of beaches on. A boy in my class wears a really nice blue one that his grandma made him. Covid has made me more understanding of my friendships. Before Covid, I saw my friends every week and never really thought about it. But during lockdown, I realised how much I depend on them for company. I think friendships are more important now and I’m more understanding of how my friends are feeling and whether they need support. I think I’m more sympathetic, but I don’t think I’m the only one to change in this way; I think everyone is more understanding of each other now, because of Covid. I’m happy to get the Covid vaccine, but I wouldn’t really mind if someone said I wasn’t allowed to have one. I thought that Covid didn’t really affect kids, but then a lot of kids in my school started getting it: the attendance in years nine and 11 is really bad at the moment because so many of the children in those years are getting it. They got 61% attendance recently. The attendance in my class was almost 80%, so that’s a lot of kids with Covid. I guess they’re all giving it to each other. I hope they don’t give it to me or my friends. I wouldn’t say I’m more interested in the news since Covid, but I am quite interested in finding out what people in other countries do to entertain themselves when they’re in lockdown. I think our government sometimes don’t do what they know to be the best thing for us, because they think it costs too much money. I think they know how to look after us and most of the time, they put it into action, but sometimes they don’t. That’s a bit sad, but also, I don’t want our country to be in loads of debt because of that. Having been at home for so long, I’m excited to grow up and see what it’s like. I want to experience the responsibility that comes with being a grownup. I’m excited about the future.Bulb Energy has gone bust and will be placed into an untested bailout process that will rely on public money to manage the fallout of the UK’s biggest energy supplier collapse yet. The company will be handed to a “special administrator” that will have access to government funds to keep it running to supply gas and electricity to its 1.7 million household customers. The cost to taxpayers is expected to soar through the winter, and could also be shared by households in the form of higher home energy bills in the future if the government cannot recover the costs from a new company through a rescue deal. Bulb is by far the largest energy supplier to go bust after a string of more than 20 company collapses since September. The total cost of the energy market crunch could run to around £2bn this winter, according to Investec analyst Martin Young. But the final tally remains unknown as “Bulb’s failure takes us into uncharted waters”, he said. Bulb told its staff that it had made the “difficult decision” to support a special administration. It added that there would be “no interruption of service or supply” and urged customers not to worry “as your energy supply is secure and all credit balances are protected”. The company’s collapse has been long expected by industry rivals after it struggled to find new investment, or a willing buyer, before the UK’s looming winter energy crisis. “It has been like watching a zombie movie – you know they’re walking dead but you couldn’t be sure when they’d stop moving,” one senior industry source said. “They’ve long been dicing with death but the recent events in the energy market have been a catalyst for what would have happened anyway.” Bulb blamed the surge in energy market prices ignited by the global gas crisis for scuppering its plans to raise funds to fuel its ongoing growth, which included new businesses in France, Spain and Texas. “When we started exploring fundraising options, we were delighted to receive lots of interest from investors to fund our business plans and future growth,” the company said in a blogpost on Monday. “However, the rising energy crisis in the UK and around the world has concerned investors who can’t go ahead while wholesale prices are so high.” The company also took aim at the UK’s rising energy price cap, which was designed to set a fair energy price for about 15m homes using standard energy tariffs but has not kept pace with the rocketing increases in the wholesale energy markets. The record increase in energy bills has caused 21 suppliers to collapse since the start of September, leaving the regulator, Ofgem, to find new suppliers to take on more than 2 million customers. The collapse of Bulb brings the number of households affected by a failed energy supplier to more than 3.7m. The size of Bulb’s customer base means Ofgem is unable to find a supplier that would be willing or able to take on all of Bulb’s customers via its usual safety net process. Instead, the regulator will need to use untested legislation, in place since 2011, to put the company into special administration while a complex plan for its future is mapped out. The prime minister’s spokesperson said: “Bulb is around three times larger than the largest company that has become insolvent in recent weeks. That’s why we’re taking the special administration regime approach. “We will seek to appoint the administrators who will effectively run it and provide energy through that system, but at this stage it’s too early to say what the future of that provider is going forward.” Ofgem plans to apply to court to appoint the administrator once it has had approval from the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng. “Customers will see no disruption to their supply and their account and tariff will continue as normal,” the regulator said. “Bulb staff will still be available to answer calls and queries.” The process is similar to other bailout schemes used to keep critical infrastructure companies, including British Steel and railways, running with the help of government funds. Ofgem is expected to work alongside the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy and the Treasury to keep the company running through the winter and until a fate for its customers is decided. Some energy industry sources believe the company may be left in “special administration limbo” for up to a year, at a significant cost to the government, because it would be easier to find new private-sector investment or a willing buyer when energy prices have started to return to normal. Gillian Cooper, the head of energy policy at Citizens Advice, said Bulb customers would be protected by the special administration process and “shouldn’t see much change to their service for now”. She added: “But when the country’s seventh largest supplier fails, serious questions must be asked about the state of the market and how it’s regulated. It’s clear reforms are needed to prevent consumers and taxpayers from paying the price for supplier failures in future.” The regulator has conceded in recent weeks that “robust action” was required to overhaul the energy market due to the ongoing supply market crisis. An Ofgem spokesperson said: “Customers of Bulb do not need to worry – Bulb will continue to operate as normal.”Two Fox News contributors have quit the network over Tucker Carlson’s Patriot Purge, a documentary about the deadly Capitol attack. In an open letter, Steve Hayes and Jonah Goldberg said: “Fox News still does real reporting, and there are still responsible conservatives providing valuable opinion and analysis. But the voices of the responsible are being drowned out by the irresponsible. “A case in point: Patriot Purge, a three-part series hosted by Tucker Carlson.” As Hayes and Goldberg noted on the Dispatch, an outlet they founded in 2019, Patriot Purge showed on the Fox Nation streaming service but was promoted on Fox News. The three-part series recycles conspiracy theories about the Capitol attack, in which supporters of Donald Trump attacked Congress on 6 January in an attempt to overturn his election defeat by Joe Biden. Hayes and Goldberg, formerly writers with the Weekly Standard and the National Review, said the series was “presented in the style of an exposé, a hard-hitting piece of investigative journalism. In reality, it is a collection of incoherent conspiracy-mongering, riddled with factual inaccuracies, half-truths, deceptive imagery and damning omissions.” Goldberg told the New York Times he and Hayes had stayed on at Fox News in the hope it would recover independence from Trump. But as goes the Republican party, so goes Fox News. In their resignation letter, Hayes and Goldberg wrote: “Over the past five years, some of Fox’s top opinion hosts amplified the false claims and bizarre narratives of Donald Trump or offered up their own in his service. In this sense, the release of Patriot Purge wasn’t an isolated incident, it was merely the most egregious example of a longstanding trend.” Goldberg told the Times the Carlson documentary was “a sign that people have made peace with this direction of things, and there is no plan, at least, that anyone made me aware of for a course correction. “Now, righting the ship is an academic question. The Patriot Purge thing meant: OK, we hit the iceberg now, and I can’t do the rationalisations any more.” Fox News did not comment. The Times said a spokeswoman “sent data showing that [political] independents” watch the network. NPR cited five sources “with direct knowledge” as saying Hayes and Goldberg’s resignations “reflect larger tumult within Fox News over Carlson’s series … and his increasingly strident stances”. The same report named Bret Baier and Chris Wallace as senior anchors whose objections “rose to Lachlan Murdoch”, the chairman and chief executive of Fox Corporation. Murdoch did not comment. Last week his father, Rupert Murdoch, said it was “crucial that conservatives play an active, forceful role in … debate, but that will not happen if President Trump stays focused on the past. The past is the past, and the country is now in a contest to define the future.” But Carlson dominates primetime. He told the Times the resignations of Hayes and Goldberg were “great news” and said: “Our viewers will be grateful.” Carlson is due on Monday to broadcast an interview with Kyle Rittenhouse, the 18-year-old who was found not guilty on all counts on Friday, in his trial for shooting dead two men and wounding another during protests for racial justice in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last year. Carlson has also made a documentary with Rittenhouse, an enterprise Rittenhouse’s lawyer has said he opposed. Hayes told the Times he had been disturbed when a man at a recent event staged by Turning Point USA, a pro-Trump group, asked: “When do we get to use the guns?” “That’s a scary moment,” Hayes said. “And I think we’d do well to have people who at the very least are not putting stuff out that would encourage that kind of thing.”French authorities have dispatched police reinforcements to the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe after a week of violent protests over coronavirus restrictions. Islanders are angry after Paris announced that health workers across all French territories must have Covid vaccinations. This sparked demonstrations that degenerated into the torching and looting of shops and pharmacies and clashes with police. There were reports that rioters had broken into an arms depot in the island’s coastal capital, Pointe-à-Pitre, and stolen rifles. “We just don’t know how far this will still go,” the city’s mayor, Harry Durimel, told FranceInfo radio. Island authorities have imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew until Tuesday morning. On Monday police said they had arrested 38 people caught looting and smashing shops, and had begun dismantling road barricades set up by protesters. Col Jean Pierre, of the gendarmerie at Pointe-à-Pitre, said protesters had fired on security forces and firefighters, and blamed the worst incidences on “organised gangs”. Emmanuel Macron described the situation in Guadeloupe as “very explosive” and called for calm on the island. The French president said the authorities had his full solidarity and urged people not to fall for the “lies and manipulation” of what he described as a “very small minority”. “You cannot use the health of the French people to drive political battles,” Macron said during a visit to Amiens in northern France. “Public order must be maintained.” He added: “There’s a situation that is very explosive, which is linked to a very local context and to tensions we know of and that are historic as well as to certain interests that seek to use this context and anxiety. The government is mobilised.” The prime minister, Jean Castex, will hold a meeting with Guadeloupe’s MPs and other elected representatives at 6pm on Monday. The health minister, Olivier Véran, will also attend. French government spokesperson Gabriel Attal described the situation on the island as “intolerable and unacceptable”. He said there would be a tough response to the “small minority” involved in the violence and vandalism. “We cannot accept this happening on national territory,” Attal said. Olivier Serva, the MP for Guadeloupe with Emmanuel Macron’s governing La République En Marche party, said he had warned that the situation on the island was “quasi-insurrectional”. He said opposition to the vaccine and Covid regulations was down to “weakening state authority” on the island and a symptom of the legacy of “colonial slavery”. Maité Hubert M’Toumo, the secretary general of the island’s biggest union, the UGTG, called for more protests. He said they had been sparked by the vaccine order but were symptomatic of a greater malaise. “They express the depth of suffering, inequality, poverty and exclusion felt by the people, especially the young and the elderly,” he said. On Saturday the island’s doctors’ union appealed for calm, saying the health system was “fragile” and condemning “those individuals who want to prevent patients from accessing care or caregivers accessing their place of work”. There are fears the violence could spread. On the neighbouring island of Martinique, union leaders called a general strike on Monday. In September France made it compulsory for all health workers, home carers, transport staff, medical students, firefighters, and all personnel linked to these services to have the Covid vaccine. According to government figures, just under 90% of the adult population of France – including the overseas territories – has been fully vaccinated. However, only 40.3% of adults on Guadeloupe have had the vaccine. In Martinique the figure is 41%. A passe sanitaire, or health pass, showing a person has been vaccinated or recently tested negative for Covid is necessary in restaurants, cinemas, theatres, museums and other public buildings in France. Free Covid tests ended in the middle of October, putting pressure on the French to have the vaccine. Guadeloupe has reported a total of 54,854 Covid cases and 822 deaths attributed to the virus.Nadhim Zahawi has rejected calls for the introduction of exclusion zones to keep anti-vaccine protesters away from schools, saying he would prefer the police to deal with the problem. The education secretary told LBC that anti-vaxxers who have been picketing school gates across England should not be going anywhere near schools, teachers or pupils, but indicated exclusion zones were not the best solution. Zahawi’s cabinet colleague the health secretary, Sajid Javid, and the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, are among those to have called for the use of exclusion zones – known formally as public space protection orders, which are administered by local authorities – to protect schools from protests. Zahawi said on Monday: “I’d rather have the police deal with it.” Asked if he wanted to see arrests rather than exclusion zones, he said: “Absolutely. Because the moment you start giving them the space to think that they are somehow being prohibited … [the home secretary, Priti Patel] has promised me that the police have got all the resources they need to be able to deal with [them].” He went on: “The anti-vaxx protesters should not be going anywhere near a school or a pupil or a parent or a teacher. If they do, the police will and can take action against them.” Zahawi said local government was also working with schools and added: “If anybody feels threatened by these anti-vaxx protesters they should report them and they will be arrested.” A recent survey by the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL) suggested that four out of five schools (79%) have been targeted by anti-vaccination campaigners, mainly in the form of emails threatening legal action. Many school leaders have complained of feeling intimidated and upset by misinformation being spread by protesters. More than one in 10 (13%) schools said protests had been staged immediately outside their school premises, 20% reported protesters in the local area, 18 schools said protesters had gained access to the school premises, while 20 said they had received communications threatening physical harm to staff. Geoff Barton, the ASCL general secretary, said he was not surprised to see the education secretary steering away from the idea of exclusion zones. “It’s a good idea in principle but difficult to determine exactly how it would work in practice. “The trouble is that by the time protesters have turned up and protested it is difficult to do much about it. If protests are ongoing, then exclusions zones might work, but equally it might be possible to defuse the situation simply through appropriate police support under existing powers. “What we really need is for the protesters to desist from this sort of unhelpful activity. Protests outside schools are completely unacceptable. Students and staff should be able to go to and from school in a calm and orderly environment.” Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, added: “Whatever your views on vaccination, it is never OK to make children feel scared and intimidated as they arrive at school. “People have the right to express their concerns, but this must be done appropriately – schools are not the place for angry protests. We would urge anti-vaccination campaigners to behave more responsibly and to carefully consider the impact their actions are having on children.” Last month, after a particularly concerning incident involving an anti-vaccination protest, Javid backed the introduction of exclusion zones around schools, saying: “These people are doing so much damage. “First of all, here you have three children who are injured, actually physically injured, and that’s heartbreaking to see, children going about what they should be doing, going to school every day, and you’ve got frankly these idiots outside their school spreading vicious lies. It is becoming a growing problem as time goes by.” Starmer described the demonstrations as “sickening”, adding: “Labour believes the law around public spaces protection orders urgently needs to be updated so that local authorities can rapidly create exclusion zones for anti-vaxx protests outside of schools.”If I had a dollar for every time I’ve heard the term “first world problems”, my bank account would look similar to those of my clients. I work as a psychotherapist and my specialism is ultra-high net worth individuals. I got into working with billionaires by accident. I had one wealthy client, who passed my name around to their acquaintances. They are called the 1% for a reason: there are not that many of them and so the circle is tight. Over the years, I have developed a great deal of empathy for those who have far too much. The television programme Succession, now in its third season, does such a good job of exploring the kinds of toxic excess my clients struggle with that when my wife is watching it I have to leave the room; it just feels like work. What could possibly be challenging about being a billionaire, you might ask. Well, what would it be like if you couldn’t trust those close to you? Or if you looked at any new person in your life with deep suspicion? I hear this from my clients all the time: “What do they want from me?”; or “How are they going to manipulate me?”; or “They are probably only friends with me because of my money.” Then there are the struggles with purpose – the depression that sets in when you feel like you have no reason to get out of bed. Why bother going to work when the business you have built or inherited runs itself without you now? If all your necessities and much more were covered for the rest of your life – you might struggle with a lack of meaning and ambition too. My clients are often bored with life and too many times this leads to them chasing the next high – chemically or otherwise – to fill that void. Most of the people I see are much more willing to talk about their sex lives or substance-misuse problems than their bank accounts. Money is seen as dirty and secret. Money is awkward to talk about. Money is wrapped up in guilt, shame, and fear. There is a perception that money can immunise you against mental-health problems when actually, I believe that wealth can make you – and the people closest to you – much more susceptible to them. I see family situations like those in Succession all the time. People like the series’ lead character, Logan Roy, who came from humble beginnings to create an incredibly successful media empire. His entire life has been focused on his business. However, it is evident that he has failed miserably at raising fully functioning children. Too many of my clients want to indulge their children so “they never have to suffer what I had to suffer” while growing up. But the result is that they prevent their children from experiencing the very things that made them successful: sacrifice, hard work, overcoming failure and developing resilience. An over-indulged child develops into an entitled adult who has low self-confidence, low self-esteem, and a complete lack of grit. These very wealthy children start out by going to elite boarding schools and move on to elite universities – developing a language and culture among their own kind. Rarely do they create friendships with non-wealthy people; this can lead to feelings of isolation and being trapped inside a very small bubble. There are few people in the world to whom they can actually relate, which of course leads to a lack of empathy. The next time you watch Succession, see how the Roys interact with their staff and others outside their circle. Notice the awkwardness and lack of human connection and how dreadfully they treat each other. It’s fascinating and frightening. When one leads a life without consequences (for being rude to a waiter or cruel to a sibling, for example) there really is no reason to not do these things. After a while, it becomes normalised and accepted. Living a life without rules isn’t good for anyone. Succession is built on the idea of a group of wealthy children vying for who will take the mantle from their father – none of them are able to convince him that they can do it. And that is because they have reached adulthood completely unprepared to take on any responsibility. The wealthy parents I see, often because of their own guilt and shame, are not preparing their children for the challenges of managing their wealth. There is truth in the old adage “shirt sleeves to shirt sleeves in three generations”. On numerous occasions the child of a wealthy family has said to me: “We never talked about money. I don’t know how much there is or what I’m supposed to do with it. I don’t know how to take care of it. It’s all so secret and dirty.” I was raised in a small town in rural Kentucky, solidly in the middle class. And it can be very difficult to watch these individuals struggle with the toxicity of excess, isolation and deep mistrust. Succession is a dramatised version of the world they operate in – it is made for television and part of its purpose is to give audiences the pleasure of watching the wealthy struggle. But for someone who has worked with them, I know that their challenges are real and profound. Clay Cockrell is a psychotherapist and the founder of Walk and Talk TherapyTo access his dreams the surrealist artist Salvador Dalí napped while sitting on a chair, holding keys over an upturned metal plate. After he lost consciousness, the keys dropped onto the plate, jangling him awake so he could paint fresh from his unconscious. Kim Gillingham tells this story to connect her practice to the history of artistic endeavour. She is a Jungian dream coach, based in LA, who combines ideas from psychoanalysis and the method acting of the Actors Studio to, in her words: “access the incredible resource of the unconscious through dreams and through work with the body and to use that material to bring authenticity, truth and aliveness up through whatever discipline the artist is working in”. Jane Campion sought Gillingham’s services to help conjure the forces at play in her first film in 12 years, The Power of the Dog. It’s a western adapted from Thomas Savage’s 1967 novel that riffs on themes of masculinity and stars Benedict Cumberbatch as Phil Burbank, a toxic alpha cowboy whose personality is designed to hide a secret that would have made him vulnerable in the story’s setting of 1920s Montana. Gillingham’s work takes place during pre-production, at first going through the script looking for where subtext can be heightened, before helping an actor to develop their character in the same way. Both Campion and Cumberbatch engaged in dream work. Techniques include repeating details of a dream back and forth with a partner (“I’m in my childhood bedroom” “You’re in your childhood bedroom”) until it comes to life. “The dream begins to open itself, just by being heard back and forth like that,” says Gillingham, who credits her former teacher Marion Woodman for additional practices such as: “observing gestures or habits within the body and then inquiring around what the body might be doing”. The common thread seems to be to shift away from the conscious mind, the better to focus on what rises up in its stead. Gillingham won’t reveal any details of what Cumberbatch and Campion went through, saying that “dream work brings up deep material for the artist to work with and, inevitably, that reveals personal truths.” But in general terms she says: “We’ve all developed personas, taken certain aspects of ourselves and hidden them away in order to walk through the world. Dreams pretty stubbornly and persistently remind us of hidden aspects of ourselves that we might do well to integrate.” Gillingham’s work uses a psychological philosophy that has much in common with “the method” that – in cinema at least – was popularised in the 1950s via the feral magnetism of actors such as James Dean and Marlon Brando. Both dream work and method acting use characterisation as a container for “a sense memory or something that’s very personal”. Having a strong emotional relationship to their work can imbue actors with a mesmerising presence, yet they are protected from total vulnerability by the construction of a fictional character. But drawing from parts of the self that are sublimated in day-to-day life is not a straightforward process and Gillingham says that to put the genie back into the bottle afterwards requires both training and a well-balanced ego. Saying that both Campion and Cumberbatch “have a wonderful creative ego”, she describes the former as “a lioness of an artist” while the latter is “completely open, translucent to his inner life”. What is the value of going to such psychological lengths in service of art? To Gillingham personal dreamscapes and socio-political landscapes are linked. “In the same way that we’re having dreams to bring us to consciousness, I think we’re participating in the culture’s dreams when we go to the movies or make movies. So I’m rabidly interested in the stories that we’re telling and how the stories are coming through.” She believes that dreams are a means to innovate beyond what the social activist and writer bell hooks defined as “the white supremacist, patriarchal capitalistic culture”. There is a freshness to what lurks in the unconscious that is both raw and new. “If I’m only repeating what I’ve already seen,” says Gillingham, “I am repeating a dominant narrative over and over again. If I have the ability to drop into the unconscious and bring through – even if I don’t understand it fully – some kind of new material, I probably have a new narrative. I believe this is the case with The Power of the Dog.” The Power of the Dog is in UK cinemas now and on Netflix from 1 December.Sean Foley, co-writer and performer It was all [producer] David Pugh’s fault. In 1988 I’d set up a small two-person theatre company, The Right Size, with Hamish McColl, creating work that was somewhere between European physical theatre and British variety. We’d had some success; one of our shows had transferred to the West End. One day in 2001, David called us in and said, “I want you to make a show about Morecambe and Wise.” We made polite noises in the room, but as soon as we got out, we said to each other, “This guy’s an idiot.” It looked like a poisoned chalice: as a double-act, surely the riskiest thing you can do is attempt to impersonate one of the most famous double-acts of all time. But David kept on at us and so we wrote a dummy script for him, half-hoping that he would realise the error of his ways. But he didn’t. He loved it. And we thought, “Oh God, we’re actually going to have to do this.” The solution we found is that in The Play What I Wrote we don’t actually impersonate anyone, except ourselves. There are two characters called Sean and Hamish on stage: Hamish wants to put on a “serious” play he’s written (a very Ernie thing to do), while Sean wants to do comedy (a very Eric thing to do). It was a homage to Morecambe and Wise, but a cock-eyed one. The idea was to look at what it means to be a double-act as well as evoking Eric and Ernie’s comic spirit. We were lucky enough to work with Eddie Braben, who wrote a lot of their material and also a few new jokes for us. He insisted on being paid per gag – very old-school. It was the way it was done in those days. In the second half of the show a guest star appears, echoing what happened on the Morecambe and Wise TV specials. We worried that no one famous would actually want to do it, but luckily a few guinea-pig stars got the ball rolling. Then one night Ralph Fiennes strode into the dressing room and said he loved the show, and we booked him there and then. It went like that. The whole thing was very kick-bollocks-scramble. One of the things I’m proudest of is that even though we deliberately weren’t trying to be Eric and Ernie, we managed to evoke at least some of their comic world, activate this sense of nostalgia in the audience. People would say, “Oh, I remember that bit!” In fact they didn’t remember it at all: we’d written it ourselves. Toby Jones, performer I’d known Sean and Hamish for ages and seen everything they did. They were really smart. When they told me they were going to do a show about Morecambe and Wise, I said: “Don’t, it’s a really bad idea.” Then they asked if I would come on board and play the supporting roles they’d written – lots of little parts. Rather grandly, I said no, that didn’t sound very appealing. So it morphed into one part, a bloke called Arthur, again a tribute to a character in the original shows. He’d come on with his harmonica and they’d say, “Not now, Arthur.” I became Arthur. David Pugh convinced Kenneth Branagh to direct, which made the whole thing feel a lot more intense, also because after starting in Liverpool we were due to go into the West End. There was a script of sorts, but quite a rough one, as I recall; we had to tighten it up and get it properly written down. Of course the show kept changing, partly because of the guest-star thing – the way it worked was that Arthur would come on, dressed as the star, before the star actually appeared in the second half. It wasn’t so much impersonation as a deliberately pathetic attempt at impersonation. That was the gag. Ralph Fiennes had been in The English Patient, so they swaddled me up in bandages. With Bob Geldof, I came on and started swearing. When we had Kylie Minogue, I had to wear her dress. I was constantly changing costume. And it wasn’t an easy show to perform. When we were doing it on Broadway, Roger Moore collapsed on stage one night after a dance number. I was actually offstage at the time but I heard the audience go deathly quiet. When I looked back, I saw him sprawled out on the floor and thought, “Oh my God, he’s dead.” They pulled in the curtain, Sean went out front and said: “I’m so sorry – Roger Moore is unwell. A doctor is coming.” The audience cheered. They thought it was all part of the joke. Somehow he was OK. He got up again and made it to the end of the show. • The 20th anniversary production of The Play What I Wrote is at Birmingham Rep, 27 November to 1 January 2022.The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, has lambasted as “idiots” people who turned to “pure violence” during three consecutive nights of anti-lockdown protests across the Netherlands. Rutte told Dutch media that their actions had “nothing to do with demonstrating” but were “a pure explosion of violence directed against our police, against our firefighters, against ambulance drivers”. At least 130 people have been arrested, four wounded and several police officers injured since the violence began in the port city of Rotterdam on Friday. Rutte, who leads a caretaker government, said he would always fight for the right to demonstrate, as part of Dutch democracy and the rule of law, “but what I will never accept is that idiots use sheer violence against the people who work for you and me every day … to keep this country safe under the guise of: ‘We are dissatisfied.’” The Netherlands tightened coronavirus restrictions last week after a surge in cases, as rising infections across Europe trigger tougher measures from governments. Rutte’s government is facing calls from opposition politicians to go further, either by banning non-vaccinated people from bars and restaurants, or closing all non-essential shops and other venues. Last Friday in Rotterdam hundreds of rioters torched cars and threw rocks at police in what the city’s mayor called an “orgy of violence”. On Saturday night protesters lit fires in The Hague and other cities, including at a primary school in Roosendaal in the southern Netherlands. On Sunday demonstrators were out in force in the northern cities of Groningen and Leeuwarden, Enschede in the east and Tilburg in the south, where they threw fireworks and vandalised property. In Belgium politicians have condemned violence in Brussels, after a peaceful demonstration against coronavirus restrictions turned violent. Belgium’s home affairs minister, Annelies Verlinden, said: “A mature democracy respects the opinion of a minority but does not accept that a few abuse their protest vote by force. Vaccinated or not: it is important that we continue to follow the measures. Only together can we win the fight against the virus.” Police estimated that 35,000 demonstrators gathered in the Belgian capital to march against the Covid Safe Pass, the app demonstrating vaccine and recovery status, which is essential to enter bars and restaurants. But many wanted to voice discontent more broadly with Covid restrictions, which were tightened last week as infections rose. Local media reported a varied mix of people at the demonstration, including the far-right, people espousing anti-vaccine conspiracy theories and antisemitism, as well as seemingly apolitical people opposed to vaccination, including entire families. The daily Het Nieuwsblad reported that healthcare workers stood shoulder to shoulder with people who had pinned Jewish stars on their clothes in protest at what they called a Nazi regime. It also reported attendance by the anti-vaccination, anti-mask, Dutch-speaking “Teachers for Freedom” group, as well as MPs for the Flemish far-right party, the Vlaams Belang. One nursery nurse, Tina Cleybergh, told the paper she had come to the protest because the Covid pass had created division in society, “in which unvaccinated people feel labeled as criminals”. Some protesters expressed concern their intended peaceful gathering had been infiltrated by troublemakers. A police spokesperson told De Standaard that many of the agitators were “hooligan-like types” already known to law enforcement. The spokesperson said the crowd was diverse: “What they have in common is mistrust in the system and politics, especially in the area of coronavirus.” Police used water cannon and teargas to disperse violent protesters, who massed close to EU headquarters, where they were throwing firecrackers, smashing cars and setting bins on fire. Officers made at least 45 arrests, including two on suspicion of armed rebellion. Three police officers and one protester were injured and taken to hospital. The violence has reignited the debate on compulsory vaccination in Belgium, an idea that divides the seven-party ruling coalition. On Monday, Pierre-Yves Dermagne, the Socialist deputy prime minister, who is also economy minister, said it was necessary to reopen the discussion. “We must have this debate because we know that we are going to live with this virus for months and even years. We cannot limit ourselves to short-term measures.” Last week Belgium’s liberal prime minister, Alexander De Croo, dismissed mandatory Covid jabs as a “false good idea”, arguing it would be difficult in practice and more effective to persuade people. The government is already facing backlash over mandatory Covid jabs for healthcare workers. On Monday about 50 people protested against the recently agreed policy outside a hospital in the eastern town of Libramont. From 1 January all healthcare workers in Belgium are obliged to be vaccinated against coronavirus, or face redundancy if they refuse.“Quiet on set, please!” They are not the words you might expect to hear at a theatre, but these are not usual times. Behind the stage and cosy velvet auditorium of the National Theatre’s Lyttelton venue, we are in a dark, cavernous complex overrun with wires and scaffolding, where the film Death of England: Face to Face is being shot. Light falls through the windows of a makeshift flat where Delroy (played by Hamilton’s Giles Terera) is reconciling with his friend Michael (Utopia’s Neil Maskell) after a longstanding feud. The characters reflect on the tumultuous events of the day, before Michael takes Delroy’s baby daughter back to her mother. “I’ll have her back in your loving arms before it gets dark – just chillax,” Michael tells her on the phone. The dialogue continues but the baby’s unscripted wails prompt a “cut!” from director Clint Dyer. The film, broadcast on Sky Arts this week, takes Dyer and co-writer Roy Williams’s Death of England saga – which has included two acclaimed stage plays – back to its original form: film. The series began with a microplay made with the Royal Court for the Guardian’s website in 2014, following a grieving son (played by Rafe Spall) who gives an alcohol-induced, no-holds-barred speech at his father’s funeral. “It came off the back of England’s disastrous performance in the World Cup in 2014,” explains Williams. “They stank the house out – they were bloody awful!” It became a metaphor: not just how a football team may be viewed but a whole nation. Around the same time, Williams started hearing the word “Brexit”. The microplay’s title, Death of England, is “kind of how I felt – yeah, this country is going to die”. That short film was later expanded for a monologue of the same name performed by Spall at the National’s Dorfman theatre at the start of 2020, followed by a sequel at the NT later that year. Face to Face is a feature film “but we’re telling it in a very theatrical way,” says Dyer. “So now we’re harnessing both mediums.” It is the second film to be created solely for the screen by the National since the pandemic began. Simon Godwin’s production of Romeo and Juliet aired in spring. “The National was desperate to still employ all the people that it had employed for the original [stage] production of Romeo and Juliet,” says Dyer, who is the NT’s deputy artistic director. “The only way to keep it moving was to film it. And so the idea was to try and use the Lyttelton as a film studio.” The success of Romeo and Juliet led them to consider the same treatment for Face to Face. The first stage sequel, the monologue Death of England: Delroy, was also affected by the coronavirus shutdown, which led to it closing early. “It ended on its first night,” explains Dyer. But there was a silver lining as that monologue was later streamed. “We won because thousands more people saw it … That was what really encouraged Rufus Norris [the National’s artistic director] to accept our crazy idea. I’m not sure if I’ve seen a film made in the same form. It’s a proper arthouse film, innit!” “Originally, we thought we’d get kickback against some of the things we were saying,” says Dyer of the Death of England stage productions’ exploration of nationalism and identity. “But what we really found across the board was that people could tell that whatever we were saying was done with love – there’s an emphasis and an understanding inside it – none of it is done out of trying to poke the finger,” Dyer adds. After Death of England, the pair found they had so much material that they could tell a story from the point of view of Delroy, the black best friend of Spall’s character, Michael. “As we wrote it, Delroy’s story came out, which is just as important – we gave it as much time as Michael’s,” says Williams. Death of England: Delroy was originally to star Giles Terera, but illness led him to be replaced on stage by Michael Balogun for a monologue that in part responded to the Black Lives Matter movement. Delroy, with an ankle tracker, recounts being unjustly arrested when en route to the hospital for the birth of his daughter. With Delroy’s story told, Williams explains that the next step was to “put them in the same room. Michael’s told his bit, Delroy’s told his bit – we want to hear them tell all that stuff to each other now.” Death of England, in its various instalments, is a story about class, race, British identity and sport – more relevant than ever in light of the Euro 2020 racism and cricket’s current crisis. “It’s impossible to talk about ‘Britishness’ or ‘blackness’ without talking about what is considered the opposite – as in ‘whiteness’,” says Dyer. Yet, Death of England is among the few works to have a black character talk into the sensibilities of a white character, and vice versa. Delroy and Michael’s lenses are effectively those of the real-life experiences of Dyer and Williams – both growing up as black working class and predominately among the white working class. Williams feels that he is “living in country that’s saying all the right things but not doing the right things to make me – and other people like me – feel equal. It’s what led me to want to write these stories.” For Dyer, the Death of England series is “the same conversation that I’ve been having in my work forever” but the difference is that “the response to my work has changed … I think that people are able to hear it in a more nuanced way than ever before.” The stories have become intertwined with the pandemic and Face to Face takes place during the January lockdown. Has Covid brought about newer and more inventive ways to create art? “I know it’s given voices to a lot of people that didn’t have voices before,” says Dyer. “I know that it pushed us to create in a way that we’ve never created before. I think most theatres would say that that was a fact. I hope one day when we’re really out of this that we can look back and applaud some of the amazing courage that was shown.” Death of England: Face to Face is on Sky Arts on 25 November.The Brit awards have become the latest award ceremony to do away with gendered categories that split male and female talent apart. For the 2022 ceremony, a new award, artist of the year, will replace the British male solo artist and British female solo artist categories. An international artist of the year award will replace the previously gendered international solo artist awards. At 2021’s ceremony, the non-binary British pop singer Sam Smith was left out of the gendered categories for solo artist. They responded: “I look forward to a time where awards shows can be reflective of the society we live in. Let’s celebrate everybody, regardless of gender, race, age, ability, sexuality and class.” Following Smith’s statement, Brit organisers said they were “committed to evolving the show and the gendered categories are very much under review. But any changes made to be more inclusive need to be just that – if a change unintentionally leads to less inclusion then it risks being counterproductive to diversity and equality. We need to consult more widely before changes are made to make sure we get it right.” The 2020 ceremony was criticised for only featuring one British woman across the mixed categories of British album, group, song and new artist, so, presumably mindful that a reduction in gendered categories could lead to fewer women winning awards or being nominated, organisers have introduced a number of new mixed categories. Awards for alternative/rock act, pop/R&amp;B act, dance act and hip-hop/rap/grime act join the artist awards and the rest of the usual categories: album of the year, song of the year, group of the year, international group of the year, best new artist, and the rising star award for tipped future talent. The Brit awards are voted for by the Brits Academy, comprising musicians, industry figures and media professionals, though the four new genre categories will be voted for by the public. Another new honorary award is songwriter of the year, joining the producer of the year award. Tom March, co-president of Polydor Records who is this year’s Brit chairman, said: “It is important that the Brits continue to evolve and aim to be as inclusive as possible.” The ceremony on 8 February at the O2 Arena in London will be hosted for the first time by Mo Gilligan, taking over from Jack Whitehall who had presented the last four ceremonies. It is the first time that a non-white person has presented the awards since 1994, when RuPaul co-presented alongside Elton John. Gilligan said he was honoured to be presenting, adding: “We’re going to give it all we’ve got to create an incredible night for music fans everywhere.” Presenting the nominations show on ITV in December, and reporting from the Brit awards red carpet, will be Maya Jama and Clara Amfo. Staging the show will be Block9, known for their imaginative sets at the Glastonbury festival’s night-time area, and who staged Dua Lipa’s Studio 2054 livestream in November 2020 as well as the upcoming Gorillaz: Song Machine Live From Kong in December. British male and female solo artist categories had been awarded since the Brit awards’ inception in 1977, with Annie Lennox receiving the most female awards (six) and Robbie Williams the most male (four). International artist categories began in 1989, with Björk leading the female award winners with four, and Beck, Eminem and Kanye West each winning three. The MTV VMA awards have been gender neutral since 2017. The Television Critics Association awards in the US also uses mixed-gender categories, and literary prizes have long been primarily mixed. This year’s Emmy awards acknowledged non-binary actors by allowing them to be named a “performer” rather than an actor or actress, though they would still ultimately appear in a gendered category.Russia has accused the west of building up forces on its borders as well as those of Belarus in remarks that appeared tailored to mirror recent US warnings about Moscow’s aggressive positioning towards Ukraine. The Kremlin, as well as Russian intelligence, security, and diplomatic officials, have all gone on the offensive in the past 48 hours after Vladimir Putin publicly instructed his diplomats that tensions should be maintained with the west as a form of aggressive deterrence. US and Ukrainian officials have said that Russia has amassed nearly 100,000 troops in the border regions near Ukraine and warned it was seeking a pretext in order to justify a major intervention in the country. In a public statement on Monday, Russia’s foreign intelligence service announced that the situation was similar to that with Georgia in 2008, where Russia fought a short war against the government of Mikheil Saakashvili. “The provocative policy of the United States and the European Union, which has deliberately strengthened Kyiv’s sense of permissiveness and impunity, causes extreme concern,” the agency wrote in the statement. Also on Monday, the deputy head of Russia’s security council accused Nato members of increasing military activity in Black Sea, eastern Europe, and Arctic regions. Alexander Grebenkin, the body’s deputy secretary, said that the probability of a border incident was “not decreasing”. A foreign ministry spokeswoman complained about recent joint US-Estonian military airborne exercise, while a Kremlin spokesman pointed to US weapons provided to Kyiv. Russia has denied that it is planning to launch an attack. But Putin has admitted that raising tensions in eastern Europe serves Russia’s interests. “Relative tension has actually developed there,” Putin said while addressing Russian diplomats last week. “Firstly, it is necessary that they keep in this kind of state as long as possible, that they don’t even think to cause any kind of conflict we don’t want to see on our western frontiers, and we don’t need any conflicts.” US officials have said that they do not know whether Putin is planning to launch a larger invasion of Ukraine but that the country has been methodically moving the needed elements for an offensive operation toward Russia’s western borders since a massive buildup in April. Russia has sent men, money and weapons to fight in Ukraine since 2014, annexing the Crimean peninsula and sparking a war in the Donbass region that has left more than 14,000 dead. In an interview with the Military Times, the head of Ukraine’s defence intelligence agency said Russia had amassed more than 92,000 troops around Ukraine’s borders and was preparing for an attack by the end of January or beginning of February. A slide published by the outlet showed that Russia had 40 battalion tactical groups, or BTGs, stationed near the border with Ukraine. That number was lower than an earlier buildup in April of this year, when Russia had an estimated 53 BTGs, consisting of 105,000 troops, in the border region.Paul Dacre has returned to the Daily Mail publisher as editor-in-chief of the newspaper’s parent company after pulling out of the running to be the next chair of the media regulator, Ofcom. His appointment at the helm of DMG Media comes days after his rival, Geordie Greig, was ousted as Daily Mail editor and less than three weeks since Dacre parted ways with the publishing group where he has spent 42 years. Dacre’s appointment was announced to staff in an email from Jonathan Harmsworth, the fourth Viscount Rothermere, who is the chair of the Daily Mail and General Trust. “Although he will not be involved in day-to-day editing, he will be taking an active role advising me and the editors,” Rothermere said. It comes after Rothermere announced he is close to concluding transactions that will allow him to take the parent company DMGT off the stock market and have total private control over the Daily Mail and its sister titles. The return of Dacre to his former employer, where he will also have influence over the Metro and i titles, comes after a brief dalliance with the public sector in the form of a potential move to Ofcom. He disengaged from that race last week – describing the process of civil service recruitment as an “infelicitous dalliance with the blob” in a letter to The Times – after concerns were raised about the transparency of the recruitment process. After failing in his first attempt when an interview panel decided he did not fulfil the required criteria, ministers cleared the way for him to be given another shot. But after the Guardian revealed a lobbyist at a company with close connections to the Conservative party was picked to help select which candidates should be approved, Dacre announced he would not proceed with an application again despite being urged to “by many senior members of the government”. He said he was taking up “an exciting new job” in the private sector. His move back to the Mail is effectively a reappointment. Despite standing down as editor of the Daily Mail in 2018, he had remained on the payroll after being given the largely honorific positions of chair and editor-in-chief of parent company Associated Newspapers. On Monday, the news of his return was greeted with surprise among staff at the company’s titles. One reading was that the tenure of Greig – a remain-backing former editor of Tatler and friend of David Cameron – was an experiment to detoxify the Mail image, which the company had now decided to abandon. Dacre, one of the leading media campaigners for Brexit, had been rarely seen in the Daily Mail newsroom after moving upstairs to an office on the executive floor of the company’s Northcliffe House headquarters after Greig’s appointment in June 2018 but had used his position to criticise his successor. In one intervention, Dacre wrote a letter to the Financial Times accusing Greig of being “economic with the actualité” when it came to suggesting advertisers thought the newspaper had become too toxic. He also accused Greig of failing to pay enough respect to his journalistic achievements. By contrast, Dacre has had a close working relationship with the Mail on Sunday’s editor, Ted Verity, who will be taking charge of a new seven-day operation that will cover Grieg’s role at the Daily Mail. He has also worked well with Martin Clarke, DMG Media publisher and the executive who oversees online operations. He said in a statement issued by the company on Monday: “Nobody has done more to make the Mail titles what they are today than Paul Dacre and I am honoured to be working with him.”The insurer LV= has claimed that a takeover by the US private equity firm Bain Capital will result in £212m in extra distributions for members, as it tried to fight back against criticism of its decision to demutualise. The 178-year-old life insurance and pensions provider, formerly known as Liverpool Victoria, has accepted an approach by Bain for £530m in a deal that would end its member-owned status. However, members must back the takeover in a vote on 10 December, and the deal has triggered a political storm. The majority would receive a payout of only £100 from the deal, a figure criticised by some as a meagre return for the loss of mutual status and the prospect of ownership by a private equity firm; such firms often insist on job losses or cost-cutting to achieve higher profits. LV= said its “business as usual” no-deal scenario would result in only £404m being distributed to its 271,000 members whose policies mean they share in its profits, compared with £616m under the Bain deal. The insurer has been criticised by politicians and campaigners for failing to explain properly why members should sell out their rights. The mutual said on Monday that it would fail in a business-as-usual situation because it was too small to compete against global insurers, and the £100m needed for new computer systems and product development would have to be funded by members, endangering their future distributions. Mark Hartigan, the chief executive of LV=, said the company’s sale of its general insurance business before his arrival had made it too small to compete against larger rivals that could take advantage of a lower cost of capital. LV= sold its general insurance business to Allianz for £1.1bn between 2017 and 2019 to stem a capital shortfall that it said became apparent in 2016 after new regulations to protect financial stability kicked in and after it lost money in the market volatility following the Brexit vote. Hartigan said he remained confident that members would back the company. “I just have to, because the alternative is a much, much poorer outcome,” he said. “That would be a crying shame.” LV= and Royal London are two of the largest financial mutuals left in the UK that are open to anyone, rather than limited to members of services such as the police, but Royal London is much better capitalised, Hartigan said. “The model is just not appropriate for LV= as it stands,” he said. “If it was we wouldn’t have to do this.” LV= said it had considered 12 offers, one of which was from Royal London. Asked if Bain would be a good long-term custodian for LV=, Hartigan said: “The truthful answer is they’ll have to be. They’re going to have to invest a lot of money in this business for a long, long time to turn it round.” LV= plans to pay out £533m over time to the 271,000 with-profits members, at an average of about £1,970, compared with an average of £1,490 without the takeover. About 830,000 non-profit members will receive £100 each. Hartigan said he understood the “strong emotions” at play in the decision to abandon mutuality. “I hope the wider mutuals sector remains strong,” he added. • This article was amended on 24 November 2021. LV= and Royal London are not the only two financial mutuals left in the UK that are open to anyone as stated in an earlier version.Spain’s rightwing People’s party (PP) has been compelled to reiterate its condemnation of the Franco regime after the party’s leader was criticised for inadvertently attending a mass at which prayers were said for the soul of the dictator on the 46th anniversary of his death. Pablo Casado, who has led the PP since July 2018, was seen attending the mass in a church next to Granada cathedral on Saturday evening. According to the PP, Casado – in Andalucía for a party conference – took his family to mass there because it was near his hotel and because he thought work commitments would stop him making it to church the following day. “At no point was [Casado] aware that prayers would be said for the dictator,” the PP said in a statement on Monday. “In fact, there was no express mention of Franco in the homily.” The party said its leader had only become aware that prayers had been offered for the dictator using Franco’s first name, Francisco, the day after he had gone to the mass. “He never knew that they were going to pray for Franco,” the statement said, adding: “The People’s party has always condemned the Franco dictatorship.” The statement came after Casado’s political opponents had demanded to know exactly what had happened. A spokesperson for the Spanish Socialist Workers’ party (PSOE), which leads Spain’s coalition government, described Casado’s presence at the mass “a totally irresponsible insult” and called on the PP leader to explain himself. Pablo Echenique, a spokesperson for Unidas Podemos, the PSOE’s junior coalition partners, also said an explanation needed to be forthcoming. “Last Saturday there were 10 masses for Franco and there are about 23,000 churches,” Echenique said in a tweet. “The probability of randomly stumbling into one is 0.05% – yet, according to sources from his own PP, Pablo Casado managed it.” Íñigo Errejón, leader of the Más País party, said that while Casado may have attended the mass unknowingly, he still needed to address the matter. “If this had happened in another country – if Angela Merkel was travelling through Germany, found herself in Munich and went into a church where people were paying homage to Adolf Hitler – then I’m sure she would have come out the following day and said: ‘I was wrong. I didn’t want to be there and I’m sorry of I’ve offended the democrats of my country.’” But not everyone was outraged. The Francisco Franco National Foundation – which exists to preserve and promote the dictator’s legacy – said that while it had not “expressly” invited Casado to the mass, it was pleased he had been there. “We thank Mr Casado and his family, and the rest of those who attended the mass, for the prayer for the soul of an exemplary Christian such as Francisco Franco Bahamonde.” The incident comes as the PP continues to lead in the polls despite internal rifts and tensions over the party’s ideological direction, and a few days after the government tabled amendments to draft legislation that would in effect allow prosecutors to investigate crimes committed under the 1939-75 Franco regime on the basis that crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide and torture have no statute of limitations under international humanitarian law.Jerome Powell’s handling of the economic fallout from the Covid-19 pandemic has won the chair of the Federal Reserve the backing of the White House for a second term running the world’s most important central bank. Despite speculation that he might sack Donald Trump’s appointee, Joe Biden cited the “decisive action” taken by Powell during the early stages of the crisis as a reason to reappoint the 68-year-old Republican for another four years. The White House said Lael Brainard – the only Democrat on the Fed board, whom some had tipped as a possible replacement for Powell – was its choice to become the vice-chair. The nominations hark back to a tradition of a non-partisan approach to the top job at the Fed that was broken by Trump. Some progressive Democrats had called for Biden to follow the same approach and appoint Brainard in Powell’s place. Both nominations are subject to approval by a Democrat-controlled Congress and come at a time when the Fed is grappling with an annual inflation rate of 6.2% – the highest level in more than three decades. “As I’ve said before, we can’t just return to where we were before the pandemic, we need to build our economy back better, and I’m confident that Chair Powell and Dr Brainard’s focus on keeping inflation low, prices stable, and delivering full employment will make our economy stronger than ever before,” Biden said. After nominating Powell to run the Fed, Trump seemed to regret his choice and subjected the former investment banker to repeated criticism for his refusal to provide as much stimulus for the economy as the then president demanded. But the central bank moved swiftly when the global economy and the world’s financial markets were shaken by the arrival of Covid-19 in early 2020. US interest rates were cut to nea zero and the Fed resumed bond-buying that would result in its holdings of US Treasury bonds and other securities increasing by $4tn (£3tn). “Chair Powell has provided steady leadership during an unprecedentedly challenging period, including the biggest economic downturn in modern history and attacks on the independence of the Federal Reserve,” the White House statement said.“So bloody cool, so engaging.” That’s how Adele described her English teacher at Chestnut Grove school in Balham, south-west London, Ms McDonald, when asked who had inspired her. Answering a question from the actor Emma Thompson during ITV’s An Audience With Adele on Sunday, Adele said: “She really made us care, and we knew that she cared about us and stuff like that.” Images of the singer breaking down in tears when McDonald surprised her on stage at the London Palladium have gone viral, triggering conversations about the impact teachers can have on the lives of their pupils. Max Daniels, 28, a communications consultant who lives in London, described how the humanity shown by his teacher Miss Coyle had a lasting impact. “Miss Coyle was this upbeat, enthusiastic Irish woman who taught me English and media studies,” he said. “I could go on about how fun she made classes or how she injected life into her lessons, but the impact they had was far more personal. “My father passed away when I was 14 and, during a parents’ evening shortly after, Miss Coyle gave my mum a huge hug. It was something that made me realise how much she cared about the lives of the people she taught. “Even though she was a teacher and had a professional role to fill, it made me realise that it shouldn’t stop you from being human, from being caring. It’s something I think about in my professional career. It’s so easy to be the cold professional with your job, but actually caring about the lives, achievements and successes of people around you doesn’t hurt your job. If anything, it makes you work better with people. “As the classic secondary school loser – someone you could have pulled from The Inbetweeners – Miss Coyle made me feel important even when people around me would make me feel the opposite.” Sometimes teachers can be instrumental in helping pupils face deep, personal challenges. Jack Haywood, a 29-year-old doctor who lives in London, said his last teacher at primary school, Miss Stuart, helped him deal with anxieties about his sexuality at a young age. “The move to secondary school was a particularly anxious time for me, and I dreaded leaving. I had always wanted to do well at school and enjoyed it. But I was teased at school – I was called gay and excluded because of it,” he said. “I am an out and proud gay man now, but at the time I hadn’t even considered this and found it deeply hurtful. This alongside the anxiety of the move held me back and knocked my confidence. “Miss Stuart would regularly pull me aside and talk to me one to one, giving me the courage to push on. She told me it was OK if I was gay, and that there was nothing to be afraid of. Alongside dealing with the bullies, she made me feel safe and valued. Because of her, leaving primary school was a smooth transition, and I worked hard all the way through secondary school because of the confidence and reassurance she gave me.” Haywood added: “My schools were in a small town in Scotland, and I have since moved to London to go to medical school and I am now a public health doctor. I have absolutely no doubt that if Miss Stuart had not provided me with the push I needed, I was heading for a downward spiral and I wouldn’t be where I am today. So, thank you Miss Stuart. I am sure you have inspired and motivated many more after me.” Sophie Smith-Tong, 37, a primary school teacher who lives in London and the founder of a centre for educators and their families, Mindfulness for Learning, said her teacher Ms Rea changed her journey in education. “We met at 13 when in a drama lesson she has dressed up a classroom as a police station,” she said. “Starting here, she has continued to inspire me throughout my life. She is the reason that I realised I could apply to go to uni and that I had something to offer even though I felt so different to all of my peers. “She took me to perform my first professional theatre production at the Edinburgh festival at 16. She believed in every single one of us and it gave us the space to fly our own individual journeys. We are still friends 24 years on and she still has a major impact on the life decisions I make today. She is the reason I created Mindfulness for Learning.” For Mandeep Rai, her teacher Mr Holmes helped her with the challenges of being a child of immigrants to the UK, particularly language difficulties. The 39-year-old, who lives in Gravesend and is a global head of function for a pharmaceutical firm, said: “English was not my first language – I was born in the UK but my parents insisted we speak Punjabi at home to ensure I could communicate with my grandparents. They felt it their duty to ensure they passed on their mother tongue to their children. “This meant I only learned to speak English when I started school at around three years old. I struggled with English, in particular vocabulary. In my first year of secondary school I did poorly in an end-of-term geography exam, which surprised my teacher Mr Holmes as I was usually the first to raise my hand in class and clearly enjoyed the topic. “He encouraged me to read as much as I could, anything I enjoyed, to better understand sentence structure and improve my vocabulary,” Rai said. “It was tough feedback for an 11-year-old but he was spot on. I took his advice and, in short, I think it was a huge help in passing exams and performing well in the workplace.”VIBES WILL ONLY TAKE YOU SO FAR It’s been a busy 48 hours for Manchester United, whose latest Premier League shellacking was so humiliating it prompted an emergency five-hour board meeting at which the decision was taken to finally relieve Ole Gunnar Solskjær of duties it has been abundantly clear for some time now he is not equipped to carry out. Quite what those involved in the Zoom call spent the other four hours and 59 minutes discussing remains unclear, although the best manner in which to publicly distance themselves from their own responsibility for the shambles over which their Norwegian patsy has presided in recent months may have come up. Like many others, your cynical Fiver found its mind well and truly boggled that the club’s Fan Sentiment Graph guys somehow persuaded Ole to film a tearful, touching and click-tastic video farewell in which he wished their newly appointed pre-interim interim manager Michael Carrick all the best, before trundling out of the club training ground consigned to the wheel of nothing more powerful than his Range Rover. We can but hope his former counterparts Brendan Rodgers, Rafa Benítez and Mikel Arteta were around to buy him a drink, considering how much his dismissal managed to deflect attention away from their respective teams’ similarly inept performances over the weekend. Fast forward to Monday, when it emerged that Ed Woodward is reportedly reconsidering the reconsideration of his role as the club’s executive vice-chairman, a position he was supposed to leave at the end of the year following his controversial and unpopular promotion of the €uropean $uper £eague. With his long track record in the field of hiring quite obviously unsuitable managers when far better ones are available, he clearly doesn’t want to be ultimately remembered as the man with the keen eye for a noodle partnership who shot Bambi and has presumably decided he is the man to hire Rodgers, Zinedine Zinedine or current bookies’ favourite Mauricio Pochettino. With Solskjær gone, United’s players will have turned up to catch their flight to Villarreal with renewed vim and vigour, which will have quickly dissipated when they realised his departure simply means each member of his uninspiring and less-than-stellar coaching team will simply be scooching one seat up on the bench. “The players need to take responsibility,” honked Harry Maguire, one of many United players who increasingly talks and tweets a far more impressive game than he plays. QUOTE OF THE DAY Once more, with feeling. FIVER LETTERS “Can I be the first of the 1,057 to say that for Manchester United to dispense with Ole Gunnar Solskjær is blatantly unfair. The 12 clubs United have already played get a distinct advantage over the seven they haven’t” – Martin Landrygan (and no others). “It’s worth noting that Solskjær made his name as a player in a match in which United scored two goals in stoppage time, and ended his role as manager of the club after United shipped two in stoppage time” – Peter Oh. “It seems little remarked on that only the Premier League’s top four and Crystal Palace (at a minimal +1) have positive goal differences. Does this reflect poor attacks or poor defences, or indeed both? Maybe The Fiver should set up a judge-led public inquiry” – Richard Hirst. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Peter Oh. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Lyon will have to play behind closed doors pending an investigation into the crowd trouble – including Dimitri Payet being hit by a bottle – that prompted Sunday’s match against Marseille to be abandoned. “Everyone must understand that it’s the survival of French soccer that’s at stake,” said sports minister Roxana Maracineanu. Get ready for more underwhelming but generally sensible management of the England men’s team now Gareth Southgate has extended his contract until Euro 2024. Whizzy 18-year-old Barcelona playmaker Pedri has won the 2021 Golden Boy gong for being the most top, top, top under-21 player in Europe. Antonio Conte is plugged in and ready to power Tottenham towards the top four after their 2-1 comeback win over Leeds. “I have a great passion,” he roared as lightbulbs flickered all around N17, “and I want to transfer my passion into all of this environment.” Hibs will meet the Queen’s Celtic in the CIS Insurance Cup final after Martin Boyle’s hat-trick saw off the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers 3-1. “I am a bit dizzy,” cheered Boyle. “I’ve just read all my messages from friends and family.” And 2011’s Jack Rodwell, 30, has yelled “I’ve got the best years ahead of me” after his 13-minute debut for Western Sydney Wanderers in a flamin’ 0-0 draw with Sydney FC. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … 30 November. Tickets are available now. STILL WANT MORE? Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s removal will not solve Manchester United’s problems, reckons Barney Ronay. Meanwhile, Jonathan Wilson is of the opinion that Cristiano Ronaldo is the biggest problem for Ole’s successor. And here’s John Brewin on what United need to do now. Handy timing but here’s a red-hot chat with Mauricio Pochettino, who doesn’t appear to be wholly loving life at PSG. Ten talking points from the Premier League’s weekend action, right here. And here’s a review of the latest round of WSL matches, too. You’re welcome. Luciano Spalletti wasn’t the only one left floored by the dizzying drama in Serie A at the weekend, writes Nicky Bandini. Union were crowned the new kings of Berlin after their dominant derby win over Hertha, reports Andy Brassell. Jonathan David is emerging as an elite striker at Lille. Where will he go next, asks Adam White. Meanwhile, Raphaël Jucobin reckons clubs and authorities must stop blaming each other to end crowd trouble in Ligue 1. Will the Human Rights World Cup change Qatar or is it more the other way round? Sean Ingle asks the legacy question. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! COLE STOCKTON REMAINS THE LEAGUE ONE CHEAT CODEDominic Raab, the deputy prime minister, held a party for Conservative activists at his grace-and-favour home, raising questions about the costs and whether they were declared within the rules. Raab, who was foreign secretary at the time, invited about 50 Tories from his Surrey constituency to Chevening, a Grade I-listed, 115-room manor, on 4 September for prosecco and canapés. The event was held 20 days after the fall of Kabul and in the wake of criticism of Raab for remaining on holiday as the British army sought to protect its staff. The disclosure comes as a leaked document shows the Tories are doubling the number of regular volunteers campaigning in Raab’s Esher and Walton constituency after his majority collapsed at the last general election. The ministerial code says “government property should not generally be used for constituency work or party activities”. A spokesperson for Raab, now the justice secretary, said the event qualified for an exemption from the rules because the costs were picked up by his constituency party. Section 6.2 of the ministerial code says that “where ministers host party or personal events in these residences it should be at their own or party expense with no cost falling to the public purse”. Raab’s office has not released a breakdown of the costs paid or said when they were paid, or to whom they were declared, as requested by the Guardian. The Liberal Democrat deputy leader, Daisy Cooper, said she would be writing to the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, to ask for a full explanation. “It is staggering that just days after the fall of Kabul, Dominic Raab appears to have been using Chevening House to host a do for his local Conservative party. While Afghan interpreters were desperately trying to escape the Taliban, the then foreign secretary was apparently busy giving a tour of his country mansion to local Tory activists,” Cooper said. “This raises serious questions over whether an official residence has been used to boost local Tory campaigning efforts. Mr Raab must publish details of how much was spent to rent Chevening House, who paid for this visit and whether it has been used to host other local party political events. It shows yet again why Dominic Raab is not fit to be a government minister or to represent the people of Esher and Walton.” The event took place between 1pm and 5pm on Saturday 4 September. About 50 Conservative councillors and activists from Esher and Walton attended the party. Waiting staff carried flutes of prosecco, plates of canapés and wraps to guests who strolled around the lawns, lakes and maze of the 3,000-acre estate in Kent. Photographs show Raab addressing the Conservative activists from the steps of Chevening. On the same day, Taliban forces brought protests by women in Kabul to an abrupt end with pepper spray, teargas and live bullets fired into the air. In the weeks after the fall of Kabul, Raab was heavily criticised for having failed to return from holiday to oversee the crisis amid the reported murder by the Taliban of dozens of people who had worked with British forces. The party was held to thank activists for their work on the 2019 general election. Raab’s majority in Esher and Walton fell from 23,000 to 2,500 as the Lib Dem candidate Monica Harding achieved the biggest swing in the election. The Conservatives are aiming to shore up support in the constituency before the next election. A leaked strategy plan from Raab’s constituency party shows they aim to double the number of regular volunteers in the constituency from 25 to 50 this year and more than double the number of hours by paid-for campaigners from 40 to 104. The document, entitled Esher and Walton Strategy Plan August 2021, also aims to increase membership to 1,000 and send a birthday card from the constituency party to new voters who have turned 18 and are eligible to vote. Raab was demoted to the Ministry of Justice 11 days after the party, but was given the title of deputy prime minister to cushion the blow. Chevening, one of three grace-and-favour mansions temporarily gifted to senior ministers, is usually passed to the next foreign secretary. But after a much-publicised tussle with Liz Truss, the new foreign secretary, over who would have access to Chevening, Raab was told they would share it in future. There appears to be no formal declaration by Raab or the Esher and Walton Conservative party of using Chevening for party political purposes, or any social media coverage. A spokesperson for Raab said all costs of refreshments, staff and venue were covered by the association in full accordance with the ministerial code. No declarations were required and no other constituency events had been hosted there, she added. “An event to thank volunteers in September was paid for in full by local association,” the spokesperson said.The mantra “greed is good” has been associated with the corporate and financial world ever since it was immortalised in the 1987 film Wall Street. But in recent years the mantra could arguably be rewritten as “green is good”. Investors’ increased focus on companies’ social and environmental credentials forms part of a broader shift in the world of business and finance as investors and consumers pay more attention to the social impact and responsibilities of companies. Just as consumers have been changing their spending habits to support more ethical businesses, investors have been judging companies on so-called ESG factors – their performance against environmental, social and governance criteria. “It’s a trend that has been building for a decade but in the last two years we have hit tipping point,” says Jessica Fries, executive chair of The Prince’s Accounting for Sustainability Project (A4S). “Climate is the key driver: as the material, financial impacts of climate change are starting to become clear, we’re seeing key stakeholders from the financial community coming together with individual investors to bring pressure on organisations to change.” Wising up during a downturn Alongside the climate emergency, the Covid pandemic has brought home the role played by businesses in tackling or exacerbating wider societal problems. The crisis has shown us how interconnected we all are and the importance of pulling together for the common good. It has also made issues such as inequality feel even more tangible and urgent. One stark indication that a fundamental shift in values has taken place is the fact that the trend intensified during the sharp economic downturn sparked by the pandemic – defying those cynics who had assumed that socially responsible investing was just a “fair weather” trend that would be abandoned at the first sign of economic difficulties. According to the Investment Association, in 2020, investors put almost £1bn a month into responsible investment funds in the UK, taking the total under management to more than £56bn, an increase of 66% over the year. Likewise, shareholder resolutions on climate change have started to dominate company meetings as investors try to influence companies’ approaches on ESG issues. Positive choices, positive returns Last year’s advances aside, socially responsible investing has a long history, driven initially by religious groups such as the Quakers and Methodists that avoided “sin stocks”, such as alcohol and tobacco. Likewise, the concept of ethics plays a role in Islamic finance. In the second half of the last century, campaigns against the Vietnam war and apartheid drove organised disinvestment from certain companies. Today’s ascendency of responsible investing, however, is also driven by the belief that ESG criteria also have financial relevance: poor standards of sustainability and social governance are often linked to a higher risk of financial underperformance. In short, there is no longer necessarily a trade-off between doing good and making a profit. Positive choices can often mean positive returns, says Shalin Shah, a senior fund manager at Royal London. “We’re seeing individuals thinking they can make a difference with the way they invest and make money in the process. That helps more investors gain confidence.” Shah notes that while many investors are focused on climate-related risks, social investment is still crucial. “As investors we are always looking for areas that are undervalued while being strong on ESG. Many funds are focused on the environment but there is also value to be found in the social side of ESG,” he says. “For example my fund invests significantly in social housing bonds. You’re lending to finance the building of new homes for people who really need them, but at the same time we have to keep in mind we’re looking to make a decent return for clients.” Cutting through the confusion One of the main challenges, however, is the need for common standards when it comes to ESG metrics. A number of organisations have been established to set standards, encourage disclosure and measure performance. Companies can often achieve wildly varying scores depending on who they use, because criteria differ. “We need consistent, comparable information to be able to understand where the opportunity and the risk lies, and be able to respond and monitor performance effectively,” says Fries. “Frameworks are starting to be put in place to ensure the quality of the information that companies issue is more in line with the standards of financial reporting discipline we now have, but there is a way to go.” Indeed, the Financial Conduct Authority recently released a discussion paper on how to improve transparency and labelling. Until there is full transparency, investors and asset managers will still need to “look carefully under the bonnet”, as Shah puts it. Partnering with asset managers who are well-placed to do due diligence on ESG claims and to interrogate the companies that make them is one option for investors. As well as highlighting the important analysis undertaken by Royal London’s fund managers, Shah points out that Royal London’s status as a mutual provides it with the advantage of being able to assemble portfolios with a high degree of independence. “We don’t have shareholders or dividend targets, and that means we can invest for the long term,” he says. “That lends itself to issues like sustainability.” Indeed, companies with a mutual ownership structure are another reminder that, despite the recent buzz around ESG investing, there is nothing newfangled or faddish about placing values alongside profits. Likewise, there is nothing new about striving towards a better world for everyone. Last year’s widespread re-evaluation of the social roles of businesses was therefore also an extension of people’s long-held desire for a brighter and more secure future. Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationThere have been many wake-up calls for responsible investing – from the business risks of climate change to the human and reputational damage wrought by poor labour practices. One lesser-appreciated wake-up call was the 2008 financial crisis. The market carnage was in large part due to a failure of corporate governance within the banking industry. As such, it opened investors’ eyes to the merits of judging companies against so-called ESG criteria, which measure a business’s performance on environmental, social and governance issues. The “G” bit of the acronym highlighted the dangers of being overexposed to high-risk finance. The episode also provided one of the first mainstream demonstrations of how pension and investment funds focused on ESG criteria can sometimes be a wiser financial investment. Within the finance industry, the ability of ESG investments to hedge against certain risks was fairly well-known even back then, explains Mike Fox, head of UK sustainable investments at Royal London. But being well-known did not make it conventional wisdom. A lot of people then still viewed ESG investments as being primarily tied up in green activism, even though the data existed to show they could also be a profitable place to put your money. Fox notes that it was difficult to shake people’s preconceptions. “People will literally fight not to change their opinions,” he says. “The way you often get progression is when the next generation comes along – because they are not impaired by the thinking of the previous.” Of course, generational change is not the only reason people’s perceptions about ESG investing have shifted. Many of the climate problems which seemed quite far away only 10 years ago are happening today. In a sense, then, the long term is effectively now. “If you look at climate change, insurance premiums for some types of property have gone through the roof in the last few years, just because of the effects of flooding,” says Fox. “You are beginning to see real world climate change.” He adds that some effects of the climate crisis, such as drought and wildfires in California, are not necessarily new, but they are now front-page news. And even when it comes to the more long-term threats, businesses that put climate risk at the forefront of their strategy and decisions are effectively taking a longer-term view of their market than businesses that don’t. This arguably sets their managers apart from those who prioritise short-term profits and earnings targets. That longer-term perspective in itself can make for an attractive investment – particularly for long-term investors, such as pension holders. Moreover, people’s changing perception and their realisation that sustainability is the key to a liveable future can have a material impact on a company – whether through higher demand for its products or its shares, or stronger goodwill for its brand. “If you’re a consumer company, the biggest single group of customers is now millennials and if you’re targeting them, having positive, sustainable characteristics is good for business,” says Fox. Indeed, according to the Co-op’s 2020 Ethical Consumerism report (pdf), between 2010 and 2019, ethical consumer spending in the UK rose from £46bn to £98bn. A company’s long-term sustainable or ethical perspective can also have a present-day impact on its employees. Increasingly, people want to work for businesses whose values reflect their own – whether it be on environmental issues, treating their workforce well or linking CEO pay to performance. A 2017 survey (pdf) by Deloitte found that millennials were more likely to be loyal and stay more than five years (34% v 24%) at a company that provided charitable opportunities than one that didn’t. In addition, there are issues around future regulation and legislation – companies that take ESG factors into account will likely be better placed to deal with new laws as and when they come into force. By contrast, those that fail to take adequate steps on ESG issues will not only be more susceptible to regulatory risks, they might also have to pay more for insurance, and their access to capital could be costlier. Likewise, they may even find that other companies’ ESG policies prevent them from doing business with them. “There’s a complex set of pushes and pulls behind anything like this,” says Julia Fawsley Grant of ESGmark, an organisation that promotes and recognises ESG in business. “This has been building for a long time. More and more companies are realising that if they don’t have a robust ESG policy, people will stop investing in them and will stop buying from them.” This is not to say that companies that currently score poorly on ESG metrics have no future – just that they will need to become more sustainable in order to continue to be successful. “If you look at companies like Shell and BP, if they’re clever about it, they can move into biofuels and hydrogen and renewables. If they do that, they have a very bright future ahead of them,” says Fawsley Grant. The oil companies, she adds, may also play a big role in the future in carbon capture and burial technology – in effect, cleaning the mess they helped to make. Fox says that, ultimately, sustainable business is just good business. “We already have large wealth management clients for whom the default approach is a sustainable approach. It’s not because they’re following some environmental mantra – it’s because they think they’re going to get a better return.” Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationPensions, by definition, involve thinking about the future. All too often this means they get treated as something you set up and then forget about while you focus on the present. As such, people tend to overlook the power of their pension in the here and now – viewing it as a source of personal security rather than a force for change. But your pension will almost certainly be invested in companies that can play a significant role in global efforts to tackle the climate emergency and other crises, such as growing inequality – whether through their actions or their inaction. With an estimated £2.6tn invested in UK pensions, those investments can exert an influence on the direction companies take. After all, businesses are answerable to their shareholders and investors – which makes your pension key if you want to have an impact on the world. “Your pension is directly invested in these companies, and depending on which pension provider you use, and the strategy they take, it can sit there just ticking along and making you money, and for some people that’s enough,” explains Sophie Johnson, an analyst on the Responsible Investment team at Royal London. “But at the same time it could also be used to address societal issues such as whether there’s enough diversity on the board, or whether a particular company has got the right climate change strategy.” While the world of pensions has often been perceived as rather opaque, pension funds are recognising and responding to a growing interest from investors in how their money is put to use. This means offering pensions that are invested responsibly and providing much more information regarding their different investment criteria and policies – so that people can better choose a pension fund or fund manager that matches with their own values and concerns. According to the financial data provider Morningstar, net assets held in UK funds that invest according to more stringent environmental and social principles grew from £29bn at the beginning of 2017 to £71bn by the end of 2020 – illustrating the growing consumer demand for responsible investment products. “Pension funds have power, because they invest a lot of money in company shares,” says Simon Bullock, a partner at the financial planning practice Mulberry Bow, which provides pensions advice to individuals and companies. “To use an extreme example, if every pension fund pulled out of a particular company’s shares, there’s a fair chance those shares would suffer. That can have a big impact as it affects the remuneration of the senior leadership, and it can affect that company’s ability to borrow cheaply on the bond market.” Another way that pension fund managers exert influence on companies is by voting during the company’s annual general meeting (AGM) on issues related to how each company is run. These issues range from the pay structure of executives, to whether different board members should be re-elected and, increasingly, the implementation of a climate transition plan. For instance, ahead of each AGM, Johnson and the other three analysts on the Royal London Responsible Investment team sift through reams of data – which can include information on a whole range of environmental and social factors, from workforce pay policies to plans to reduce carbon emissions. If they like the progress a company has been making, they will back the current leadership. But if it is felt to be failing, they will use their influence to try and enforce change. As the UK’s largest mutual pensions and investment company, with £153bn in assets under management, Royal London currently votes at more than 3,500 company AGMs a year. Johnson describes how Royal London has been working with a large mining company over the last six to seven years to improve pay disclosure, reduce the number of fatalities that occur during mining and, recently, to encourage the setting of targets relating to the climate crisis. This has involved many face-to-face meetings and repeatedly voting against executives who they view as being responsible for insufficient progress on these issues. “We’ve been meeting with them multiple times a year and telling them that we’re not happy with the fact they do not disclose how their top executives are paid and incentivised, and their record on fatalities,” she says. “They’re mining in dangerous parts of the world and there are many difficulties associated with that, but the lack of improvements year-on-year was unreasonable. This year, we’ve started to see some progress. They are still far from perfect, but published a climate transition plan with reduction targets and formally implemented a long-term pay scheme linked to their performance on environmental and social issues. We are keeping up the pressure through our voting to ensure that they build on these positive steps.” In another example of shareholder engagement – this time at a retail company – Johnson explains how Royal London voted against the director responsible for diversity in previous years, but in late 2020, following on from those votes, they had a meeting with the company. “There was a complete turnaround in approach,” she says. It now has a board diversity policy in place and clearer commitments to inclusion. Additional diverse candidates from different BAME and gender backgrounds have been appointed to the board and they are “seriously addressing the issue throughout the workforce with one of the more progressive approaches we’ve seen in the UK,” she adds. As a consequence, they supported the director’s re-election for the first time this year. Pension funds can also exert influence by publicly agitating for change – which can have an impact on a company’s image. “Companies are increasingly aware of how they’re seen,” says Bullock. “It’s becoming a factor in recruitment and retention of staff. A pension fund putting pressure on a company can make headlines, and both employees and potential employees can become aware of why this is happening.” For those investing in pensions, there is a greater opportunity than ever to use that money for good. As millennials and generation Z are more likely to be working for longer than previous generations, the power lying in their pension could be more potent, because it’s likely to be invested for longer. “In the past you were probably cashing in your pension by 60 or 65,” says Bullock. “Now, more and more people stay invested [for longer], and that could extend the investment period by 20 years. It could greatly increase the impact of how you invest your pension because your investment time horizon would be so much longer than in days gone by.” Harness your pension power by visiting Royal London | Life Insurance, Pensions and Investments | Since 1861That’s one large rock, one momentous shift in our relationship with space. On Wednesday, Nasa will launch a mission to deliberately slam a spacecraft into an asteroid to try to alter its orbit – the first time humanity has tried to interfere in the gravitational dance of the solar system. The aim is to test drive a planetary defence system that could prevent us from going the same way as the dinosaurs, providing the first real data about what it would take to deflect an Armageddon-inducing asteroid away from Earth. Our planet is constantly being bombarded with small pieces of debris, but these are usually burned or broken up long before they hit the ground. Once in a while, however, something large enough to do significant damage hits the ground. About 66m years ago, one such collision is thought to have ended the reign of the dinosaurs, ejecting vast amounts of dust and debris into the upper atmosphere, which obscured the sun and caused food chains to collapse. Someday, something similar could call time on humanity’s reign – unless we can find a way to deflect it. Nasa’s Double Asteroid Redirection Test (Dart) mission is the first attempt to test if such asteroid deflection is a realistic strategy: investigating whether a spacecraft can autonomously navigate to a target asteroid and intentionally collide with it, as well as measuring the amount of deflection. “This is the first step to actually trial a way of preventing near-Earth object impact,” said Jay Tate, the director of the National Near Earth Objects Information Centre in Knighton in Powys, Wales. “If it works, it would be a big deal, because it would prove that we have the technical capability of protecting ourselves.” The 610kg Dart spacecraft is scheduled to blast off from the Vandenberg Space Force Base in California onboard a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket at about 6.21am UK time on Wednesday. Its target is the Didymos system – a harmless pair of asteroids consisting of a 163-metre “moonlet” asteroid called Dimorphos that orbits a larger 780-metre asteroid called Didymos – after the Greek for “twin”). As they orbit the sun, these asteroids occasionally pass relatively close to Earth. The plan is to crash the spacecraft into Dimorphos when the asteroid system is at its closest – about 6.8m miles away – some time between 26 September and 1 October 2022. About 10 days before impact, a miniaturised satellite called the Light Italian CubeSat for Imaging of Asteroids (LICIACube), will separate from the main spacecraft, enabling images of the impact to be relayed back to Earth. Combined with observations from ground-based telescopes, and an onboard camera that will capture the final moments before collision, these recordings should enable scientists to calculate the degree to which the impact has altered Dimorphos’s orbit. The expectation is that it will change the speed of the smaller asteroid by a fraction of 1% and alter its orbital period around the larger asteroid by several minutes. Then, in November 2024, the European Space Agency’s Hera spacecraft will visit the Didymos system and conduct a further close-up analysis of the consequences of this celestial snooker game, capturing details such as the precise mass, makeup and internal structure of Dimorphos, and the size and shape of the crater left by Dart. Such details are vital for transforming asteroid deflection into a scalable and repeatable technique, that could be deployed should an apocalyptic asteroid ever be detected heading towards Earth. Even then, it is unlikely that any single deflection strategy would be enough. “Assuming it works, [this mission] will provide us with real time ground truths on the effects of a small impactor on a small asteroid,” said Tate. “The problem is that no two asteroids or comets are alike, and how you deflect one depends on a huge number of variables: what’s the thing’s made of, how it’s put together, how fast it’s spinning, and of course how much time you’ve got. “There is no silver bullet in this game. What you need is a whole folder of different deflection methods for different types of target.” So while this may be one small step towards planetary protection, many more are likely to be necessary to avoid Armageddon.There is a reason so many discussions about tackling the climate crisis have become discussions about finance and investment. The global effort to avert the most catastrophic effects of global heating is in one sense an emergency mission to reallocate resources and capital. Which means that money – lots of money – plays an essential role. A fundamental shift has therefore been taking place in the world of investments and pensions. Investors are now paying increasing attention to how companies perform against environmental, social and governance (ESG) criteria. Put simply, it’s about valuing companies against their impact on the planet and people rather than valuing them against their profits and products alone. These ESG factors used to be seen as nice to have. Now they are viewed as essential for large pension and investment funds. “Increasingly, people are realising that where their money is invested is a really key part of how they can make a positive difference in the world,” says James Alexander, chief executive of the UK Sustainable Investment and Finance Association (UKSIF). James Clarke, a senior fund manager at Royal London Asset Management, notes that clients now invariably raise these issues. “For me, it’s been a really fascinating transition and it is one that keeps accelerating,” he says. “If you take ESG themes like climate, three years ago nobody was really asking about them. Now, they’re part of every single meeting I go into.” So what has happened? How has investing suddenly become not just a force for good, but often a key driver of corporate action on the climate crisis? In a financial sector that has, in the past, had a bad reputation for short-termism and for putting profits ahead of everything else, the shift is all the more surprising. Clarke says the factors behind this shift are multidimensional and take in everything from the mainstreaming of climate as a public concern to a changing regulatory environment, to the way companies look at risk. He also points out that the debate has largely moved on from: “Is there a problem?,” to: “What are the best ways to solve this problem?” It is a complicated issue. Fund managers are not social entrepreneurs. They exist to make a return for their investors – and there are plenty of green and socially useful technologies where the risk-return ratio just isn’t right for the people whose money they’re investing. There is also the question of what a “good” company is? The world of responsible investing throws up many complex grey areas, which can make the analysis and expertise of fund managers so important. For instance, take electric vehicles. They are better for the environment, but some of the raw materials needed to make them, such as cobalt, are mined in hazardous conditions, sometimes involving child labour. Furthermore, you also need to think quite laterally. In terms of reducing carbon emissions, a videoconferencing business might be a better bet than an electric car company even though the latter appears more obviously green. There are also questions around the impact of divesting (when a fund sells its investment in a particular company or sector) from companies that are less green – again highlighting how things are rarely clear cut when it comes to responsible investing. “If you just sell your assets at this stage in the game, you’re probably going to sell them to someone who cares less than you do,” says Alexander. “We don’t really see divestment as a key route to achieving a stable future. Rather, we prefer responsible stewardship and engagement.” Selling out of companies such as fossil fuel businesses can have real downsides. If you drive their share price down to the point where they get taken over by a private equity firm, they are often simply run in the most cash-generative way possible, away from public scrutiny – and this rarely means taking a long-term, sustainable view. A recent dramatic example of how activist investors can force change in companies by engaging took place earlier this year when Engine No 1, a small hedge fund that factors ESG into its investment strategy, shocked the energy world when it got three of its nominees elected to ExxonMobil’s company board. This was widely seen as a warning to the company, both over its failure to take climate change seriously and its recent poor returns. Complicated though a lot of the detail of this may be, the business case is actually quite straightforward. Put simply, climate change is a huge investment risk. Companies that look good from an ESG point of view tend to have a more long-term and fuller view of their business. This takes in numerous factors, ranging from a lower risk of public boycotts and climate-related insurance premium hikes to problems related to regulatory changes and even the ability to attract better staff. The clear-and-present investment risk of companies that aren’t taking sufficient action on climate change has also collapsed the long-held assumption that a trade-off exists between profits and the planet. The interests of shareholders and wider society are becoming increasingly aligned. “It’s about all of us becoming aware and engaging.” says Clarke. “We all need to be part of the solution and this puts pressure on the businesses that we deal with, to clean up their act.” Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationGuardian US has launched its end of year appeal, setting a goal to reach $1.25m reader contributions, to produce more high quality, independent journalism in the US. With imperilled reproductive rights, an escalating climate crisis, growing income inequality, and democratic voting rights and norms under threat, 2022 will be a decisive year for America. But sustained reporting on these issues requires resources. From reporting on the environmental catastrophe facing the people of Mead, Nebraska to giving a voice to two incarcerated facing deportation to Laos, the Guardian’s quality, independent journalism has never been more crucial. The money from this year’s campaign will help fund Guardian US’ reporting in 2022. In 2021, Guardian US conducted a nine-month investigation on alarming levels of forever chemicals, arsenic and lead in samples taken from water systems across the US, exposed laws that keep Black and Latino Californians in prison, revealed the Facebook loophole that lets world leaders deceive and harass their citizens, exposed links between government officials and far-right groups and reported on threats to US democracy. Jane Spencer, deputy editor and head of strategy at Guardian US said: “As we near 2022, it’s clear that it will be a decisive year for America. The climate crisis is escalating, voting rights are under threat and wage inequality is growing. “Guardian US is committed to in-depth reporting on these issues and we couldn’t do it without the generosity of our readers whose support powers our journalism.” John Mulholland, editor of Guardian US, said: “When US readers are asked what they value about Guardian journalism, three themes are constantly repeated – independence, reliability and facts. “The Guardian is unique in the US media landscape because of its ownership structure with no shareholders or owner - all funds we raise from this important appeal will help us to continue to produce the agenda-setting, public interest journalism that our readers come to us for.” Crowdfunding has been a successful revenue driver for the Guardian’s US operation, which has run four successful fundraising campaigns – This Land is Your Land, Toxic America, Break the Cycle and The Mother Load and three previous end of year appeals. In the last 12 months, Guardian US has seen recurring contributions increase by 25% and overall digital reader support (recurring contributions and digital subscriptions combined) grow by 15%. US traffic accounts for 30% of the Guardian’s total online browsers and over 50% of the Guardian’s digital reader revenue comes from outside the UK. Guardian US recently celebrated its 10th anniversary, its coverage of the climate crisis, inequality and global investigations have been a differentiator since launching in 2011. The operation has also shown a deep commitment to solutions journalism, collaborating with a number of organisations, including the Economic Hardship Reporting Project (EHRP), to report on issues affecting people in some of the most underrepresented communities in mainstream media. Notes to editors Link to the Guardian US end of year appeal page About Guardian News &amp; Media Guardian US is renowned for its Pulitzer Prize-winning investigation into widespread secret surveillance by the National Security Agency, and for other award-winning work, including The Paradise Papers. Guardian US has bureaus in New York, Washington D.C., New Orleans and Oakland, covering the climate crisis, politics, race and immigration, gender, national security and more.Boycotting the Beijing Winter Olympics in February may seem a simple, symbolic diplomatic gesture – when put alongside the allegations of labour camps in Xinjiang province and the apparent sexual exploitation of the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai – but such is the contemporary economic power of China that the step will only be taken after much agonising. The threats and economic boycotts that Australia, Canada and more recently Lithuania have suffered at the hands of the Chinese for challenging Beijing’s authority in one way or another are not experiences other countries will want to copy lightly. The west has always argued that its secret weapon against China is the strength of its alliances. China, by contrast, has no friends. So if a boycott is to happen – by, for instance, withdrawing ambassadors, royalty and ministers from the ceremonial events – countries will want to know that the big players in the G7 economies are signed up. An incoherent response will only underline the west’s lack of resolve. At the moment, Joe Biden has said he is considering a boycott. That seemed surprising, because after his three-hour phone call with Xi Jinping last week, the short-term trajectory of US relations with China seemed to be towards greater contact, albeit guarded. Kurt Campbell, the Indo-Pacific director at the national security council, in an address last week placed great emphasis on establishing lines of communication with Beijing. He also said that as China became ever more centralised, a premium would be placed on relations between the two presidents. With issues such as freedom of navigation in the South China Sea, the independence of Taiwan, suppression in Hong Kong, or China’s unexpected advance in hypersonic nuclear missiles in play, it may seem unwise to offend Beijing over relatively trivial issues such as the number of US dignitaries that go to watch John Shuster competing to retain his gold for US curling in 2018. These slights are taken very seriously in nationalist China – and if Beijing has shown one trait recently, it is its determination to retaliate if it feels it has been treated unfairly. Since it regards the Olympic Games as “a rite of passage for China as a mature major power”, it has been working the diplomatic circuit successfully to gain support. The leaders of the G20 at their meeting in Rome jointly declared they “look ahead to Beijing Winter Olympics and Paralympics 2022, as opportunities for competition for athletes from around the world, which serves as a symbol of humanity’s resilience”. But amid the fallout over Peng, there is a renewed US political constituency led by Republican figures such as Mike Pompeo and Ted Cruz that favours a complete boycott by sports stars, not just officials. It is hard for the Democrat administration to declare a genocide under way in Xinjiang, and then say “let the Games commence”. Much will depend on whether further convincing evidence emerges of Peng’s state of mind. A swing vote is likely to be Germany, which under Angela Merkel was the lead European investor in China and lead advocate of engagement. Merkel has said the Olympics issue is for the next government: if the Greens claim the foreign ministry as forecast, the Olympics will be an early test of who makes the foreign policy decisions in the coalition. But what may drive governments these days is the opinions of star athletes, with their huge social media followings and relative immunity from Chinese threats. As long as the issue is one of solidarity with a fellow athlete, the stars will push sports diplomacy in the direction of confrontation with China. That will put pressure on the commercial sponsors, although few at this late stage are likely to withdraw. The fear of China’s power in the commercial sector was underscored by a recent Axios report revealing the Marriott hotel in Prague had turned down a chance to host the World Uyghur Congress, allegedly for fear of offending Beijing. The UK, with one economic engine gone missing due to Brexit, is not keen to lose the other through Chexit, at least until other markets have been established in south-east Asia. Johnson secured few favours from the Chinese at Cop26 on the climate crisis, but his natural stance is to oppose sports boycotts as self-defeating. His instinct is that sports diplomacy should help, not hinder, relations. In a report this year, the all-party Commons foreign affairs select committee proposed a nuanced package including: “The government should suggest the British Olympic Association does not participate in the opening or closing ceremonies, beyond one representative carrying the union flag. It should abstain from sending government officials to any ceremonies or functions, strongly discourage UK businesses from sponsoring or advertising at the Olympics, encourage fans and tourists to stay away, and discourage athletes from supporting or accepting the Chinese government’s propaganda efforts while in-country.” In its response in November, the government committed to nothing. Similarly, it said an urgent review started on 12 January of export controls as they applied specifically to Xinjiang had not yet finished its “urgent work”. Johnson will want to pick his fights with China, and despite a vociferous backbench lobbying group and a foreign secretary in Liz Truss inclined to rattle cages, it will be a surprise if the British are first in line to propose a substantial boycott.In the past few weeks, Austria has hit many new Covid-19 records – none of them good. On 18 November there were 15,145 new cases recorded, the largest number seen since the pandemic began. And the seven-day average for new confirmed cases per 100,000 people is at 1,395, more than double the rates in countries such as Germany, France and the UK. On Friday the Austrian chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, announced the country’s fourth national lockdown, beginning today and lasting between 10 and 20 days. This makes Austria only the second European country, after Latvia, to impose lockdown measures since vaccines became widely available earlier this year. Going even further, Schallenberg announced that Austria would also be the first in Europe to bring in compulsory vaccination beginning on 1 February 2022. Schallenberg and his health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein, had previously said that lockdown measures would return only for the unvaccinated. They hoped this might be enough to bring the vaccination rate up and case numbers down. While the percentage of Austrians in receipt of first doses has crept up to 69%, from below 60% at the beginning of August, once intensive care units in the states of Upper Austria and Salzburg became full, another nationwide lockdown became inevitable. And a vaccine mandate – once an unthinkable option – has been broached. Public discussion about a vaccine mandate began over the summer. But the former chancellor Sebastian Kurz resisted the idea, preferring to rely on appeals to responsibility and individual choice. By the summer’s end, however, the country seemed to have stalled at “max vax”, and its share of the population fully vaccinated against Covid-19 had fallen behind the EU average. How a broad vaccine mandate could be enforced remains unclear – though non-compliance could mean a fine of as much as £3,000, cabinet minister Karoline Edtstadler has said – and it may be liable to challenge on constitutional grounds either at the domestic or European level. Recent opinion polling indicates a slim majority in Austria in support of a vaccine mandate. When asked to choose between a potpourri of possible Covid-19 countermeasures, 41% of Austrians plumped for compulsory vaccination – the most popular measure ahead of a lockdown, nightly curfew and vaccine mandate for particular professions. And 53% of viewers of the news channel Puls24 said they favoured a vaccine mandate, with 44% against. But while a majority of citizens may actually support a mandate, Austrian society is deeply divided between those who have accepted vaccination measures thus far, and a hardened, unvaccinated residuum caught up in conspiracy theories and false information, and attracted to far-right politics. On Saturday, demonstrations in Vienna against the new lockdown and mandate announcements attracted 40,000 people, according to police estimates. Convicted neo-Nazi Gottfried Küssel and identitarian leader Martin Sellner were among those taking part. Several demonstrators wore yellow Stars of David or carried placards that compared the mandate to the Holocaust. Austria’s low vaccination rate and lashings of anti-vax and Covid-sceptic sentiment are reflected in its party politics. Austria has not one but two openly Covid-sceptic parties: the Freedom party (FPÖ) and a new movement, the People-Freedom-Fundamental Rights (MFG) party, which won representation in the Upper Austrian state parliament in regional elections in September. The FPÖ leader Herbert Kickl – prone to throwing about terms such as “vaccine apartheid” and “two-class society” – has promoted the horse deworming drug ivermectin as a treatment. Kickl makes a point of his unvaccinated status, and last week revealed that he had tested positive for Covid-19. But there are also particular political, geographical and cultural differences that account for Austria’s relatively low rate of Covid-19 vaccination. The government encouraged but never at any point attempted to force the hand of the unvaccinated. This was particularly evident during the September elections in Upper Austria, where the unvaccinated formed a large pool of potential voters and a vaccine mandate was perceived to be a vote-losing issue, a hill on which no party wished to die. There are particularly low rates of jab uptake in more isolated and disconnected rural areas and less affluent, outer districts of Vienna in which the proportion of residents born outside Austria is larger. It is also worth noting that Austrians use alternative medicines, from homeopathy to home remedies, much more than in Britain. The health minister, for one, is a GP and a qualified practitioner of traditional Chinese medicine. Though Austria’s public insurance-based system produces better health outcomes than the NHS, it is not revered in the same way. Austria has been a harbinger of European Covid-19 policy before. On 8 November, in a vain attempt to bring the case numbers under control, it introduced a so-called “2G” rule at venues such as restaurants, cinemas and gyms, meaning only those who had been double-jabbed or had recovered from Covid-19 in the previous six months could enter. Where Austria led, others followed, including many German states. Nations that continue to struggle with outbreaks and stubbornly low vaccination rates will be watching Austria’s vaccine mandate rollout closely, possibly as a roadmap of things to come. Liam Hoare is Europe editor for Moment magazine and author of the Vienna Briefing newsletter This article was amended on 23 November 2021. Due to an editing error, the infection rate in Austria was understated by a factor of 10.Press organizations in Canada have condemned the arrest of two journalists who were detained while covering Indigenous-led resistance to a controversial pipeline project and remain in custody. Amber Bracken, an award-winning photojournalist who has previously worked with the Guardian, and Michael Toledano, a documentary film-maker, were arrested on Friday by Royal Canadian Mounted police officers who were enforcing a court-ordered injunction in British Columbia. More than a dozen protesters were also arrested. Bracken was on assignment for the environmental outlet the Narwhal, which had previously notified police that Bracken was reporting in the area. “The Narwhal is extremely disturbed that photojournalist Amber Bracken was arrested for doing her job while reporting on the events unfolding in Wet’suwet’en territory on Friday,” said the editor-in-chief, Emma Gilchrist, in a statement. “Bracken has been held in jail for three nights, in violation of her charter rights. We strongly condemn the RCMP for this behaviour and all violations of press freedoms in this country.” Gilchrist told the Guardian the publication had not been able to access Bracken’s photos from the day she was arrested. The Canadian Association of Journalists has condemned the arrests and called for the immediate release of the two journalists. Bracken and Toledano have each spent months documenting tensions over the 670km Coastal GasLink pipeline that would transport natural gas from the north-eastern part of the province to a facility in Kitimat. While a number of communities have approved the project along the pipeline’s proposed route, hereditary chiefs of the Wet’suwet’en peoples have refused to give consent for the project, which passes through their traditional territory. The Wet’suwet’en has never signed a formal treaty with the provincial government, and have not relinquished their land. Police conduct against Indigenous-led blockages has drawn criticism in the past, and in 2019 the Guardian revealed that the RCMP was prepared to shoot activists. In recent months, during a separate blockade against old-growth forest logging, police responded by ripping off protesters’ masks to pepper-spray them and dragging them by their hair. Last month, a British Columbia supreme court judge ruled that the police force’s expulsion zones – set up to prevent media from entering certain areas of the injunction area – were unlawful. The RCMP said in a statement over the weekend that its officers were enforcing a provincial court injunction granted to Coastal GasLink which bars protesters from blocking a forest road used by construction crews. The statement says police found a structure built on the service road and ordered people to leave after reading out the injection. Police then broke down the doors of the structure and arrested 11 people, including Bracken and Toledano, who the police said identified themselves as “independent journalists”. The two are due to appear before Prince George court on Monday.Few rock’n’roll stars have understood the symbiotic relationship between music and image better than David Bowie and, in the photographer Mick Rock, Bowie found the perfect creative partner. Commissioned to do a photojournalism piece by the London office of Rolling Stone magazine, Rock went to a Bowie gig at Birmingham town hall in March 1972, and struck up an immediate rapport with the glam rock guru, just as he was metamorphosing into his Ziggy Stardust persona. It kicked open the door to Rock’s brilliant future, and he would earn the sobriquet “The Man Who Shot the 70s”. Rock, who has died aged 72, became Bowie’s personal photographer as his profile soared with the release of his fifth studio album, The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars, in June 1972, and captured some of the best-remembered images of the mercurial star. These included the picture of Bowie and the guitarist Mick Ronson eating lunch on a train to Aberdeen, and the famously provocative “fellatio” shot of the duo onstage at Oxford town hall. As Rock later explained, probably with tongue in cheek: “All David was trying to do – and he explained it to me many years later when we did the book Moonage Daydream – was bite the guitar.” Rock enjoyed uniquely intimate access to Bowie (“I got him in his knickers, just camping around”), and Bowie’s trailblazing charisma drew other musicians such as Lou Reed and Iggy Pop into his orbit. Rock was ever-present with his camera. He shot the definitive photo of a panda-eyed, wistful-looking Reed for the cover of his hit solo album Transformer (1972), and bagged the dramatic cover image of a bare-torsoed Pop for Iggy and the Stooges’ Raw Power LP (1973). His sleeve photo for Queen’s Queen II (1974) memorably echoed an image of Marlene Dietrich from the 1932 film Shanghai Express (“No one was ever more glam than the divine Ms Dietrich,” Rock said), and Queen revisited it in their video for Bohemian Rhapsody in 1975. Having travelled to New York on tour with Bowie in 1972, Rock became increasingly infatuated with the city and moved there in 1977. “There’s no doubt that New York was darker, more depraved than London,” he told the interviewer Barney Hoskyns. “Lou Reed took me to places you’d never have found in London.” Rock inevitably found himself photographing such icons of the New York scene as the Ramones and Blondie’s Debbie Harry, and cherished his shot of Mötley Crüe in a bubble bath (“the dirtiest, the naughtiest band of the 80s, God bless ’em”). Rock didn’t like to talk about his background and upbringing, commenting that “I don’t normally get into that because I don’t think it’s necessary,” but it was generally accepted that he had been born in Hammersmith, London, his parents Joan and David Rock, the latter a civil servant at the Ministry of Labour. However, Rock shed a different light on it in a 2017 interview with the website the Talks. He described how he had been conceived when his unhappily married mother had an affair with an American airman, who subsequently returned to the US. He claimed he had had two birth certificates, the first of which named him as Michael Edward Chester Smith. However, it was as Michael Rock that he attended the independent Emanuel school in Battersea, before winning a scholarship to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he took a degree in medieval and modern languages. At Cambridge he first started to experiment with photography, acquiring “a battered Pentax camera from a mate for 40 quid”, and there he met the local boy Syd Barrett, a founding member of Pink Floyd. Rock would photograph Barrett for his first solo album, The Madcap Laughs (1970), with the back cover featuring a naked woman, and also shot the centrefold photo for Pink Floyd’s 1971 album Meddle. Rock immersed himself enthusiastically in the lifestyle of the artists he photographed, and admitted that “by the end of the 80s, early 90s, my cocaine problem had got completely out of order. I could still shoot, but the rest of my life was a wreck.” He divorced his first wife, Sheila (also a photographer), and married again, to Pati (who worked in real estate). In 1996 he underwent quadruple bypass surgery and a kidney transplant, his medical bill paid by the Rolling Stones’ former manager Allen Klein, and subsequently enjoyed a career rebirth. He had been irked by the “Man Who Shot the 70s” tag, considering that it made him sound obsolete, and he photographed swathes of newer artists including Snow Patrol, the Black Keys, Snoop Dogg, Foo Fighters, Alicia Keys, Yeah Yeah Yeahs, Janelle Monáe, Rufus Wainwright, Lady Gaga, Miley Cyrus and Pharrell Williams. In addition to his still photography, he created several memorable videos with Bowie, for Life on Mars, John I’m Only Dancing, Jean Genie and Space Oddity, and Bowie gave his endorsement to Rock’s books Blood and Glitter: Glam – an Eyewitness Account (2001), Moonage Daydream: The Life and Times of Ziggy Stardust (2002) and The Rise of David Bowie 1972-1973 (2015). He also published books in collaboration with Debbie Harry, Iggy Pop, and the Queen members Brian May and Roger Taylor. Rock was profiled in Barney Clay’s documentary SHOT! The Psycho-Spiritual Mantra of Rock (2016). He was chief photographer on the films The Rocky Horror Picture Show, Hedwig and the Angry Inch and Shortbus. An enthusiastic raconteur, Rock stressed that his work always stemmed from an admiration for the artists he worked with. “To me these guys were like Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Shelley, Keats, Coleridge, the Beats … I have been respectful because I love these people and I feel I’m a sort of image guardian.” He is survived by Pati and their daughter, Nathalie. • Mick Rock, photographer, born 21 November 1948; died 18 November 2021Mining giant Glencore has launched an extraordinary public attack on two Indigenous people who are seeking to stop the company destroying the site of an Aboriginal massacre in New South Wales. Scott Franks and Robert Lester identify as Wonnarua people, the traditional landowners in the Upper Hunter. They have applied to protect Aboriginal massacre sites at the historic Ravensworth Homestead and surrounding lands near Singleton. In an advertisement in the community newspaper Hunter River Times on 5 November, Glencore named Franks and Lester, stating that they are “seeking to stop our project”. It alleges “independent studies of the written histories, including thorough investigation by a local historian, indicate that the September 1826 massacre in question occurred more than 20km away from the homestead site”. The advertisement is a controversial intervention, coming after the public opprobrium experienced by mining company Rio Tinto after the destruction of the Juukan Gorge rock shelters in the Pilbara region of Western Australia. The Ravensworth site has been owned and maintained by Glencore for the past 23 years, but plans to extend their existing Glendell open cut coalmine to include the Ravensworth Homestead has meant that the site would be impacted by mining operations. The proposed extension is known as the Glendell continuation project, which Glencore says will extend the life of the mine until 2044 and extract 135m tonnes of coal and provide ongoing employment of 600 workers. To enable the extension to proceed Glencore have proposed that they will either move the homestead to another part of the property or relocate it to the nearby village of Broke. Both suggestions have been rejected by the Plains Clan of the Wonnarua People (PCWP), who describe the Ravensworth Homestead and surrounding land as “hallowed ground” of the Wonnarua people and the site of a series of massacres from the 1820s onwards. Franks described the advertisement as a “flat-out attack on First Nations people”. “We have been sledged in an open forum, this huge mining company has taken out a full page ad against two Aboriginal people because we are trying to protect our heritage,” Franks said. The men deny any suggestion of misinformation and say that Glencore’s claims about the location and date of the massacre are wrong. Asked to comment on the advertisement, a spokesperson for Glencore stated that they are “concerned by the amount of misinformation that has been published about our project” and that they “will seek to correct the record”. Minister considers protection application The public spat comes as the federal environment minister, Sussan Ley, considers a section 10 protection claim by Franks and Lester under the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act (ATSIHP), designed to protect areas and objects that are of particular significance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. The application has the potential to protect a proposed area in the centre of the Upper Hunter’s thermal coal heartland, so a number of mining operations – most of which are owned by Glencore – could be impacted. A map of the specified area published in a commonwealth gazette notice shows the area for which protection has been sought. The map covers the entire area of Glencore’s proposed Glendell continuation project and possibly sections of the company’s five other nearby mining operations. It could also impact sections of the proposed continuation project for Glencore’s and Yancoal’s Hunter Valley operations north and south projects. On the edges of the map the nearby Bloomfield Group’s Rix’s Creek operation, as well as sections of Yancoal’s approved but yet to be developed south east open cut coal project near Singleton could also be impacted. Under the ATSIHP act, Ley appointed a reporter to determine whether the criteria for the section 10 claim could be met. The reporter has since submitted an independent report and Ley must now determine whether to protect the area. If she does accept the claim, it could be a landmark decision whereby Aboriginal culture is preserved in the Hunter Valley. A spokesperson for the Agriculture, Water and the Environment Department confirmed the report had been received and would make the decision “in due course”. “Parties have been provided an opportunity to comment on the content of the report for procedural fairness and a significant amount of additional information has been received by the department, which is under assessment. The application and related material is under assessment,” a spokesman said. The Ravensworth Homestead complex was built around 1832 by Dr James Bowman, who was the principle surgeon for the colony of NSW. Lyn MacBain, a local historian and former Singleton councillor, said: “Ravensworth has a history which ties Aboriginal heritage and European heritage”. “They are intermingled, which is why Ravensworth Estate is a prime location to be protected to allow reconciliation in the Hunter Valley.” The shock and public reaction to the destruction of the Juukan Gorge in WA led to a federal parliamentary inquiry to examine why it occurred and how best to protect First Nations cultural heritage. The final report, titled A Way Forward, emphasised that a “loss of cultural heritage diminishes the heritage of our nation and deeply wounds the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples for whom this heritage is sacred”. The report, while expressing that Rio Tinto’s “actions demonstrated the profound lack of care for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander heritage in this country”, also indicated that “perhaps the tragedy may at least be a catalyst for change”. Rana Koroglu, the NSW managing lawyer of the Environmental Defenders Office, who is currently representing the PCWP, said: “Glencore’s offensive ad aimed at our clients is yet another example of a multinational coal mining company attempting to intimidate First Nations peoples who are seeking to lawfully exercise their human rights to protect their cultural heritage.” Sophie Nichols is a freelance journalist based in the Hunter Valley. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityFuneral plan providers have been ordered to refund or compensate $1.34m in the past two years after the Australian Financial Complaints Authority found some had engaged in misleading, deceptive and unconscionable conduct targeting Aboriginal people. The majority of complainants to the Australian Financial Complaints Authority (AFCA) in the past two years identified as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander, according to statistics provided by the authority. One complainant was sold a funeral plan for five people, including two babies aged less than one. In the 2020-21 financial year the authority received 178 funeral plan complaints relating to a range of companies and awarded $460,000 in compensation and refunds. In 95 of these cases the complainant identified as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. But in less than five months in the current financial year, the authority had received 144 complaints and awarded $880,000 in compensation and refunds. The complainant identified as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander in 93 of these cases. Of 15 determinations recently published by the authority, all related to plans sold to Aboriginal people (14 of these related to plans in New South Wales, and one in South Australia). The largest refund ordered by the authority in its recent determinations related to a funeral plan sold by Aboriginal Community Benefit Fund (ACBF) for five people, including two infants aged younger than one. Because of the young age of the infants, it was highly likely the premiums paid on the plan would exceed the benefit paid in the event of their funeral, the authority found in its September determination. The authority ordered that ACBF repay $33,275 in premiums because it agreed the fund had misled the family into believing the business was Aboriginal owned and operated, including by the use of a logo similar to the Aboriginal flag and the use of black figures in documents it provided. The family member who complained to the authority had been making payments to the fund using automatic deductions from her Centrelink benefits. “She has lived her whole life in a small, predominantly Aboriginal community,” the authority determined. “The complainant is a strong advocate for Aboriginal services and has supported her community by working in the community and supporting her community through the services she purchased. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The imagery in the documents provided to the complainant gave the indication ACBF was an Aboriginal organisation. The documents provided to the complainant contain Aboriginal imagery.” The fund submitted that a disclaimer acknowledging ACBF was not an Aboriginal organisation nor affiliated with any Aboriginal or government organisation was communicated to the complainant verbally and on multiple documents it sent her. But the authority agreed with the complainant that these disclaimers were insufficient. “This is because they were presented in small print and alongside complex information an ordinary, reasonable person was unlikely to understand or fully appreciate.” The authority found ACBF’s conduct was misleading, deceptive, and unconscionable and it had breached its duty to act with “good faith and the standard of conduct required” under the Asic Act. The fund said repaying the premium would prejudice the rest of its 15,000 members as to do so would breach the NSW funeral funds act. But the authority – which noted the fund submitted the same position in relation to all complaints lodged before it – said ACBF refunding premiums did not offend its registration requirements.Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology is expected to declare on Tuesday that a La Niña event is under way in the Pacific, underscoring the prospect of a relatively cool, damp and stormy summer for much of the north and east. The declaration will come a day after the bureau confirmed the season’s first tropical cyclone had formed in the Australian region. Cyclone Paddy developed near Christmas Island and reached category-one stretch on Monday but will weaken within days without making landfall. LATEST: BoM declares 2021 La Niña weather event for Australia A declaration of a La Niña is widely expected by the bureau at its fortnightly update of the main climate drivers for Australia’s weather on Tuesday afternoon. It has had a La Niña alert in place for weeks, and most of the models the bureau uses have been tipping such an event will last until at least January 2022. “You can see the pattern is already La Niña and you can see the impacts,” said Agus Santoso, a senior research associate at UNSW’s Climate Change Research Centre. “It’s not strong but it’s not that weak either.” The Bureau of Meteorology was approached for comment. People living in eastern Australia, in particular, hardly need more confirmation that conditions have recently turned wet and cool. While the above-average rainfall endured by many areas during winter and spring had more to do with conditions in the Indian Ocean, the Pacific tends to have more influence in summer. During La Niña years, the east to west trade winds blowing across the equatorial Pacific strengthen. These effectively push rain systems westwards and raise the chance of flooding, and also lift relative sea level in the western Pacific. Such years also tend to have more cyclones than usual. Last month, the bureau estimated there was a two-in-three chance Australia’s region would have more than the seasonal average of 11. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Last year also included a La Niña and experts say there is about a 40% chance of having back-to-back events. The last double bout covered 2010-11 and 2011-12. “I suspect it will be neutral next year,” Santoso said, adding “it’s not impossible to have three years in a row” as shown by the 1998-2000 period. Ben Domensino, a senior forecaster at Weatherzone, noted the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa) declared a double-dip La Niña last month. It uses a lower threshold to assess such an event, or its opposite, an El Niño. “Although it’s not technically been declared [in Australia], we’ve been in a very La Niña-like state for some weeks now,” Domenino said. Recent widespread and heavy falls have resulted in minor to moderate flooding in many inland rivers, notably in NSW. The Lachlan River, which last week threatened the NSW central west town of Forbes, remains at major flood levels. Another belt of rainfall – with moisture fed in part from Cyclone Paddy – is heading eastwards. That should bring 40-60mm of rain to a large area from Queensland into Victoria, with isolated falls of 100mm. Since catchments are already saturated, more flood watches will be issued, Domensino said. Farmers struggling to get crops in before fields become saturated are among those looking to the skies for relief from the rain. Insurers too will be watching closely since flood damage typically exceeds that from droughts and even bushfires. During the most recent La Niña and its aftermath from December 2020 to April 2021, the Insurance Council of Australia declared three catastrophes. These triggered about 65,000 insurance claims for damages totalling just over $1b, the ICA said.Paul Wheatley is often in bed by 7.30pm. There is little else to do once locked in his prison cell well before the sun’s light fades. So he reads a bit, then attempts to drift into unconsciousness. It is the only sure way to push out the voice which follows him everywhere. The one most familiar and cherished in his world frantically repeating his name, each an anguished attempt to rouse him from a seizure before they were off the road and the tree appeared and it was too late. It is Maria’s birthday tomorrow. His partner of 23 years would have been turning 69. That date, 10 May, is not a good one for Wheatley. That one, and 23 February – the day Maria was killed in the car he was driving. *** Standing at 170cm, Wheatley is short. The type of short that does the gritty, grunty work in a game of footy. That tackles low and hard and gets knocked about a lot. The 61-year-old played 200-odd games for Victoria’s Fairfield Football Club over a decade and copped, at an estimate, at least one hard hit to the head every fortnight. One was a knee which left him with a hole in his skull. The groove can still be felt today, underneath his tufts of silvery hair. Wheatley’s brain isn’t what it used to be. He has temporal lobe epilepsy, a condition his treating neurologist, Professor Chris Plummer, has potentially linked to these recurrent brain injuries. It is an epidemic affecting a generation of contact-sport participants. And, as the majority of public conversation centres around first-grade athletes, there are many, many more playing grassroots codes every weekend. All possess identical brain matter to their elite counterparts. The high-profile cases are piling up. Earlier this month, All Blacks player Carl Hayman said he had been diagnosed with early onset dementia at the age of 41. Just days later, concussion forced Wallabies full-back Dane Haylett-Petty into retirement. They come as the coronial investigation continues into the death of former Richmond footballer Shane Tuck, who was posthumously diagnosed with chronic traumatic encephalopathy. These are the tip of the iceberg; beneath the surface floats a much larger mass. “He copped the same knocks,” says Wheatley’s brother John, the father of former Melbourne AFL player, Paul Wheatley, who is named after his uncle. “It doesn’t matter what grade you’re playing; when you get hit, you get hit. Unfortunately, when we played, that was part of the game.” For the senior Paul Wheatley, that part of the game could have landed him in jail, convicted of manslaughter and dangerous driving occasioning death, and sentenced to five years and two months behind bars. The accident occurred before Wheatley came under Dr Plummer’s care and what happened is described by Wheatley’s sister, Annitta Siliato, as “an unbelievable set of circumstances – like a movie”. *** St Heliers Correctional Centre, on the outskirts of the mid-north NSW town of Muswellbrook, is a minimum-security facility. This place is not like Mid North Coast Correctional Centre in Kempsey, where he had a knife pulled on him and was not given the correct dose of medication. Or Grafton, where he was bashed by another prisoner. Or, indeed, Long Bay Gaol, where he saw brawls over access to the phones. Here he can read, sometimes watch Carlton play on TV – his mum sends newspaper clippings of the fixture – and walk unhassled laps around the yard. He is even allowed to earn $35 a week working in the cordoned-off garden section reserved for well-behaved inmates. But the past four and a half years have been a lesson in grief, crippling depression and a legal and prison system foreign to any first-timer, all while coming to terms with an illness which has so profoundly altered the course of his life. Wheatley’s epilepsy is a serial loiterer. It sits on his shoulder and steals his memories before they can take root and floods his neural pathways as his brain tries to communicate with his muscles. On one occasion in jail, while in the shower, he awoke on his feet to feel burning-hot water scalding his thigh, seemingly unable to move as he watched his skin welt. Another time, he came to on the grass outside, unsure of how he got there. *** In AFL terms, the 1980s and ‘90s were the hardman years. They were the days of David Rhys-Jones, Dermott Brereton and Robert DiPierdomenico. In essence, they were a time of being tough. And if you weren’t, at least acting like it. On a local field, in a much lower grade, Wheatley was doing his best to fake it until he made it. He was 26 and hadn’t played since doing his knee as a teenager, so it was with initial reluctance that he joined his brother John at Fairfield. He enjoyed the sport, having been a regular spectator at Carlton games with his late father. But he was also unconvinced his 70kg frame would cut it. He started on the wing and ended up a rover in the middle. The less he held back, the more confident he got. His dad had always told him to bump them before they bumped you. So he gave and took whacks for 10 years, and his more significant head knocks numbered in the hundreds. “He was always in the bottom of the pack,” says John, whose son, Paul Wheatley Jnr, played almost 150 AFL games for the Demons between 2000 and 2009. “I’m surprised I haven’t got any problems – I wasn’t much different to him. It’s in the back of your mind, especially when you see what happened with [Danny] Frawley. I’ve been knocked out a couple of times and kept playing – no one knew back then. “Once I missed a whole half a game and didn’t even remember it. After I had a shower, I walked back into the club room, was handed a beer and snapped out of it. It was the weirdest feeling.” Professor Mark Cook, an internationally recognised epilepsy specialist, says the most frightening factor about the disorder’s links to collision-based sport is the inability to measure the long-term cumulative effects of subclinical brain injuries. “Even minor head injuries are associated with about double the risk of epilepsy,” says Dr Cook, who is chair of medicine and director of clinical neurosciences at St Vincent’s Hospital in Melbourne, and a former long-time president of the Epilepsy Foundation. “And because of the difficulties measuring repeated minor injuries, I don’t think we really have a good way of figuring out how often this is the problem.” Dr Cook says the recent post mortems of former footballers Danny Frawley, Polly Farmer and Tuck showed the players had been collecting injuries over very long periods. “And just because they’re professional, I don’t think that means they get more head knocks than amateur footballers,” he says. “In fact, the reverse might be true.” All three were found to have CTE, which is mostly discovered in the brains of people with a history of head trauma but has recently been found in sportspeople who have not sustained a clinical concussion but multiple subclinical concussions, as was the case with Tuck. On top of this, CTE has also been linked with epilepsy. *** Signs of Wheatley’s epilepsy surfaced insidiously after he and Maria moved from Melbourne in 2016 and bought a property in the New South Wales mid-north coastal town of Smiths Lake. It showed itself via lapses in memory, pauses in speech and moments of mental absence. He went to a family function and greeted a peer he thought he hadn’t seen in years, only to be informed they had caught up the month prior. Chris and Graeme Watt, close friends with Maria for 37 years and Wheatley the 25 since they met him, noticed a “vagueness” in the two years before the accident. “We went on holidays to Port Douglas, all four of us,” Chris says. “We were talking about it and he didn’t remember the holiday.” Peter Kemp, who worked with Wheatley for almost 15 years and counts himself as “one of his and Maria’s best mates”, recalls Maria once phoned him after a night out in Melbourne. “She said he’d passed out and hit his head on the corner of the bench,” Kemp says. “I was with him that night and he didn’t have much to drink.” Most telling were the brief vacant spells they now recognise as complex partial seizures. “He just goes blank, it’s quite unusual,” says Siliato. “If you didn’t really know he had it, you might not suspect he’s having a seizure. You might just think he’s sitting there staring. When you tell him he stopped talking for two minutes he doesn’t know it’s occurred.” Maria soon learned the signs. He would appear awake but also unresponsive, smack his lips and fidget involuntarily. She took him to the GP, suspecting the memory loss was dementia. When tests returned a positive result for epilepsy his mother, also named Annitta, couldn’t figure it out. “I said that was impossible,” she says, “because it doesn’t run in the family at all.” *** According to the facts relied on in the criminal proceedings against Wheatley, he was referred to a neurologist and had an initial consultation on 17 November, 2016. The neurologist diagnosed Wheatley with epilepsy and told him he would need to observe a “stand-down period” from driving for six months and inform the Roads and Maritime Services. He recalled that his patient was “very reluctant to cease driving”. “Paul asked if the stand-down period could be shortened,” he stated, adding that he told Wheatley that, if he continued his medication and had no further seizures between then and his follow-up appointment in February, he should be able to get his licence back. Maria rang family and friends to relay the news. “She said ‘it’s treatable, that he should be right with these tablets’,” says Chris Watt. Wheatley was advised against driving by both the specialist and his GP, though the RMS did not officially suspend his licence until 29 January, 2017. According to the agreed court facts, a number of witnesses said Wheatley spent the intervening period hankering to get his licence back. A neighbour and friend said he had discussed Wheatley’s “regular blackouts” with both Wheatley and Maria and that, after his diagnosis, Wheatley told him: “I still have my licence so until someone tells me otherwise I can drive.” The neighbour’s impression was that Wheatley viewed his inability to drive as a “threat to his identity”. He also felt he “was in denial about his condition”. This is not uncommon, according to Dr Cook. “I’m often with people when they have seizures, and when you tell them immediately after they’ve recovered awareness that they’ve just had a seizure, they say ‘no I didn’t’. Sometimes they’d become quite aggrieved that you’ve suggested it,” he says. “It’s a strange mixture of the brain abnormality itself and the fact that it disrupts your ideas and thoughts, and memory around the time it happens, and that sometimes prevents you taking that information in. “Sometimes people are just in denial about it, other people just don’t join the dots – and these are all normal people.” The judge who sentenced Wheatley stated in his remarks that the GP had said that, from the date of diagnosis, he “endeavoured to inform and educate Mr Wheatley repeatedly about the risks of and gravity of driving with his diagnosis”. After Wheatley asked him to complete a fitness to drive form, the doctor opined that Wheatley either did not understand the legal requirements around his condition or was “trying to pull a fast one” to get his licence back. Dr Cook says, from his decades of experience with epileptic patients, the reality is potentially more complicated. “The thing about temporal lobe seizures in particular,” says Dr Cook, “is they involve parts of the brain which are fundamentally a part of the way memory works, and they disrupt it in complex ways. So when people say they didn’t know they had a seizure or don’t remember someone telling them they did, they’re probably telling the truth for the most part.” The sentencing remarks detail concerned conversations between Maria and family members, friends and neighbours – many in Wheatley’s presence – about his continued seizures. She had said they were “frightening” for her and that she wanted to become his full-time carer. A number of witnesses said Wheatley told them he was not aware when he was having seizures, but that he was present during discussions about them and told he should not be driving. An expert report before the court concluded that although Wheatley may not have been aware of all the seizures he was having, he must have been aware that he was having sufficient seizures not to be allowed to drive. In all, they paint a picture of Wheatley that is blurred between unawareness and blind obstinance. Dr Plummer acknowledges Wheatley may have had “his head in the sand”. But he also believes his understanding of his condition was poor. Dr Plummer first saw Wheatley on 28 June, 2017 – about four months after the accident – and admitted him to St Vincent’s for a week of inpatient testing, which found he was having up to several complex partial seizures each day. He asked his patient if he had ever played a contact sport. He also says Wheatley appeared surprised when informed that epilepsy could manifest very differently to what popular culture might have him imagine. “Lay people think seizures are only when you crash to the floor and shake all over,” Dr Plummer says. “But seizures come in different shapes and sizes, and you can just have what we call minor events, where you just lose awareness. “That can be quite brief, but can last long enough for you to cause a lot of damage, like fall into a fire. Or crash a car.” *** On the morning of 23 February, 2017, Maria drove Wheatley to his follow-up appointment with the neurologist. According to the court facts, Wheatley told him he had not had any further seizures since September the previous year and asked him to sign a fitness to drive form. The court would later find the neurologist was “clearly and deliberately misled” by Wheatley. The neurologist told police that, had he been informed Wheatley had experienced further seizures, he would have “increased the dosage of his medication as well as apply for a longer stand-down period for his driving”. The fitness to drive form was signed by both parties and Maria drove Wheatley to a RMS branch. With his licence newly restored, he drove them to a shopping centre to buy some groceries. Over lunch they discussed long-standing plans for a caravan trip around Australia. Then he got in the car to drive them home. “My son rang me in the morning,” says Wheatley’s mother. “He’d been to the doctors, and he rang me to tell me he was cleared and he’s got his licence back. The next call I got,” there is a long pause, and then a breaking voice, “was the accident.” While travelling down a quiet detour street, Wheatley’s brain went elsewhere but his foot stayed weighted on the accelerator. The car, rapidly increasing in speed, hit a tree with such force it was dislodged and uprooted. Unbeknown to him, Maria was no longer next to him, having been flung from the vehicle and then under it. Wheatley escaped with a small scratch on his face. Police attending the scene reported him crying uncontrollably and shouting, “I’ve killed her”. A roadside breath test returned negative, and he was taken to hospital. When a doctor asked him about his epilepsy history, he said he usually asked Maria. The following day, with the family now at Smiths Lake, police came to interview Wheatley. John remembers not wanting to let them in because Paul remained so upset. “But Paul wanted to talk to them,” he says. Siliato says the detective that day told her he might be charged with reckless driving. A few months later, in early May, he rang to let her know Wheatley would be arrested and charged with manslaughter and dangerous driving occasioning death. “It was just the saddest thing because my brother really loved Maria,” Siliato says. “I’m going to start crying. Just the fact that he lost the love of his life and he was responsible.” Wheatley admitted in court that he drove at least once while on conditional bail following the accident. “It was his lack of understanding, lack of awareness,” Siliato says. “That rationalisation wasn’t there. If it was me, I probably wouldn’t drive, but I don’t have a neurological condition.” Dr Cook emphasises that Wheatley’s case is “fairly exceptional” and should not compromise the independence of the many people with epilepsy who are able to drive safely. “There just needs to be a better system for more carefully considering each individual situation,” he says. “Not black-and-white rules, because most people with epilepsy will drive fine without any problems.” *** On 18 June, 2019, at Port Macquarie district court, Wheatley was convicted and sentenced with a non-parole period of two years and nine months, having pleaded guilty to manslaughter. In a letter he wrote from jail as part of an unsuccessful submission to be granted early parole, he says he felt he had no choice but to plead guilty, citing the emotional and financial stress of the accident and subsequent legal rigmarole. The presiding judge, Christopher Robison, noted Wheatley’s remorse over the death of “the love of his life” and said there was little doubt he was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and prolonged bereavement disorder. During his first night inside, he tried to strangle himself in his cell. It was not the first time he had tried to take his own life in the 15 months since Maria’s death, a period wracked with nightmares and heavy drinking. On one occasion, the neighbours helped him down from the roof. On another, he rowed his dinghy out onto the lake. In jail he was closely monitored, but encountered problems of a different nature when his dose of medication was lowered. He had a seizure in the clinic and woke up on the floor. He rang his sister. “Eventually,” Siliato says, “one of the people that worked for the prison called me. They said they weren’t allowed to because there are lots of inmates who have addictions. I said, ‘but this is not an addiction, he could die’. “So they said they had him in a cell with a camera and were watching him 24 hours, and if he had a seizure they would take him to the hospital.” The correct dose was reinstated soon thereafter and in August 2020, a letter from parliamentary secretary for health, Natasha Maclaren-Jones, confirmed that “regrettably, since June 2019, Mr Wheatley’s seizure medication was not administered to him on five occasions”. The other issue was Wheatley’s involuntary ticks. The audible lip-smacking and blank stare risked being misconstrued as provoking fellow inmates. That fear came to pass during his first few days at Grafton Correctional Centre, where he was bashed by another prisoner, having been placed in maximum security instead of the minimum security section for which he was approved at the time of his transfer from Kempsey. Wheatley did not press charges. A few days later, he was transferred to St Heliers. *** On 10 February, 2021, Wheatley authorised concussion campaigner Peter Jess to act on his behalf for all his health, incarceration and legal matters. Jess has unsuccessfully attempted to have him released, petitioning for NSW governor Margaret Beazley to reduce his sentence under the royal prerogative of mercy. Wheatley cannot afford to appeal the rejection. “Our criminal justice system cannot cope with trauma-induced brain damage,” Jess says. “Somebody who has structural damage such as Paul has not had the cognisance to understand what had happened. “And the focus on the impact of brain trauma on elites has not filtered down to the grassroots, even though we are finding that the brain trauma is exactly the same at the grassroots as it is at the elite level.” On 16 February, his application for early parole on the grounds of exceptional extenuating circumstances was rejected. He cannot afford the legal fees for an appeal, so will remain at St Heliers until his scheduled parole in March, 2022. When the time for his release comes, he aims to help educate others. He has spoken on the phone with former AFL player Shaun Smith, who last year was awarded a $1.4m insurance payout over the brain injuries acquired during his career, and hopes to build more connections with others who played before the risks were known. “Thankfully it’s a lot different today,” says Siliato. “But I think there’s still more awareness that needs to be out there. My daughter still plays footy, and I’m so nervous. Every game, I can’t relax. I never used to be like that.” It is why she has set up the Head Knock Foundation, and hopes to educate schools and sporting clubs, and create a support network for sufferers. Wheatley is doing better than before. There is still too much time to think in jail, and he will stay on his antidepressants. And even as the outside world beckons, he knows it comes with the continued estrangement from Maria’s sons, who cut ties with their stepfather after their mother’s death. Maria’s family were contacted by Guardian Australia but declined to be interviewed. The concussion cause, at least, is something to hold onto. “My brother has been through such a traumatic experience, he is lucky to have survived,” Siliato says. “He doesn’t really have much in life, but this gives him purpose.”The peak Aboriginal health group in the Northern Territory has accused the territory government of excluding them from high-level decision-making about the Covid outbreak, despite the vast majority of cases appearing in Aboriginal communities. The head of the NT’s Aboriginal medical services alliance (AMSANT) said he’s frustrated at having to find out about key decisions via the media. CEO of AMSANT John Paterson said the government’s decision to reopen NT borders on 20 December puts “unnecessary” pressure on community-controlled clinics to ramp up vaccinations in the next three weeks. To reach the target of 80% fully vaccinated rate by 20 December, first doses would have to be administered this week, Paterson said. “If you look at the timeline, you need three weeks between first and second vaccination. So the pressure’s on us, unnecessarily I might add. The government could easily push back that date. We just don’t understand the urgency. “We won’t get that [deadline]. We’re struggling now. And this is why we are calling on the surge workforce to come and help us to get the vaccination rates up.” If AMSANT and other Aboriginal organisations like the land councils had “a seat at the table”, those concerns would be addressed, he said. “We are a major part of the health system in the Northern Territory,” Paterson said. “We’re the major service provider for primary healthcare right across the NT from the Western Australia border to the Queensland border.” It was “frustrating” to find out about top-level decisions via the media, he said. “When we hear the chief minister every day go out there and make these announcements, that’s the only way we’re being informed. And then we have to go in, battling in these arguments in the media, to get further clarification.” The NT chief minister Michael Gunner did not respond directly to AMSANT’s claim that it has been excluded from pandemic decision making, but thanked AMSANT for “all the work it has done on the remote Territory vaccine rollout since the vaccine was approved”. “We’ve shared our supply of vaccine with Aboriginal health organisations so they had enough consistent supply for everyone in their care to have a chance to be vaccinated over the past seven months,” Gunner said in a statement. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “They have been a great partner throughout this pandemic and we also thank them for their open dialogue, data sharing and the work they’re doing on the ground.” Gunner said the border reopening will be accompanied by “stronger rules to keep the Territory safe”. The NT will now require all arrivals to be fully vaccinated, alongside more public health measures to protect remote communities with low vaccination rates as well as a strict testing regime for people entering the Territory, he said. The NT’s acting chief health officer, Dr Charles Pain said AMSANT’s advice is “very much welcome” at public health advisory meetings he convenes and “is sought on a whole range of things”. But he said it was not his role to meet with them formally. “I don’t directly meet with AMSANT,” Pain told reporters in Darwin at the daily Covid briefing on Monday. “It is not for the CHO to meet formally with them, but I reiterate, I am very open to their advice.” Paterson said the advisory meetings were an information-sharing forum “telling us what governments are doing” but the “decisions were being made elsewhere”. He said the national closing the gap agreement signed by all states and territories commits governments to shared decision-making. “That’s about getting the Aboriginal leadership around, making those decisions, being part of the design, being part of any policy development strategies,” he said. The NT recorded two new cases of Covid-19 on Monday, bringing the total number of cases in this outbreak to 37. Four people are in Darwin hospital. NT Health identified 423 close contacts most of whom have already been contacted. Pain said that just under 200 people deemed close contacts have already been transferred from the Katherine region to the Centre of National Resilience quarantine facility at Howard Springs, in an effort to reduce community transmission. The Katherine region will remain in lockdown until 6pm on Wednesday as authorities await the results of more than 1,300 tests, amid concerns that the virus may have spread. On Monday Pain said he was expecting more cases to emerge.The Coalition’s traditional lead on economic management has been whittled away by Labor, as more voters say they believe the opposition would manage the economy in the interests of everyday Australians, according to the latest Guardian Essential poll. The latest survey of 1,095 respondents also suggests voters want the Morrison government to increase the Abbott-era 2030 emissions reduction pledge, with 61% of respondents saying they want a higher 2030 target, and 39% saying it should remain a cut of 26 to 28% on 2005 levels. That result follows Australia’s decision to sign up to a joint communique after the Cop26 in Glasgow pointing to a potential reconsideration of the 2030 target ahead of the next United Nations-led climate conference in Egypt. But only hours later, the government characterised the current pledge as “fixed”. Australia has been widely criticised for a lack of ambition in the 2030 pledge. Liberals facing contests with independents in the party’s metropolitan heartland are pushing the prime minister to adopt a higher target for 2035. Labor will also resolve its new 2030 target over the coming parliamentary sitting fortnight, with options ranging between 35 and 45%. The Morrison government is clearly limbering up for a federal election framed around the Coalition’s traditional strengths of economic management and maintaining downward pressure on interest rates and cost of living. But the latest Guardian Essential data suggests voters are already concerned about the rising price of housing, energy and food over the past six to 12 months – and 86% of respondents say the current government has either a lot or a little influence over the direction of household expenses. As well as shaping an election conversation around the economy, Scott Morrison has also been trialling a political narrative championing personal freedom, and the need for governments to get out of people’s lives – arguments that relate predominantly to ongoing public health measures to suppress Covid, and to more prescriptive climate policy options. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But while Morrison is championing freedom to appeal to a minority of protest voters flirting with Clive Palmer or Pauline Hanson, the latest Guardian Essential data suggests the bulk of Australian voters – after close to two years of persistent government activism to manage the pandemic – are in a more interventionist headspace. A majority (62%) agree with the statement: “I want government to have a more active role in managing the economy.” Asked about the current recovery from Covid-19, only 12% or respondents think businesses should navigate reopening after prolonged lockdowns without intervention, while 81% of the sample says government needs to work in partnership with businesses during the recovery. Only 6% say the government should be solely responsible for managing the recovery. The Coalition is, traditionally, solidly ahead of Labor when it comes to voter trust about economic management. But according to the latest fortnightly snapshot of voter sentiment, 34% of the sample nominates the Liberal and National parties as the party more trusted to manage the economy, while 34% trust Labor and 32% say there’s no difference between the major parties. The Guardian Essential sample divides on that question broadly along partisan lines, with 70% of self-identified Coalition voters nominating the Morrison government as their preferred economic manager (12% say Labor), while 65% of Labor voters nominate Labor (12% say the Coalition). Asked which party they trust to ensure the economy works in the interests of everyday Australians, 40% say Labor, 29% say the Coalition and 31% say there’s no difference between the major parties. The data also indicates voters are already highly attentive to cost of living trends. With petrol prices nudging record highs, 77% of respondents say prices have increased either a little or a lot over the past six to 12 months (16% say prices have remained the same, and 6% say prices have come down either a little or a lot). Petrol is a more hot button issue than housing prices, according to these survey results, even though house prices have surged in the major cities. While close to 80% have noticed an increase at the bowser, 47% say their rent or the cost of paying the mortgage has increased either a little or a lot (with 46% saying costs are about the same and 7% reporting a little or a large decrease). Grocery and food prices are close to voter perceptions about petrol, with 70% reporting small or large increases in costs (with 24% saying prices are the same and 6% noticing decreases). With utility bills, 63% report modest or substantial increases (with 30% of the sample saying costs are about the same and 7% reporting decreases).It was not a shock to hear Jane Campion become the latest in a growing line of high-profile directors to announce her dislike of superhero films. But the issue is not just about taste – it is about money and how the movie industry now provides less opportunity to show dramas and real-life comedies on the big screen. I’ll be upfront: I don’t mind superhero movies. I have watched plenty and enjoyed a few of them more than once. For the most part though I find them forgettable: redolent with deus ex machina saved plot holes and over-praise for not being completely terrible. I agree with Ethan Hawke’s view that “they tell us Logan is a great movie. Well, it’s a great superhero movie. It still involves people in tights with metal coming out of their hands.” Hawke is now in an upcoming Marvel film, so not thinking they are great art doesn’t mean they are not worth making or watching. Thus when Campion said that she “hated” superhero movies, I could not agree with her. Partly this is because The Piano is the only film I have paid to see and then fallen asleep while watching in the cinema. So I’m not quite the Campion stan. I do love Martin Scorsese films though, so when he threw shade at superhero movies as not being cinema, I agreed with him. But I also thought that at least they’re not as long and self-indulgent as was The Irishman. All of this, of course, is a matter of taste. I sense Campion’s, Scorsese’s and others’ real complaint is not so much about superhero movies, but about how they crowd out real-life movies. And the reason that is the case comes down to two things – opening weekends and the non-US box office. In the early 1980s, movies had plenty of time to build word of mouth, because there wasn’t a new film coming out next week that would blow it out of the water. Films back then made around 15% of their box office in the opening three days. Now it is a third or more – Avengers: Endgame made 42% of its total US box office in the first three days: If the graph does not display please click here Word of mouth requires the film to be good; a big opening weekend only needs the film to be anticipated – it is a shift from quality and reviews to marketing. The other big difference is that non-US box office now accounts for two-thirds of worldwide box office – compared to around half in the early 1990s: If the graph does not display please click here You might think that is a good thing – less monoculture, surely. But no. The US might not be the dominant audience, but it is still the dominant producer. These two factors mean studios want movies that make a lot of money in the opening weekend, and which can play everywhere – from the US to Europe and especially Asia. It means making sure people know what they’re getting. That means IP (intellectual property) either through adaptation of something well known (think Spiderman, Harry Potter, Star Wars) or sequels: If the graph does not display please click here But what it really means is more of three things: superhero movies, animation, and sci-fi/fantasy – big-event films with IP that exist in a world of make-believe anyone can relate to and are less reliant on good reviews: If the graph does not display please click here And that also means fewer films that speak to a certain time and place, or culture and sense of humour – ie dramas and comedies: If the graph does not display please click here Through to the mid-1990s at least 30 of the top 50 films in the US would be dramas or comedies; now it is usually less than 20 (and the same is the case in Australia or the UK). And many of the dramas have IP attached (eg Downton Abbey, Mamma Mia! and Bohemian Rhapsody) And this is not just limited to the big hits. Fewer dramas and comedies make it into the bottom half of the top 50 as well. This means less likelihood that your wonderful drama or insightful comedy is going to make enough money to justify Mr and Ms Paramount giving you lots of money to make it. And so directors work on superhero movies or other franchises in the hope that this might give them the chance to later make a more personal film. But the cycle perpetuates. Fewer risks, fewer films that are original and say something about your life unless it is an undercurrent of a film involving people flying. It doesn’t really matter whether you like superhero and other make-believe movies or not – it is that they have undoubtedly crowded out dramas and comedies. The good news is streaming services are filling the gap somewhat – with films such as The Irishman, Campion’s The Power of the Dog, and Spike Lee’s Da 5 Bloods. But even they are already falling into the same measures of looking at revenue – making a big deal about how many people streamed Red Notice on the opening day rather than wanting good word of mouth. Indeed it has already been supplanted at the top by the new series of Tiger King, showing that Netflix as much as any movie studio likes a franchise. And so it would not be a surprise if in a decade’s time we will be able to write this same article but about streaming services.An Australian government senator has shared content from an anti-vaccination leader who previously called for the execution of Jacinda Ardern, while posting a deluge of stories from other people about vaccine side-effects he admits he can’t verify. Queensland Liberal party senator Gerard Rennick has seen his Facebook following explode by more than 500% in the past three months since he began sharing testimonials of people claiming to have suffered severe side-effects after receiving Covid-19 vaccines. Delivered without context and in most cases without the person’s full name, the posts include the claims of people who say they developed severe conditions not linked to any known vaccine side-effect, including appendicitis, a stutter, and severe neurological conditions. Many of the claims shared by Rennick are disputed by expert medical bodies such as the Therapeutic Goods Administration. In a number of cases the person whose story the Liberal senator shared reveals a pre-existing vaccine hesitancy or aversion. “Thanks [Victorian premier] Dan Andrews your mandated vaccine that I had to have in order to work and support my family resulted in this,” wrote one man, whose story Rennick shared and who claimed to have developed appendicitis after receiving the vaccine. In one case, Rennick shared multiple posts by a woman from New South Wales who said she had developed blood clots “all through my legs, stomach and through both lungs” after receiving the Pfizer vaccine. “I never wanted to get [the vaccine] because I was genuinely scared of running the risk. I wish I had never gotten it &amp; I could have my healthy body back,” the woman wrote in a widely-shared post on social media. While rare cases of clotting have been associated with some vaccines including AstraZeneca, the TGA told the Guardian there had been no reported cases associated with people who received the Pfizer vaccine in Australia. In another post four days ago, Rennick posted a letter penned by a “retired GP” from New Zealand railing against the Medical Council of New Zealand and falsely linking vaccines with still births. The retired GP, who the Guardian has not named to avoid boosting her profile, accused New Zealand’s top doctors of having “blood on your hands” and called for them to stand trial for crimes against humanity. When sharing the letter, Rennick said retired GPs “have a lot of credibility” because they could no longer be sacked for speaking out. Four weeks before Rennick’s post, the woman said Ardern, the prime minister of Australia’s ally and closest neighbour New Zealand, would be executed for her government’s vaccination program. The doctor called for Ardern to stand trial for crimes against humanity and said “this woman is going to get her own l-e-t-h-a-l injection when the international criminal court sits for Nuremberg two”, according to New Zealand news outlet Stuff. In an earlier post in August, the same woman wrote: “Crimes against humanity deserve the sentence of execution... Jacinda Chris Ashley and the media had better beware [sic].” Rennick deleted the post after being contacted by the Guardian, conceding he had realised it to be “fake”. “I try to verify this stuff, I thought it seemed OK,” he said about the post. “I’m a bit annoyed about it.” His post had been shared 1,600 times before it was deleted. Rennick said he was unaware of the woman’s previous comments about Ardern, and conceded he “should have” checked the source of the letter before sharing it. Amid increasing concern about the contribution elected MPs in Australia have made to the spread of misinformation, Rennick admitted he wasn’t sure whether the stories from other people he posted were all true. “I had it sent to me from someone else. Like I said, I’m not going to get everything 100% right,” he said. “Did you get all of your school work right when you were at school?” But he claimed he did not have a duty to verify the claims or to provide context about the low overall risk associated with Covid vaccination because of the misinformation labels Facebook frequently attaches to his posts. “I cant ask for their medical records,” he told the Guardian on Monday. “Is it 100% accurate? I can’t guarantee that and I’ve never said that, and that’s why I say it’s someone’s story. It’s not my story, I’m telling someones else’s story.” Rennick, along with fellow Liberal senator Alex Antic, threatened to withhold his vote from the government unless it passed an anti-vaccine mandate bill. Rennick, Antic, and three other government senators split with the Coalition and voted for the bill, but it ultimately failed in the Senate. Facebook following explodes Rennick’s posts against vaccination have coincided with a massive boost to his Facebook following. He had just 4,068 followers this time last year, but his following has since surged to more than 79,000 while engagement with his posts is also much higher. He has so far had more than 756,000 interactions on his posts this month, including roughly 200,000 shares. He was getting about 1,900 interactions per month in November 2020. But the senator denied he was sharing the posts to increase his public profile, saying he was “moved” by people’s stories. “I’m not doing it for that at all, you can make that accusation [but] I’m not winning any friends doing this, I’m copping lots of pile on in the media, I’m just moved by the fact people have had serious [issues],” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The explosion in his Facebook following poses serious questions about the company’s strategy for dealing with anti-vaccination content. Facebook’s policy is to try to restrict the distribution of content that misleads or sensationalises vaccine side-effects, even where it doesn’t directly breach its other policies. “Based on input from experts in health communication and related fields, we are also taking additional steps amid the pandemic to reduce the distribution of content that does not violate our policies but may present misleading or sensationalised information about vaccines in a way that would be likely to discourage vaccinations, as outlined in more detail below.” Facebook would not say whether it removed any of Rennick’s posts. Speaking generally about its policy, a spokesperson for Meta, Facebook’s new company name, said it does not allow anyone “including public figures” to share misinformation about Covid-19 if it could lead to imminent physical harm. A spokesperson also said the company does not allow “misinformation about Covid-19 vaccines that have been debunked by public health experts”. “Pages or accounts who repeatedly breach these rules will have restrictions placed on their page, and repeat offenders will be removed from Facebook” Facebook has previously removed Craig Kelly’s page for breaching misinformation policies and has removed more than 20m pieces of content on Facebook and Instagram for containing misinformation.Australia could face a wave of plant and animal extinctions by 2050 unless it takes urgent action to address the threat of invasive species, according to a new report that finds the problem is already costing at least $25bn a year. The research, by Australia’s national science agency the CSIRO and the Centre for Invasive Species Solutions, takes a once-a-decade look at the scale of the threat caused by rabbits, feral cats, toxic toads, weeds, diseases such as myrtle rust and other invasive pests. It argues invasive species are the number one threat to Australia’s wildlife, with more than 80% of nationally listed threatened plants, animals and habitats affected by them. The scientists call for the urgent development of new technologies that could be used to detect, eradicate and prevent invasive pests. They warn the problem is growing and a “new wave of mammal extinctions is looming across northern Australia, as intense fires and overgrazing by feral cattle, pigs and buffaloes remove shelter and make it easier for feral cats to hunt”. “It’s important to get on top of invasive alien species now,” said Andy Sheppard, a research director in biosecurity at the CSIRO. Sheppard said the threat posed by invasive species was compounded by other factors, such as land use change and the climate crisis, with increased natural disasters creating opportunities for feral animals and weeds to spread. “We’ve got to address climate change but if you just focus on that and not the other drivers of biodiversity loss it’s just going to get worse,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The report finds rabbits, which infest two-thirds of Australia, were the biggest menace, followed by feral cats, pigs, foxes and cane toads. Sheppard said rabbits had a large impact on many of Australia’s endemic plants and their grazing prevented plant regeneration in areas where wildlife was already under threat from other factors such as habitat destruction caused by agriculture. He said although there were effective biological control measures to reduce their impact on agriculture, Australia had so far been unable to reduce rabbit populations to low enough numbers to stop the damage they were causing to the environment. Invasive plants were also causing havoc in farmlands, forests and savannas, the report finds. Australia now has more than 2,700 established weed species – a figure that is growing by 20 new species every year – or one new weed every 18 days. The other problem the researchers were most worried about was myrtle rust, an invasive plant disease that is already threatening at least three native plants with extinction. “There are parts of Australia it could still get into and cause devastating impacts for native flora,” Sheppard said. The report finds that invasive species have already cost the economy $390bn over the past 60 years and the current costs were at least $25bn a year. That figure, likely an underestimate, includes the costs of management, costs to agriculture and also the costs of environmental losses to the extent data was available to quantify them. It calls for urgent investment in and development of technologies that could improve detection and surveillance of threatened species at Australia’s borders, particularly ports where new pests can enter via activities such as the illegal pet trade. The researchers said governments must fast-track emerging genetic technologies that could control, prevent and eradicate pests such feral cats. Chief executive of the Centre for Invasive Species Solutions, Andreas Glanznig, said public awareness programs were also needed to help find and eradicate invasive species. “The challenge is for all Australians to work together to stop the problem from getting worse,” he said. “Together we can work to drive down Australia’s native species extinction rate – currently over four species a decade – towards net zero extinctions.”An old friend once described her style to me as, “like an apple, crisp and fresh”. The description was apt for that period of our lives (early 20s) and although a decade has passed, I still think of it every time I put on a white shirt. The wardrobe classic looks best when it is exactly that: bright white, crisp and fresh. But keeping it that way is not always straightforward. The life of the shirt will be partially determined by its composition. Jade Sarita Arnott, the creative director of slow fashion brand Arnsdorf, recommends choosing natural fibres such as organic cotton, linen, hemp or Tencel. She says, “steer away from synthetic fabrics or synthetic blends as these attract odours and trap bacteria”. Steve Anderton, a laundry expert from the consultancy group LTC Worldwide, says this is because “polyester tends to cling tenaciously to oily contamination [including skin sebum]”, and also to greasy food stains from “salad dressing, chicken fats and fish oils”. Mind the deodorant Anderton warns the chemicals in deodorant stains makes them “virtually impossible to remove”. To avoid them, he suggests waiting for your deodorant to completely dry before putting your shirt on. While they’re not particularly popular in a warm Australian climate, wearing an undershirt will also help with soaking up sweat before it hits your shirt. Choose the right detergent Sarita Arnott and Anderton both suggest keeping white garments away from all other colours in the wash. Sarita Arnott explains that this prevents dyes from other clothes tinting whites. An all-white wash will also allow you to pick a specialised detergent that may not be as kind to other colours. Anderton recommends choosing a premium detergent with a suspending agent like sodium silicate salts, so that once the dirt has been removed from your shirt in the machine, it will stay in the water, and off the fabric, for the rest of the wash. This prevents the shirt from turning grey. He says your detergent should contain an emulsifier, such as citric acid, to solubilise greasy food stains (this will even help stained polyester). A mild oxidising agent such as sodium perborate will help de-colour any vegetable dye stains from things like coffee, tea, red wine, beetroot or grass. The other thing to look out for is detergent containing enzymes like protease or proteinase, which will digest food and drink stains and work well at a low wash temperature. If this is all a bit technical, Choice has run lab tests to figure out which detergents are best. Pre-treat troublesome areas Often collars and cuffs are the first places to go yellow. Anderton says this is because “grime tends to accumulate on fabric which gets rubbed repeatedly against the skin in normal wear”. He suggests pre-treating collars and cuffs to keep these areas white by following these steps: “wet them out and scrub for a few seconds with a medium-hard, natural bristle brush dipped in a liquid detergent”. If this doesn’t work, unfortunately the fabric might have been discoloured by skin oils from a previous wash, where they were not removed, “either with the heat of a previous drying, or ironing, or simply over time”. To avoid this, Anderton advises paying “special attention to pre-treating the yellowed areas, otherwise they will not wash out”. Although sweat and skin oil can be more complicated, he says, “most food and drink marks will wash out very easily, provided they have a cool pre-wash (below 40C) to prevent stain setting”. Sarita Arnott recommends targeting stains by making a paste from baking soda and water, applying the paste directly to any oily stains and leaving it overnight before washing the garment. After this treatment, Sarita Arnott advises using “a cold or 30C gentle machine wash”. She says, “you can also add baking soda in your regular washing load to brighten whites and keep them looking fresh”. Sunlight helps To dry white shirts Sarita Arnott suggests hanging them outside in the fresh air because “sunlight can also brighten whites”. This should be even more impactful if you have used a detergent with an optical brightening agent, says Anderton. It should “lock on to the cotton fibres and converts the invisible, ultraviolet portion of natural daylight into brilliant white light” which will make the shirt glow. Pressing matters Sarita Arnott says you can avoid some ironing “if you hang the shirt on the line or on a coat hanger” to dry, because most of the creases will fall out in the process. But she warns, “if you are using a coat hanger make sure to use one with a light wood or metal or plastic rather than a dark wood that may transfer the colour”. If you do need to iron, Anderton recommends doing so while the shirt is still slightly damp, using a medium temperature iron. Turn it inside out, start with the back of the collar, and the yoke across the shoulders, then progress to the sleeves and finally work around the body. He says to avoid pressing hard creases into the sleeves or any pleats, to maximise the fabric life. Do you have a clothing care conundrum you’d like this column to tackle? Email australia.lifestyle@theguardian.com with requests.In 1997, when things could only get better, Wired magazine gave over an issue to the raw optimism of the age: we should look forward to 20 solid years of peace, prosperity and progress, as a new age of consensus politics and technological advance smoothed away the rough edges of the warlike beings we once were. Tucked away in this panacea was a little list: 10 things that could go wrong, and dim the otherwise glittering brightness of the future. It’s like looking in a goddamn mirror. “Tensions between China and the US could escalate into a new cold war,” they said. Can I tell you what our collective 90s consciousness thought about that? Meh. Cold wars are fine. We did the last one no problem. “New technologies turn out to be a bust. They don’t bring the expected productivity increases or the big economic boosts.” This is probably the least insightful prediction, since even though it turned out to be precisely true, it didn’t touch the sides of what else would happen – the inexorable concentration of wealth into the hands of new-tech evil geniuses, or the fact that we would all instantly surrender everything meaningful in our lives to ping-pong between emailing and doom scrolling. But just because we mainly didn’t anticipate surveillance capitalism doesn’t mean we were fancy-free. We were very worried about Y2K, and I know that because my mother stockpiled a load of bottled water against the eventuality of the computers breaking down in the water-processing plants. She still has it. European integration might stall, they said, and the entire European project might break apart. So, phew, at least that didn’t happen. One obstructive and obstreperous nation crashed out of it, and the rest seem, if anything, more solid. I can’t speak for the whole 90s here, only for myself; my one worry about Europe in 1997 was that they might all regret joining the euro because their previous currencies were so pretty and melodramatic, particularly the lira. I want to be clear: I wasn’t nine, I was 24. Climate change, terrorism and pollution could all have potentially destabilising effects, and here there is a tiny glimmer of success: our main concern in the 90s was that it would take so long to reach agreement on whether climate change existed at all that we would all perish while still arguing. It’s true that we may yet perish while arguing about something else, but at least we have reached consensus on this. We weren’t, so far as I remember, all that worried about terrorism, since the looming story then was the Unabomber attack of 96. Since there was no hard-right-funded propaganda machine spreading fear of unhinged white men, it didn’t feel like a daily concern. Energy prices could go through the roof, and there might be a social and cultural backlash from people who simply don’t want change: both good points, though the energy one is particularly salient right now. You want to know what we talked about a lot in the 90s? Whether or not wind farms killed birds. I’m not minimising the problems attached to being a bird. But it does suggest that we weren’t really thinking ahead. And finally: “An uncontrollable plague – a modern-day influenza epidemic or its equivalent – takes off like wildfire, killing upward of 200 million people.” In fact, there was no shortage of cultural anxiety around pandemics; there were BBC mini-dramas about a modern smallpox, and feature films. Danny Boyle’s magisterial post-apocalyptic 28 Days Later was released in 2002. One of the many lessons of recent times is that it doesn’t help very much, pandemic-wise, for the private citizen to worry. What you want is for the government to worry, and maybe do some contingency planning. In that carefree decade, there was one concern we did talk about: fin de siecle anxiety; the worry that this completely abstract thing, the century, would come to an end, which it was definitely going to, and that might be bad. Honestly, we don’t deserve foresight; we use it for such daft things (except the people who work at Wired). • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistAs human rights organisations and the world’s media questioned the whereabouts of the Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai, the International Olympic Committee opted for a “quiet diplomacy” approach, arguing that was the most effective way to deal with such a case. “Experience shows that quiet diplomacy offers the best opportunity to find a solution for questions of such nature. This explains why the IOC will not comment any further at this stage,” the Lausanne-based organisation said in an emailed statement on Thursday about the case of Peng, who disappeared from public view after she made an accusation of sexual assault against a former senior Chinese official. Yet the IOC’s approach to the Peng saga, which resulted in a half-hour-long video call between its president, Thomas Bach, and the player on Sunday, appeared to have failed to ease concerns. Instead, the committee was accused by rights activists of engaging in a “publicity stunt” for Beijing. Such a backlash is a familiar recurrence for the IOC throughout its history since the late 19th century. Last month, in response to rights organisations’ calls to relocate the Winter Games, the IOC vice-president, John Coates, responded: “We are not a world government. We have to respect the sovereignty of the countries who are hosting the Games.” This pragmatism from the IOC is not a new phenomenon, nor a feature unique to its dealings with China. Critics often cite the organisation’s response to the 1968 Olympics in Mexico. Ten days before that year’s Games, government forces shot dead hundreds of protesters in the Tlatelolco massacre. “Olympic Games to go ahead in spite of Mexico rioting,” reported the Guardian in a front-page story on 3 October that year. But Susan Brownell, a former nationally ranked US track and field athlete who is an academic at the University of Missouri–St Louis, said the IOC’s response to the Peng case marked a change to its previous practices. “In the past, the IOC’s sole mission was to ensure that the Games take place whatever the circumstances. But this time around, it did get involved in what is essentially a #MeToo case, despite the criticisms that ensued.” She added: “Thomas Bach could have chosen not to get involved and left it to the International Tennis Federation. But since 2017, when human rights were added into the host city contract, the IOC is beginning to stand up for a wider range of human rights issues than it previously did, although critics will insist on their line that the IOC does not have credibility.” The organisation has repeatedly come under fire in recent years. In 2014, for example, it was criticised for allowing the Sochi Winter Games to take place amid Russia’s deteriorating human rights record, in particular its hostility towards the LGBTQ+ population. And when Beijing became the leading contender to host the 2008 Summer Games in 2001, some urged the IOC to think twice. “I would be most hesitant and most reluctant to award Beijing the Olympic Games, and give the Chinese government a substantial propaganda coup, in light of that human rights record and until there’s a clear improvement in that record,” said Donald Anderson, who at the time was the Labour MP for Swansea West and a former chair of the foreign affairs select committee, in a 2001 Observer debate. Less than a month after Peng’s revelation on Chinese social media site Weibo, her saga is transitioning from allegations of sexual assault to precarious international diplomacy. There is a lot at stake for Beijing as it faces international scepticism and potential boycotts from some western capitals. In the meantime, a parallel narrative is taking shape among pro-government actors. “For those who truly care about safety of Peng Shuai, her appearances of these days are enough to relieve them or eliminate most of their worries,” tweeted Hu Xijin, the editor of the Chinese state-run Global Times. “But for those aiming to attack China’s system and boycott the Beijing Winter Olympics, facts, no matter how many, don’t work for them.”A whistleblowing hotline launched by Yorkshire to allow people to safely report discrimination has been contacted by 36 individuals in its first week, the club announced on Monday. The service was initiated by the club’s new chairman, Lord Kamlesh Patel, as part of his response to Azeem Rafiq’s allegations of institutional racism at Yorkshire, and reports will feed into the investigation into unlawful discrimination at Headingley being overseen by Mohinderpal Sethi QC of Littleton Chambers in London. As part of their commitment to transparency Yorkshire will regularly publish the number of people who have contacted the hotline. “It is essential that those who have experienced or witnessed racism, discrimination and abuse are able to come forward to share their experiences. I thank all of those who have contacted the hotline,” Lord Patel said. “Lasting and authentic change, particularly in the face of a complex and systemic issue, takes consideration and time and cannot happen without the voices of those who have suffered. Only through committing to listen, and to believe, those who have bravely shared their experiences – and those still to do so – can we truly understand the scale of the issue.” Meanwhile, Alex Hales, who was accused by Rafiq of using a derogatory in-joke as the name of his black dog – an allegation he has denied – and who apologised last week after pictures of him wearing black body paint while attending a 2009 fancy dress party as Tupac Shakur, has kept his contract to play for Sydney Thunder in the Big Bash League after talks with the franchise. The 32-year-old has not played for England since testing positive for a recreational drug in 2019 but remains an outstanding white-ball cricketer and was the highest run-scorer in last year’s BBL. “There is no place in cricket – or society – for racism or discrimination,” Lee Germon, the chief executive of Cricket New South Wales, said. “One of the hallmarks of Thunder’s success is the team embraces diversity and is a club for all. If we really believe that we also must accept people who have made mistakes. “I’ve spoken to Alex, I’ve watched his apology, and have no doubt he is remorseful for the photograph and the other errors of judgment he made as a young man. Alex appreciates that going by today’s standards people will question his judgment and actions and he’s offered them a sincere apology.”A priceless Roman mosaic that once decorated a ship used by the emperor Caligula was used for almost 50 years as a coffee table in an apartment in New York City. Dario Del Bufalo, an Italian expert on ancient stone and marble, described in an interview with CBS’s 60 Minutes on Sunday how he found the mosaic. In New York in 2013, Del Bufalo gave a lecture and signed copies of his book, Porphyry, about the reddish-purple rock much used by Roman emperors. The book included a picture of the long-lost mosaic, which once formed part of a floor on one of two vast “party ships” commissioned by Caligula to float on a lake near Rome and sunk when the emperor was killed. The mosaic and other antiquities were recovered from the lake in the 1930s and housed in a lakeside museum. In 1944, as the Nazis retreated from Italy, the ships and many other treasures were burned. Nearly 70 years after that, as he signed copies of his book, Del Bufalo overheard a man and a woman say the woman had the mosaic they were looking at on the page. “There was a lady with a young guy with a strange hat that came to the table,” Del Bufalo told CBS. “And he told her, ‘What a beautiful book. Oh, Helen, look, that’s your mosaic.’ And she said, ‘Yeah, that’s my mosaic.’” Del Bufalo tracked down the young man, who confirmed that “Helen” had the mosaic in her apartment in Manhattan. She was Helen Fioratti, an art dealer and gallery owner. According to an interview she gave the New York Times in 2017, she and her husband, an Italian journalist, bought the mosaic from an Italian noble family in the 1960s. When it arrived in New York, the couple turned it into a coffee table. “It was an innocent purchase,” Fioratti told the Times. “It was our favorite thing and we had it for 45 years.” The office of the Manhattan district attorney says evidence suggests the mosaic was stolen, possibly during the second world war. Returned to Italy, it went on display at the Museum of the Roman Ships in Nemi in March this year. “I felt very sorry for her,” Del Bufalo said of Fioratti, “but I couldn’t do anything different, knowing that my museum in Nemi is missing the best part that went through the centuries, through the war, through a fire, and then through an Italian art dealer, and finally could go back to the museum. “That’s the only thing I felt I should have done.” Del Bufalo said he wanted to make a copy of the mosaic for Fioratti to keep in her apartment. “I think my soul would feel a little better,” he said.The streets of Southend were lined with members of the public coming to pay their respects to an MP who died serving his constituents. Mourners at the funeral of Sir David Amess on Monday paid tribute to a man who always had time for a chat, loved a joke, and was dedicated to the people he had been elected to represent. They thanked him with a round of applause as his coffin, draped in a union flag, was borne into and out of St Mary’s parish church in Prittlewell. “It’s just tragic, it’s awful. Such a terrible waste of a life that was lived just to serve people,” said 64-year-old Antoinette Moore. “And he really did that – he served everyone who met him. They are thin on the ground, people like that.” She said she and her partner, 74-year-old John Lawrence, had travelled 45 minutes from their home to pay their respects, having had dealings with Amess while living in his constituency. Moore described his generosity and said he had taken children at the preparatory school she used to run on a guided tour of the Houses of Parliament. “Because of his personality, you felt you had lost someone in your family,” Lawrence said of Amess’s death. “He is one in a million.” Amess was killed last month during a constituency surgery meeting. There will be a second service for him at Westminster Cathedral on Tuesday. His relatives released a statement in which they asked people to “set aside hatred and work towards togetherness”. They said: “Whatever one’s race, religious or political beliefs, be tolerant and try to understand. As a family, we are trying to understand why this awful thing has occurred. Nobody should die in that way. Nobody. “Please let some good come from this tragedy. We are absolutely broken, but we will survive and carry on for the sake of a wonderful and inspiring man.” In a eulogy, the MP Mark Francois said Amess embodied parliament’s strengths. “Our electors employ us to represent them in a contract renewable every few years. We work for them and not the other way around, and no one was ever more conscious of that than David Amess,” he told mourners. “Whatever one thinks of members of parliament – and opinions do vary – in my experience, MPs of all parties do genuinely try and help other people. However, collectively in recent years we have perhaps not always helped ourselves, and I humbly suggest today that we need to learn from that. But, boy, did David Amess honour the contract with his employers – and in his own inimitable style. Whatever the weaknesses of parliament, David Amess was the living embodiment of all its strengths.” Standing outside as the service continued in the church, 66-year-old Pat Shawyer agreed. “It is very, very sad. Sir David was a wonderful MP, he cared about our community and was involved in so many things,” she said. “I met him on several occasions and he was lovely, a genuine man. He would help you if he ever could and his death is terrible for this community.” Graham Ross, 70, from Southend, said: “Coming here today was just something I felt I had to do. He was just a lovely man. He loved Southend. I know he was Basildon first, but he put Southend in his heart. He loved the football at Roots Hall; he supported so many causes and was always helping people. You never had a quick word with him, it was always 10 minutes, because he wanted to know about you. He was always quick with a joke as well.” One of the causes closest to Amess’s heart was a campaign for a permanent memorial for the singer Dame Vera Lynn, whom he described as “one of the most loved stars this country has produced”. Her song We’ll Meet Again was played as his body was carried out after the service.Time to wrap up. Britain’s seventh biggest energy supplier Bulb, which provides gas or electricity to 1.7 million households, is to enter special administration in the largest casualty yet of the energy crisis. European consumer confidence has dropped, as rising pandemic cases and inflation worry citizens, as the euro hit a 21-month low against the pound. Germany’s Bundesbank has warned that inflation could soon approach 6%, and that growth in Europe’s largest economy may faltered this quarter. Joe Biden has nominated Jay Powell to serve a second term as chair of the Federal Reserve, as the US battles high inflation and tries to recover jobs lost in the pandemic. The news drove Wall Street to record highs, but will disappoint progressives who favoured Lael Brainard (who gets the vice-chair position). The UK’s recovery will be less speedy than hoped in 2021 and 2022, according to new forecasts from EY Item Club. Shares in Marks &amp; Spencer jumped to their highest in two-and-a-half-years, on reports that New York-based Apollo Global Management had mulled a buyout. But mining company Hochschild have ended the day down 27%, after Peru’s government announced plans to shut two of its gold and silver mines on environmental grounds. The insurer LV= has claimed that a takeover by the US private equity firm Bain Capital will result in £212m in extra distributions for members, as it tried to fight back against criticism of its decision to demutualise. British Airways could move flights away from Heathrow if the airport is allowed to increase charges by 50%, the airline’s owner has warned. Hopes that Crossrail will open in central London in early 2022 – this time on schedule – have been boosted as the troubled £19bn scheme moved into its final phase of testing at the weekend. The John Lewis Partnership has launched a £1m fund that will channel cash into projects with the potential to end the high street’s “throwaway” culture. Police and banks have warned consumers to be vigilant when shopping in this week’s Black Friday sales, with a rise in scams expected to cost shoppers millions. The CBI has told ministers that levelling up cannot be left to the free market, after decades of “benign neglect” has left the country with a “branch-line economy”. However, the message may have been lost after Boris Johnson gave a particularly shambolic speech to business leaders: Goodnight. GW In the City, the stock market has shaken off worries about Covid-19 lockdowns to end the day higher. London’s FTSE 100 index jumped 32 points or 0.45% to 7,255 points, up from Friday’s three-week lows, with mining companies and oil giants in the risers. The renomination of Jerome Powell as Fed chair lifted equity markets a little, while pulling the pound and the euro lower against the US dollar. Dan Suzuki, deputy CIO at Richard Bernstein Advisors, says: It seems in line with what the tea leaves were indicating. The Democrats gave up the option of a future inflation scapegoat in favour of a well-respected known entity that was supported by Yellen. While on paper, Powell leans slightly more hawkish than Brainard, their policies are very similar, and Powell provides more consistency and less uncertainty. Biden still has more appointments that will shape the overall make-up of the Fed. Pandemic concerns held back other markets, though, with the pan-European Stoxx 600 finishing the day flat. The British government has agreed with energy regulator Ofgem to appoint special administrators for Bulb, Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s spokesman said on Monday (via Reuters). We have agreed with Ofgem on the appointment of special administrators for Bulb and are taking this forward as quickly as possible. Here’s Tim Speed, partner and energy specialist at the law firm Shakespeare Martineau, on Bulb’s special administration: The appointment of an energy administrator is a drastic step for Ofgem and is another indicator as to the extent that the energy market is struggling. Bulb supplies 1.7 million customers and is the seventh biggest supplier in the UK. A Supplier of Last Resort (SoLR), which involves another company taking over supply to the failed supplier’s customers, is the default action for the majority of collapsed energy companies. However, the size of Bulb means this isn’t viable. Although the process has existed for some time, an energy supply company administration has never been implemented before, showing how dire the current situation is. The aim is to ensure supplies are continued at the lowest possible cost, with the administrator able to split up the existing business by transferring all or part of it to other companies, when appropriate. Energy suppliers that are concerned about their future must act quickly. By identifying the problem and seeking professional advice early on, it may be possible to secure an investment or sale that guarantees a future for the business. However, this does take time, so it’s important to address any issues whilst there is still sufficient cashflow. Ofgem and the government need to make serious decisions about the future running of the market, because the events of recent months cannot be repeated. The rise in Covid-19 cases in Europe has hit consumer confidence, as people worry that fresh lockdowns will be imposed this winter. The European Commission’s gauge of consumer morale has dropped this month, away from the three-year highs earlier this summer. Consumer confidence in the euro area dropped to -6.8 points, from 4.8, while in the wider EU it dropped to -8.2 points, from -6.1 points. This indicates that the recent rise in Covid-19 infections, which has forced a full lockdown in Austria and emergency measures in Germany. Bert Colijn of ING says concerns about new Covid cases, and inflation worries, are hitting confidence: At face value, there is still a lot to like about the current economy. The labour market is fuelling income growth and should take away worries about spending as jobs are relatively plentiful. Uncertainty for consumers seems to be stemming from two big issues. The rising cases of Covid and inflation. The first has the risk of causing further lockdowns and economic pain over the winter months. Quite some countries have already taken new restrictive measures and it looks like there’ll be more are to come in the coming weeks. This clearly has a dampening effect on the economic outlook and this casts a shadow on consumer confidence at the moment. Inflation is another factor, especially as energy prices have been soaring, which is now being felt in households across the continent. That results in an income squeeze as real wage growth suffers on the back of this despite a strong labour market. Without significant upward pressure on wages, we could see a dampening effect on consumer spending as lower-income groups especially spend a larger part of their income on energy bills. The energy regulator Ofgem has now responded to Bulb’s collapse: Customers of Bulb do not need to worry – Bulb will continue to operate as normal. Ofgem is working very closely with government. This includes plans for Ofgem to apply to court to appoint an administrator who will run the company. Customers will see no disruption to their supply, and their account and tariff will continue as normal. Bulb staff will still be available to answer calls and queries. Ed Miliband MP, Labour’s shadow business secretary, has accused government ministers of complacency over the energy crisis. Following Bulb’s collapse into administration today, Miliband says: The collapse of energy suppliers is a direct consequence of a decade of Conservative inaction in government which has left us exposed and vulnerable as a country. Families hit by a cost of living crisis will be deeply worried about what this collapse means for them, as will the workers at Bulb. The business secretary has buried his head in the sand for too long. The government was warned by Ofgem over a year ago about “systemic risk to the energy supply sector as a whole”. Instead of action we’ve had complacency from ministers and they are making the cost of living crisis worse by raising national insurance and refusing to cut VAT on energy bills. Labour will scrutinise the special administration regime to ensure it protects bill-payers and secures value for money for taxpayers. But alongside those measures, the government should now remove VAT from domestic gas and electricity bills for six months, so that families have some respite during the winter, and roll out a national home insulation plan to reduce energy bills by £400 and cut emissions. US home sales unexpectedly rose in October, despite the surge in prices making houses unaffordable for many first-time buyers. Existing home sales rose 0.8% to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 6.34 million units last month, the National Association of Realtors says, more than expected. Sales rose in the most affordable Midwest region and the densely populated South, but fell in the Northeast and were unchanged from a month earlier in the West The median existing house price increased 13.1% from a year earlier to $353,900 in October, extending the rally which began after pandemic lockdowns were eased over a year ago. The S&amp;P 500 index of US stocks, and the tech-focused Nasdaq Composite have both hit record highs. The dollar is still stronger too, pushing the pound down over half a cent to $1.339. Two months ago, Senator Elizabeth Warren called Jerome Powell “a dangerous man” on Tuesday and vowed to oppose his renomination as Fed chair. In remarks during a hearing before the Senate banking committee, Warren said that under Powell the Fed had watered down post financial-crisis bank regulations and weakened the US banking system. “Your record gives me grave concerns,” the Massachusetts Democrat said. Over and over, you have acted to make our banking system less safe, and that makes you a dangerous man to head up the Fed, and it’s why I will oppose your renomination. Wall Street has opened higher, as investors welcome Joe Biden’s decision to nominate Jerome Powell for a second four-year term as Fed chair. The Dow Jones industrial average, the S&amp;P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite have all risen at the open, with banks and tech stocks among the risers. Lael Brainard could have been a tougher Fed chair for Wall Street. As a Federal Reserve governor, she has objected to otherwise-unanimous motions to roll back financial regulations brought in to prevent financial crisis. As Fed vice-chair, she will still have significant influence. CNBC says: As the only Democrat on the Fed’s board, Brainard’s objections – 12 in 2020 alone – went unheeded. But now someone is listening. And his name is Joe Biden. The president has picked Brainard to be vice chair of the Fed, one of the most powerful economic positions in the world and perhaps the heir apparent to the Federal Reserve chair role itself. Biden on Monday picked Jerome Powell to lead the Fed for a second term. The job of Fed vice chair carries say in how interest rates are set, the balance of employment versus inflation, and the direction of regulation over the nation’s biggest banks like JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and Wells Fargo. Over in Washington, Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell is to be nominated for a second four-year term by President Joe Biden. The move ends uncertainty over whether Powell would be given a second term as the world’s most powerful central banker. Progressive lawmakers had pushed Biden to choose Fed board member Lael Brainard, arguing that Powell did not take recognise climate change as an urgent and systemic economic threat. But in the event, Biden has decided to nominate Jay Powell for a second four-year term as Federal Reserve chair. Brainard, the only Democrat on the Fed’s board, will be proposed as vice-chair, giving her a more powerful position at the central bank. Powell’s first term was dominated by the pandemic, and a severe downturn in which the Fed’s ultra-low interest rates and huge stimulus programmes helped to spur the recover, revitalise the jobs market, and saw inflation hit a 30-year high. Biden says: While there’s still more to be done, we’ve made remarkable progress over the last 10 months in getting Americans back to work and getting our economy moving again. That success is a testament to the economic agenda I’ve pursued and to the decisive action that the Federal Reserve has taken under Chair Powell and Dr Brainard to help steer us through the worst downturn in modern American history and put us on the path to recovery. Interactive Investor’s head of investment, Victoria Scholar, points out that the US dollar has pushed higher. Gillian Cooper, head of energy policy for Citizens Advice, says “serious questions must be asked” about the state of the UK energy market and how it is regulated. Bulb customers will be protected by the special administration process and they shouldn’t see much change to their service for now. But when the country’s seventh largest supplier fails, serious questions must be asked about the state of the market and how it’s regulated. It’s clear reforms are needed to prevent consumers and taxpayers from paying the price for supplier failures in future.” Walid Koudmani, market analyst at financial brokerage XTB, says Bulb’s collapse shows the “bleak” situation in Britain’s energy market, which could leave consumers with much less choice. Bulb energy’s collapse continues to highlight the bleak situation which has already seen a number of other energy providers fold under increasing costs and the inability to provide advertised services to their customers. As today’s announcement further reduces competition in the market, it could lead to a scenario where only a small number of major players are left in the energy market once issues are settled and things return to normal. Bulb Energy has gone bust and will be placed into a special administration process to manage the fallout of the biggest energy supply collapse on record. The energy regulator drew up plans over the weekend to put the company into a special administration process designed to protect Bulb’s 1.7 million household customers, according to industry sources. A statement from the company on Monday said. We’ve decided to support Bulb being placed into special administration, which means it will continue to operate with no interruption of service or supply to members. If you’re a Bulb member, please don’t worry as your energy supply is secure and all credit balances are protected. The company’s collapse has been long expected by industry rivals, which described the company as the “walking dead” after it struggled to find new investment, or a willing buyer, before the UK’s looming winter energy crisis. Here’s the full story: The special-administrator process being used with Bulb is reserved for firms that are too important to fail when other options aren’t possible. Bloomberg explains: This is the first time the measure has been used in Britain and comes in the wake of 20 energy-company failures since the start of August. It’s a sign the market is struggling to cope with the effects of higher power and natural-gas prices that are squeezing margins for suppliers and pushing them out of business. “Special administration is designed to protect the customers of a large energy supplier that’s become insolvent,” Bulb said on its website. No special administrator has been appointed yet, but Bulb expects one will be soon. The move will limit the risk of market chaos created by trying to quickly transfer a large number of customers to another supplier. Justina Miltienyte, energy policy expert at Uswitch.com, says Bulb’s collapse is a ‘tipping point’, caused by the price cap which has protected UK customers from soaring wholesale prices. This signals the tipping point of the UK energy crisis. With Bulb’s 1.7 million customer base, over four million people have now been directly impacted by the turbulent energy market. But it’s not just Bulb’s size as the seventh largest supplier that makes this so significant. Unlike some of the smaller suppliers who recently ceased to trade, Bulb operated with a strong business model combined with a competitive offering for consumers. Ultimately this demise wasn’t caused by a badly run business model. Instead, Bulb was choked off by the way the Government decided to structure the current energy market with the price cap. Miltienyte also explains that Bulb’s collapse is different than previous failures - as its customers won’t now be passed onto another supplier: Instead of Ofgem picking a supplier of last resort, as has been the case with smaller providers, Bulb will continue operating as normal. The most important thing for consumers to know is that their energy supply will continue to run as it always has done, and any credit balances will be protected. Affected consumers should not cancel their direct debit - you will continue to receive energy and be billed for it, as normal. It’s also worth noting that Bulb customers will be protected by the current price cap, until April 2022. Is it worth switching suppliers? Miltienyte argues that customers should ‘stay put’ and see how the situation develops: Technically, you can switch suppliers, but it is worth bearing in mind that there are unlikely to be better deals available elsewhere. You’re probably better off staying put and waiting for the dust to settle on the current situation. The administrator may decide to close the supplier down in the future, and move customers elsewhere. But customers will be kept informed by Ofgem and the administrators about what will happen next. Bulb says the UK’s energy price cap hampered its efforts to win support from investors, forcing it into special administration. In its blog post, it explains that the surge in wholesale gas prices means suppliers are operating at a loss: When we started exploring fundraising options, we were delighted to receive lots of interest from investors to fund our business plans and future growth. However, the rising energy crisis in the UK and around the world has concerned investors who can’t go ahead while wholesale prices are so high and the price cap – designed to protect customers –currently means suppliers provide energy at a significant loss. Wholesale prices have skyrocketed and continue to be extremely volatile. The gas supply shortage combined with lower exports from Russia and increased demand means they remain high and unpredictable. Prices have hit close to £4.00 per therm recently, compared with 50p per therm a year ago. We’ve always been big supporters of the idea of a price cap to protect customers, but the current price cap is set at a level around 70p per therm, well below the cost of energy. Those high energy costs had already forced 21 energy companies to collapse since the start of September - although none were as large as Bulb. Bulb also warns that more suppliers are expected to fail this winter: The news last week about Nord Stream 2 has sent gas prices back up again. Nord Stream 2 is a new gas pipeline from Russia to Europe which must be approved by Germany and the EU. Last week, Germany suspended its approval process, and there’s growing geopolitical pressure to scrap the project. As a result, the industry has seen many suppliers fail over the past few months and many more are expected to do so over the winter. Bulb has tweeted that moving into special administration is a ‘difficult decision’. The company adds that it will continue to operate as usual. It asks customers to only contact them in an emergency, or if they’re in a vulnerable situation or struggling to pay their bills. Newsflash: Bulb, the UK’s seventh biggest energy firm, is to enter special administration. Bulb will become the biggest UK supplier yet to collapse following the surge in global gas prices. The company has 1.7 million household customers, and says their supplies will be protected. A Bulb spokesperson says: We’ve decided to support Bulb being placed into special administration, which means it will continue to operate with no interruption of service or supply to members. If you’re a Bulb member, please don’t worry as your energy supply is secure and all credit balances are protected. In a blog post, the company explains that: Special administration is designed to protect the customers of a large energy supplier that’s become insolvent. The special administrator is required by the Government under the 2011 Energy Act to continue to supply energy to customers, and will protect customer credit balances. The process to appoint special administrators is not yet complete but we expect them to be appointed shortly. Our International businesses in France, Spain and Texas will continue trading. They are separate businesses from Bulb UK and are not immediately affected by us entering special administration in the UK. Germany’s central bank has warned that inflation could rise towards 6% this month, almost three times over target, even as the economy slows. The Bundesbank said in its monthly report that consumer prices saw “an exceptionally steep rise in the third quarter of 2021”. This was due to the surge in energy prices, and costlier industrial goods as supply chain shortages and shipping fees rise. The Bundesbank says: Prices saw a further substantial rise in October. Annual headline inflation rose from 4.1% in September to 4.6%. This month it could even reach just under 6% (CPI: just over 5½%), of which just over 1½ percentage points would be attributable to the two one-off effects. The Bundesbank fears that Germany’s economic recovery could pause this quarter (a worrying sign for the wider European and global economy), saying: Initially, there will probably be a brief pause in the economic recovery. From today’s perspective, GDP could broadly stagnate in the final quarter of 2021, after economic output already stopped rising over the course of the third quarter. The report also predicts that inflation will “decline perceptibly” earlier next year, although the bulk in gas prices will probably only be passed on to consumers after the turn of the year. Inflation is not expected to fall back to the eurozone’s 2% target soon. While, as things stand, headline inflation is likely to gradually continue falling in the following months, it could remain significantly above 3% for an extended period of time. It is conceivable that core inflation will be substantially over 2%. The Bundesbank also flagged that the global economic recovery lost significant momentum in the third quarter of 2021. The Delta variant, world supply chain tensions, the crisis at China’s property developer Evergrande, and hurricanes in the US were all factors, it says: Severe shortages of intermediate goods hindered economic activity in many regions. As the delta variant of the coronavirus spread, pandemic-induced burdens in some countries were also exacerbated again – a situation compounded yet further at times by other inhibiting factors. For instance, economic growth in China also slowed due to problems on the real estate market. In the United States, weather-induced production losses and the expiry of fiscal transfer payments were partly responsible for weaker growth. Recovery in the United Kingdom also continued at a substantially reduced pace. In the euro area, meanwhile, gross domestic product (GDP) saw renewed strong growth, but here, too, the recovery lost significant momentum over the course of the quarter. Sky News is reporting that Bulb, Britain’s seventh-biggest energy supplier, is facing collapse within days amid eleventh-hour talks between the government and the company’s biggest secured creditor. Here’s the story: Sky News has learnt that the company, which launched in 2015 and has amassed 1.7 million customers, is expected to appoint insolvency practitioners imminently. The precise timing remained unclear on Monday because of the complexity of the looming administration process and ongoing talks between the government and Sequoia Economic Infrastructure Income Fund, which has an outstanding secured loan of roughly £50m to Bulb’s parent company Simple Energy, according to industry sources. Sequoia is said to have demanded the repayment of its loan prior to Bulb being placed into administration, they added. A range of government departments and Ofgem, the industry regulator, began accelerating contingency plans for the collapse of Bulb last month. Under these plans, Bulb could be placed into a resolution process called a Special Administration Regime (SAR), which would guarantee funding for the company from the Treasury while administrators sought a restructuring deal, buyer or transfer of the customer base, Sky’s Mark Kleinman adds. More here. Bulb’s future has been unclear for weeks, as rescue talks with a small number of potential buyers have failed to reach a deal. Given Bulb’s size, industry insiders have suggested regulator would need to use a special administrator to keep the company running over winter before prices normalise. Oil is trading close to a seven-week low this morning, with Brent crude below $79 per barrel. That’s around 9% lower than the three-year highs set last month, when Brent hit $86.70 per barrel. And motoring bodies are pushing fuel retailers to pass these savings onto drivers, who have faced record prices at the pumps. Simon Williams, RAC fuel spokesperson, said over the weekend: “In the last few days the wholesale price of petrol has fallen steeply. “The biggest retailers are in a great position to cut prices and ease the burden being felt by drivers throughout the UK who are paying £80 for a full 55-litre tank. Interactive Investor’s Victoria Scholar has more details: Gas prices have eased back this morning, on speculation that lockdowns will hit demand for energy. The contract for next-day delivery in the UK down 3.2% at 208p per therm, away from the one-month high of 240p/therm set last week. European prices are also lower, with the Dutch benchmark contract for December delivery down 5.5% this morning. Here’s Reuters’ take: “Corona fears are highlighted heavily now,” a gas trader said. Market players are monitoring the return of restrictions to stem the spread of COVID-19 as cases rise significantly across Europe. Germany has declared an emergency status and there is a possibility that it could be next along with France to face some degree of lockdown. Austria and the Netherlands have already implemented full or partial lockdowns. “Our outlook for today is for prices to continue to remain under bearish pressure with the potential reintroduction of new lockdowns across Northwest Europe as case numbers increase by the day,” Refinitiv analysts said. Despite today’s falls, wholesale gas prices are still over three times higher than at the start of this year. Henning Gloystein, director at Eurasia Group, warns that the colder weather will push demand up. Wholesale electricity prices have also surged this year: The boss of the British Airways owner, IAG, has said its transatlantic bookings had already reached nearly 100% of 2019 levels after the United States dropped restrictions earlier this month, Reuters reports. Luis Gallego told the Airlines UK conference that the group was recovering, and he expected a return to pre-pandemic flying levels by 2023. He said: Now as the world opens up, we are growing our capacity. Transatlantic bookings have already reached almost 100% of 2019 levels. I expect North Atlantic routes to reach full capacity by next summer. Gallego warned however that a move by London’s Heathrow Airport to hike charges could hit the recovery: If the rise in landing charges goes ahead, I know IAG would not be alone in reconsidering our airlines’ use of Heathrow as a port. More here: Shares in Marks &amp; Spencer have jumped to their highest in two and a half years on reports that New York-based Apollo Global Management had mulled a buyout. The Sunday Times reported that the US private equity giant has been “running the rule” over the high street chain. City sources said Apollo had considered M&amp;S a bargain, believing the company’s shares were being weighed down unreasonably by the impact of Covid. M&amp;S shares had already rallied in recent months, after lifting its profit forecast in August and again this month. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says Apollo is interested in M&amp;S’s food aisles and in particular the tie-up with Ocado. And the pandemic, and Brexit, make companies such as M&amp;S good value to overseas predators. Streeter explains: Apollo has flirted with other acquisitions in the UK grocery sector, losing out in its quest for Asda, and then pulling out after making advances for Morrisons. Given its thwarted attempts so far, there is growing expectation that the group may make an offer for the company, particularly given that food was such a star performer in the last set of results. Apollo will be weighing up the future value of Marks and Spencer’s e-commerce tie-up with Ocado, and speculation that its success so far may lead the retailer to buy out Ocado’s 50% share indicates the weight of expectation about its growth prospects. However, shares have surged more than 27% since those impressive results and if the price continues to climb, there is a chance Apollo may turn into more of a reluctant suitor. It does demonstrate how the UK is still near the top of private equity shopping lists, with valuations of UK listed companies dragged down while the economy continues to reverberate with problems caused by the pandemic and Brexit after-effects. The mutual insurer LV= has claimed that a takeover by the private equity firm Bain Capital will result in £212m in extra distributions for members, as it tried to fight back against criticism of its decision to demutualise. The 178-year-old life insurance and pensions provider, formerly known as Liverpool Victoria, has accepted an approach by the US private equity firm Bain Capital for £530m, in a controversial deal that would end its member-owned status. However, members must back the takeover in a vote on 10 December. The majority would receive a payout of only £100 from the deal, a sum that has been criticised by some as a meagre return for the loss of mutual status and the prospect of ownership by a private equity firm, which often insist on job losses or cost cutting to achieve higher profits. FTSE 250-listed precious metals producer Hochschild Mining has tumbled nearly 40% this morning, after Peru’s government announced plans to shut two of its gold and silver mines on environmental grounds. On Friday night, Peruvian prime minister Mirtha Vasquez announced that a group of four mines in the Andean Ayacucho region will be closed “closed as soon as possible”. The move dashed miners’ hopes of extensions to their operational plans for extra mining or exploration work, following protests by local communities in recent weeks. Vasquez said the government would help broker terms for the shutdown of four mines, which includes Hochschild’s sites at Pallancata and Inmaculada. She explained: “We will close the mines as soon as possible. “There will be no extensions, whether for exploitation, exploration or even shutdown.” The moves deepens a clash between the country’s mining industry and its left-leaning government. Hochschild, which operates silver and gold mines in North, Central and South America, told the City it believes the move is unlawful, and vowed to “vigorously defend its position”. Ignacio Bustamante, CEO, commented: “Hochschild is surprised by this unilateral announcement by the Head of Cabinet. Our goal is to continue investing in Peru, growing our resources and extending mine lives, in accordance with the Peruvian legal framework. We are prepared to enter into a dialogue with the government in order to resolve any misunderstandings with respect to our mining operations. However, given the illegal nature of the proposed action, the Company will vigorously defend its rights to operate these mines using all available legal avenues.” Hochschild’s shares tumbled over 50% in early trading to their lowest since 2016, and are currently down 39% at 101p. In Milan, shares in Telecom Italia have jumped over 23% after receiving a €10.8bn takeover from US private equity giant KKR. Other telecoms stocks are also rallying, with BT Group (+3.2%) among the FTSE 100 risers. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, says KKR’s bid has lifted the sector: “European markets have started the week on a positive note with telcos leading the gains thanks to KKR’s $12bn takeover approach for Telecom Italia, which opened up by more than 25%. The offer signals a broader appeal to deep-pocketed US private equity giants of the European telecoms sector and could provide much needed support to the Italian business which has struggled with two profit warnings this year. European stock markets have opened higher, recovering from a choppy week. In London the FTSE 100 index has gained 30 points or 0.4% to 7253 points, having closed at a four-week low on Friday. Austria’s ATX share index has gained 0.4%, having tumbled 3% on Friday. The euro is weakening this morning, as Austria’s new lockdown worries the markets. It’s down 0.2% against the US dollar at $1.126, close to a 16-month low. This lifted sterling to a 21-month high against the euro this morning, at €1.1929 for the first time since February 2020. Kyle Rodda of IG explains: In Europe, fresh lockdowns has cast another pall on the Eurozone’s anaemic fundamentals and fledgling post-COVID recovery, with surging case numbers and tighter restrictions in Austria, Germany and the Netherlands threatening to weaken the region’s growth further. Jim Reid, strategist at Deutsche Bank, says that investors are watching for signs that other European countries could be forced to bring in new curbs: Covid will be the focus, especially in Europe as Austria enters lockdown today after the shock announcement on Friday. Germany is probably the swing factor here for sentiment in Europe so case numbers will be watched closely. Boris Johnson will seek to boost the UK’s clean energy credentials after a tricky UN climate crisis conference by announcing that all new buildings in England will be required to install electric vehicle charge points from next year. In a speech to the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) in the north-east of England on Monday, the prime minister will reveal plans, briefed as “world-leading”, to toughen up regulations for new homes and buildings. From next year developers on sites such as supermarkets and office blocks will be required to install electric vehicle charging points, in an attempt to help phase out the use of petrol and diesel cars before sales of them come to an end in 2030. The government expects the move to lead to 145,000 new charging points each year. More here.... The EY Item Club’s growth downgrade comes as the CBI holds its annual conference -- where it will warn ministers that they must work with business to level up regions and move to net zero. My colleague Juliette Garside explains: The CBI will today tell ministers that levelling up cannot be left to the free market, with regions suffering from decades of a “benign neglect” that has left the country with a “branch-line economy” where too many companies are centred on London and the south-east. Speaking in Port of Tyne at the start of the business group’s three-day annual conference, the CBI director general, Tony Danker, will argue the UK now has a “shot at redemption” if the high-quality jobs needed to move the economy towards net zero are created in former industrial heartlands. “Simply saying the market will fix this is not good enough,” Danker will say. “There are free-marketeers in the debate who say government should never play an active role like this. But I don’t know a country in the world – including, and indeed especially, the United States – where governments aren’t active in economic geography.”... Danker will call for a partnership, saying neither the government nor business can solve levelling up alone. “Since the 1980s, we let old industries die – offering little more than benign neglect for what got left behind. It was an economic policy that was ambivalent about levelling down.” Here’s the full story: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Britain’s economy will grow slower this year and next year than previously hoped, as ongoing supply chain disruption and rising prices drag back growth. So warns the EY Item Club this morning, as it predicts that the ‘tougher’ part of the recovery is upon us. In its autumn forecasts, it warns that ‘higher and more sustained inflation’, recent rises in energy prices, and intensifying supply chain disruption mean the recovery won’t be as strong as hoped. EY now sees UK GDP rising by 6.9% this year, down from 7.6% forecast in the summer [but still the best year since 1941, after last year’s near-10% plunge] But growth in 2022 is also seen lower - at 5.6%, down from 6.5% forecast before. By 2023, growth is back down to 2.3%, before sagging to a lacklustre 1.8% in 2024 and 2025. Martin Beck, the chief economic advisor to the EY ITEM Club, says: “With the boost from reopening the economy now largely passed, the UK was always expected to enter a tougher phase of the recovery. Record growth is still forecast, but there are persistent headwinds as we approach the end of the year: pandemic-related policy support is being withdrawn, supply chain disruption and shortages have been more severe than expected, and the scope for catch-up growth has been run down. With households being squeezed by inflation, EY has now cut its forecast for consumer spending this year from 4.8% to 3.9% growth, and for next year to 6.8% from 7.4% Beck warns that household incomes will not keep pace with rising prices: “Although inflation looks like it’ll peak higher – and stay higher for longer – than first anticipated, it doesn’t look like this will tip into ‘stagflation’, the combination of sluggish growth and persistent high inflation. The inflationary landscape will probably contribute to real household incomes falling around the turn of the year, slowing the rebound in consumer spending and decelerating the strong recovery seen earlier in 2021. But there are still reasons for optimism, with EY seeing a smaller increase in unemployment than feared, due to the success of the furlough scheme. The jobless rate is now seen peaking at 4.6% early next year, up from 4.3% in the last quarter. Back in July, EY had forecast a post-furlough unemployment rate peak of 5.1% in the second half of this year. Beck explains: “Despite these challenges, the UK economy has made some significant progress in regaining pandemic-related losses and the recovery is far from out of steam. Looking at the big picture, the economy has recovered much faster than was expected at the start of this year. Clear grounds for economic optimism remain too. While not every household has been able to save more over the last year or so, the build-up of household savings means consumers are in a good position overall. Meanwhile, the labour market is healthy and businesses have built up robust balance sheets. Long-term economic scarring from the pandemic is likely to be minimal.” But... Europe’s pandemic risks have not lifted, as Austria awakes to its fourth national lockdown. Austria’s 20-day nationwide partial lockdown is the toughest in western Europe for months, with Vienna also making vaccination mandatory for all from February, prompting protests over the weekend: Travel stocks have come under pressure, falling on Friday after Austria’s lockdown was announced, as investors worry that Europe’s recovery may be hurt by fresh restrictions this winter. Analysts at MUFG Bank say: Market participants are becoming more fearful of downside risks to growth in Europe. The latest COVID wave has already prompted policymakers to re-tighten restrictions. It joins the energy price shock, geopolitical tensions with Russia and the developing currency crisis in Turkey on the list of worries for European investors. In contrast, the U.S. economy has regained upward momentum and the Fed’s communication is turning more hawkish. The agenda 11am GMT: Bundesbank Monthly Report 1.30pm GMT: Chicago Fed national activity index for October 3pm GMT: Eurozone consumer confidence flash estimate for November 3pm GMT: US existing home sales for October“They’ll be fine. I’ll watch them and support them,” stuttered Ole Gunnar Solskjær, fighting back the tears in his emotional farewell interview on Sunday – and as a Manchester United fan it was hard not to feel the same sadness. Yes, the team may be eighth in the Premier League having recently been torn apart by a Watford side fighting relegation, but that should not be the only way Solskjær’s tenure is remembered. Let’s not forget that under Ole there’s been some memorable wins, record‑breaking away runs and a sense of a return to the United ethos in giving youth a chance, an idea to which José Mourinho, despite his promises, often only paid lip service. For much of Ole’s reign, pride was restored, whether it was thanks to some desperately needed Manchester derby wins, a clutch of free-scoring games, or brief dalliances with the summit of the Premier League. Ultimately, though, much like Bayern Munich in those final few minutes in the Nou Camp in 1999, Solskjær’s successes seemed to be undermined by falling apart at the final hurdle, or more often the semi-final one. United’s failure to lift the Europa League in Gdansk may be one that is looked back upon with almost the same level of regret as either of United’s Champions League final defeats to Pep Guardiola’s Barcelona. Missing out on Europe’s biggest prize undoubtedly hurt more, but they weren’t necessary in cementing Sir Alex Ferguson’s legacy. Lifting the Europa League may just have given Ole the belief, along with the breathing room, he needed to make this season the success it once promised to be. The arrivals of Jadon Sancho, Raphaël Varane and some goat called Ronnie moved the goalposts to a new “XG” as the kids say, one where it was no longer acceptable just to finish in the top four, but to truly challenge for the title. Ole the player is a legend and will always remain so, Solskjær the manager was one who flattered but ultimately deceived as he was unable to build on the euphoria of nights like Paris or long unbeaten away runs to add to the Old Trafford trophy cabinet. Regardless of his shortcomings as a coach, there’s little doubt that Ole, like his predecessors, was massively undermined by a lack of structure at the club, a total absence of a plan by those in charge and the carelessness of the owners. United has been a money‑making machine for the Glazer family ever since they took over but what’s been almost equally infuriating as the money the owners have bled from the club, is the funds squandered on transfers due to a lack of foresight. David Moyes, Louis van Gaal, Mourinho and now Solskjær all made signings they felt would enable United to win the title and all failed. Other than Ole, although it’s likely to ensue, they have all seen their successors go on to replace expensive recruits with ones of their own. This is no way to run a football club, let alone one that claims to be the biggest in the world and the manager’s failures have been a symptom rather than a cause of United’s problems. No matter which avenue the Old Trafford hierarchy have gone down when it comes to managerial appointments, like a blindfolded bus driver they’ve ended up careering into a brick wall, with us passengers in the back watching in horror. Moyes was the reliable Premier League stalwart, Van Gaal the venerable statesman, Mourinho the closest you’d get to a guaranteed league title, yet ultimately they all failed, as did Ole. Why? Did they all suddenly stop being able to win football matches on a regular basis? Did they lose the ability to coach a team or spot a weakness in an opponent? No, the only common denominator is they had to work under a flawed system that has proven for the past eight years to be completely broken. A system where bankers like Ed Woodward are given the authority to make monumental decisions based on zero footballing knowledge. It’s a joke – and it isn’t funny any more. Someone with actual football experience needs to be involved above the manager’s level. Darren Fletcher and, to a lesser degree [football director] John Murtough, may be a step in the right direction but it’s hard not to be cynical about the amount of influence they’ll have. What many of us would give for an Edwin van der Sar to take over from Woodward. Almost a billion pounds has been wasted on transfers and while United fans rightly point the finger at too much of the club’s money heading into the Glazers’ bank accounts rather than the transfer market, we cannot ignore the catalogue of signings who have failed at the club. Can Erik ten Hag, Mauricio Pochettino or Brendan Rodgers, fix United under this system? Or maybe we’d be better off writing a letter to Santa Claus to see if he can deliver a title? Will United ever get back to winning titles and Champions Leagues? Under the current regime I seriously doubt it, but in the words of Ole when asked if he was always going to be welcome at Old Trafford: “I hope so.” Jay Motty is a lifelong Manchester United fan who is part of the Stretford Paddock YouTube channel.Radical plans ranging from strict restrictions on second home ownership to setting up a publicly owned energy company and driving forward a free nationwide social care system have been announced in an agreement between the Labour-led Welsh government and the nationalists, Plaid Cymru. Details of the “cooperation agreement” were unveiled by the Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, and the leader of Plaid, Adam Price, on the steps of the Welsh parliament building, the Senedd, on Monday. The three-year agreement covers almost 50 policy areas and also includes the delivery of free school meals to all primary school pupils, a commitment to bolster the Welsh language and understanding of the country’s history, and exploring an increase in the number of Senedd members. Drakeford said: “We do not have a monopoly on good ideas and we will work with progressive parties where we have shared and common interests to benefit people in Wales.” Welsh Labour won 30 of the 60 seats at the last election, one short of an absolute majority. Working with Plaid, which has 13 seats, will create what Drakeford called a “stable Senedd” capable of delivering “radical change and reform”. Drakeford refused to be drawn on whether the three-year lifespan of the deal indicated how long he intended to remain first minister. He said he stuck by his pledge to remain as first minister and make sure the party was “thoroughly established” in this Senedd term. Price said the agreement was a “historic” step forward to Wales and a “radical counterpoint” to the confrontational nature of Westminster politics. “We’re setting out a new way of doing politics,” he said. The Plaid leader also said his party would have the best of both worlds, pushing forward some of its most important priorities while still opposing Labour in areas not covered in the agreement. The parties emphasised that it was not a coalition, but a “bespoke agreement”. No Plaid members join the government as ministers or deputies, but is understood Plaid special advisers will be allowed to work within the Welsh government’s offices. Among the plans outlined are: “Immediate and radical action” to address the crisis of second homes and unaffordable housing, using the planning, property and taxation systems. Actions being planned include a cap on the number of second and holiday homes. A publicly owned energy company for Wales could be created to encourage community-owned renewable energy generation. Appoint a commission of independent advice to examine potential pathways to net zero by 2035 – the current target date is 2050. Set up an expert group to support the creation of a “national care service”, free at the point of need. Implementation plan to be agreed by by the end of 2023. Extend free school meals to all primary school pupils, over the lifetime of the agreement. Establish a national construction company to support councils and social landlords to improve the supply of social and affordable housing. Support plans to reform the Senedd, increasing its membership to between 80 and 100 members and having gender quotas enshrined in law. Improve the teaching of Welsh history and make its delivery mandatory in the new curriculum for Wales. Set new ambitions and incentives to expand the proportion of the education workforce who can teach and work through the Welsh language. Prof Laura McAllister, of the Wales governance centre at Cardiff University, described the agreement as a “curate’s egg”, important, radical policies sitting alongside promises to explore and investigate. She said she believed Drakeford was keen to make sure his legacy was not confined to his handling of the Covid crisis. For Plaid, which finished third at May’s elections, it was a foothold in power. The Welsh Conservative shadow minister for the constitution, Darren Millar, said: “This deal fails to deliver on the priorities of the people of Wales. It does nothing to address the crisis in our NHS; nothing to improve our ailing Welsh infrastructure; and nothing to fire up our sluggish economy.” The agreement is subject to ratification by the Plaid Cymru membership at its annual conference on Saturday. The cooperation agreement is due to come into force on 1 December.Lewis Hamilton will go into the crucial penultimate round of the Formula One season with a vital advantage in his Mercedes car. After Hamilton’s win in Sunday’s Qatar Grand Prix the Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, confirmed he would be reverting to his newest engine at the next meeting in Saudi Arabia, which may make the difference in the world champion’s title fight with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen. The championship is finely poised. Hamilton’s victory in Qatar closed the gap to Verstappen to just eight points with 52 available from the two remaining meetings. Mercedes lead Red Bull by just five points in the constructors’ contest. The lead has changed hands between Hamilton and Verstappen five times already but the latter’s slim advantage means he could secure the title in Saudi Arabia on 5 December. Thanks to his nine race wins to Hamilton’s seven so far this season, he will be champion if he wins and takes fastest lap and Hamilton finishes sixth or lower, or if he wins and Hamilton finishes lower than seventh. Yet barring a failure to finish from the world champion, the most likely outcome is that the two drivers will face off for the title at the season finale in Abu Dhabi on 12 December. Mercedes are confident they have the tools to ensure the championship goes to the wire. Hamilton won on Sunday at the Losail circuit with a dominant run from pole to flag, with pace Verstappen was unable to match. However Mercedes have more to unleash at the next round. They will be using the new engine Hamilton took for the Brazilian GP and with which he scythed through the field from 10th to victory. They did not use the engine in Qatar because of the preponderance of high-downforce corners at the Doha circuit. The high-speed straights of the Jeddah circuit in Saudi Arabia, however, will reward raw power, and with their engine used only once and having at most two more races to go, Mercedes will be able to run it at its maximum output. “It is long straights and we will get our spicy equipment out: the engine for Saudi Arabia,” said Wolff. Andrew Shovlin, the Mercedes trackside engineering director, was optimistic Hamilton would be able to continue his run of form with two wins from the last two races. “If we look at the track in Saudi, I think it should suit us,” he said. “For Lewis, we have got the more powerful engine to go in the car, so that’s going to give him a useful engine.” Verstappen last took a new engine at the Russian GP, six races ago. Mercedes will also almost certainly employ their low-downforce wing which Red Bull have accused of bending under load on straights, reducing downforce illegally, and will likely protest against its use. Mercedes insist their wing complies with FIA regulations, while Hamilton believes his team have managed to bring the best out of their car at exactly the right moment. “As the year’s gone on, we’ve understood the car more,” he said. “We’ve definitely been able to squeeze more performance out of the package without bringing any upgrades. We’ve not had an upgrade since Silverstone, so it’s quite phenomenal to see the increments that we’ve been improving.”At my local garage, three police officers were buying coffee recently. None wearing masks. Do police personnel routinely take lateral flow tests? Is it controversial to say that when people don’t wear masks, other people unnecessarily get hospitalised and some die? Or to say that when people in authority don’t wear masks, others think, “Why should I?” Daily cases on Sunday: 40,004. James Bance Ruislip, London • Re the oldest Christmas puddings (Letters, 19 November), might I mention a visit to the Wagner museum in Lucerne, Switzerland. After gazing reverently at an unidentifiable black object, I found a label claiming: “This bread roll was used at the first performance of Parsifal.” Do not bring me your old puddings unless they are museum specimens. Anne Cowper Swansea • Surprising news from the London School of Economics that lobsters have feelings (Boiling of live lobsters could be banned in UK under proposed legislation, 19 November). I wasn’t aware that people involved in economics considered the feelings of others. Niall Gormley Moyne, County Longford • Please tell your Wordsearch compiler to be accurate and say: “Can you find 15 male philosophers, artists, scientists…” It will save a lot of disappointment among us optimistic readers. Vivienne Anderson Leeds • Four print pages on Solskjaer’s exit from Manchester United (22 November). For goodness sake, he is a football manager – where’s your sense of proportion? Dr Richard Carter Putney, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your leader on urban rewilding schemes (19 November) correctly points out the ecological value of brownfield sites such as Kent’s Swanscombe peninsula. But not all brownfield sites are as valuable, and a stronger “brownfield first” policy is still urgently needed to protect against the escalating loss of valued countryside. According to a 2021 CPRE report, there is enough brownfield land available for 1.3m new homes. Yet planning legislation favours building on greenfield sites, which is easier and more profitable for developers. Boris Johnson recently adopted “brownfield first” rhetoric, but will it guide Michael Gove’s new planning legislation? After Chesham and Amersham, and with more byelections coming up, ministers would do well to notice what’s happening in Kent on Sunday. Campaign groups are coming together for a day of action, Save Kent’s Green Spaces. They know how much of the Garden of England will be lost if current plans for huge housing developments go ahead. Across the country, many are distressed at the suburbanisation of their countryside. Planning legislation must now be harnessed to protect nature and open spaces. Ros Coward London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.You rightly point out the concerns of human rights activists and international politicians that China could misuse Interpol’s capabilities to track down overseas dissidents if Hu Binchen is elected as an executive committee member (Chinese official seeks Interpol role, sparking fears for dissidents, 15 November). One should also note that Taiwan is not included in Interpol, meaning there is a missing part in the global fight against international crime and cybercrime. As cybercrime transcends borders, transnational cooperation is key to bringing international crime rings to justice. Taiwan’s police authorities have a hi-tech crime investigation unit and professional cybercrime investigators. Taiwan’s expertise will benefit global efforts to build a safer cyberspace. The global policing goals were endorsed by Interpol member countries in 2017, with the stated purpose of creating a safer and more sustainable world. No police agency or country should be excluded. We urge the international community to support Taiwan’s participation in Interpol. Huang Chia-lu Commissioner, Criminal Investigation Bureau, Taiwan • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your report (‘We have fallen into a trap’: Qatar’s World Cup dream is a nightmare for hotel staff, 18 November) fails to acknowledge the progress Qatar has made to improve living and working standards for foreign workers, including those in the hospitality sector. The impact of Qatar’s reforms is best highlighted through its numbers: over 240,000 workers have successfully changed jobs since barriers were removed in September 2020; more than 400,000 have directly benefited from the new minimum wage; improvements to the wage protection system now protect 96% of eligible workers from wage abuse; and hundreds of thousands of workers have left Qatar and returned without permission from their employer since exit permits were abolished. Enforcement too has been strengthened to safeguard workers and prosecute companies that violate the law. Again, the numbers tell the story: 35,280 accommodation and worksite inspections were carried out in the first half of 2021, and 13,724 penalties issued to violating companies. Systemic reform is a long-term process, and shifting the behaviour of every company takes time. Through its actions, the government is sending a strong message to companies that violations will not be tolerated. Not a single story from among the thousands of people who have benefited from Qatar’s labour reforms is highlighted in the article. Qatar has never shied away from acknowledging that its labour system is still a work in progress, but we expect reporting to present the facts as they stand. Going forward, Qatar remains firmly committed to cooperation, transparency and continuous improvement of its labour system. Fahad Al-Mana Media attache to the UK, government communications office of Qatar • This letter was amended on 23 November 2021 to correct the spelling of Fahad Al-Mana’s name in the subheading. • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.It is true that Lord Parekh’s report and its vision of multiculturalism was rejected by Conservatives (‘Crude racism’ fuelled by Tory rejection of multiculturalism, says Lord Parekh, 19 November), but it was actually New Labour that first turned its back on its findings, not long after its publication. A rapid backlash arose during David Blunkett’s tenure as home secretary (2001-04), embodied in policy proposals in 2001 for citizenship ceremonies and tests requiring proficiency in English language, and suggestions in 2002 that immigrants should speak only English at home, and that arranged marriages among south Asian communities should not involve partners from the Indian subcontinent. This sea change was given further impetus by Trevor Phillips, then head of the Commission for Racial Equality, in his interview with the Times in 2004, in which he called for an end to the political and social goal of multiculturalism, claiming it was “out of date and no longer useful, not least because it encouraged ‘separateness’ between communities”, in the words of the Times’s report. A clearly emergent policy shift away from multiculturalism gained speed and momentum from 2006 onwards, with speeches espousing this move given by the then prime minister, Tony Blair, reflecting on the “duties” of those wishing to settle in Britain to conform to “British values”. This distortion of the aims of multiculturalism was, of course, enthusiastically promoted by the rightwing press, which routinely dismissed multiculturalism as a failed experiment. So while it is right to criticise the Tories, we should perhaps reflect a little more on the wider political context of the rejection of multiculturalism and its values. Bethan Benwell Blackford, Perth and Kinross • Re your article (‘We’ll never be accepted’: Yorkshire’s Asian community absorbs Rafiq story, 19 November), does it not strike you that the phrase British Asian is itself a token of non-acceptance? Why do we persist in calling Mr Rashid, Mr Raje and Mr Sajawal Asians, with the qualifying adjective British? They are British and if, as in this article, you need to highlight their ethnicity for the purpose of the argument, then surely they are Asian Britons, not British Asians? Asians is a very silly label, covering people from Turkey to Japan. Martin Rose Saffron Walden, Essex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Rudy Guede, the only person definitively convicted of the murder of the British student Meredith Kercher, could be freed in the coming days after completing 13 years of a 16-year sentence. Guede’s sentence is due to end on 4 January, but he has asked magistrates to reduce it by a further 45 days. Fabrizio Ballarini, Guede’s lawyer, said on Monday that the supervising magistrate was evaluating the request and if granted, Guede would be released straight away. “We don’t know when the decision will come, it could be tomorrow morning, the end of this week or early next,” he added. Kercher, a 21-year-old student from Coulsdon, Surrey, was murdered in her home in the university town of Perugia in November 2007. Her body was found in her bedroom, partly undressed with multiple stab wounds. She had also been sexually assaulted. Guede was initially sentenced to 30 years in prison in 2008 after a fast-track trial, but that was reduced on appeal to 16 years. The convictions of two other suspects, Amanda Knox, an American student who shared the house with Kercher, and her Italian former boyfriend, Raffaele Sollecito, were overturned. Guede, 35, was first granted day release from Viterbo prison in 2017 to complete a master’s degree, and before the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic he had been working in the library of the town’s criminology centre. After the centre closed because of the pandemic, Guede started working as a volunteer for the Catholic charity Caritas. In December 2020, he was entrusted to social services to complete his sentence doing community service, meaning he did not have to return to prison at night. “This is only granted to prisoners with a positive prison curriculum and he had the requisites to be able to ask,” said Ballarini. Knox and Sollecito spent four years in prison after initially being convicted of Kercher’s murder. They were acquitted in 2011 before being convicted again in 2014 by an appeals court in Florence, which ruled that the multiple injuries inflicted on Kercher’s body proved that Guede could not have acted alone. Italy’s highest court overturned the decision in a definitive ruling in 2015, because of what it described as “stunning flaws” in the investigation that led to the convictions of Knox and Sollecito.Pissing off the boss is rarely a good plan and losing lots of football matches is even worse. Do both and it can only really end one way. It doesn’t matter if you’re a season ticket holder and possibly the most important coach your club has had in half a century, the man who took them up for the first time in 24 years and returned again as saviour six years later to keep them there, if you’ve taken charge of more games than anyone else, or even if you were in charge every time they finished above the relegation zone in primera since 1977, and Fran Escribá knew that. Which is why he told everyone he was going before they did. Elche hadn’t yet announced Escribá’s sacking when Escribá announced Escribá’s sacking on Sunday evening. “Bragarnik informed me that I have been fired,” he said as he arrived in the press room at the Martínez Valero after their latest defeat, 3-0 at home against Betis. “I’m not going to analyse the game; doing so doesn’t make any sense now. This is a chance to say goodbye. I bid farewell to you lot and to the fans, who I love.” There wasn’t much analysis to offer, even if Escribá had wanted to, his sacking not that much of a surprise. His team have won just twice all season – 1-0 against Getafe and against Celta – picking up two of the last 18 points. This was Elche’s seventh loss, their fourth in six, leaving them second bottom. It was also their worst. Only Villarreal had defeated them by more than one goal but Betis blew them away, 3-0 up after 26 minutes and able to take the rest of the afternoon off, which Escribá can now do too. There were no more goals, Darío Benedetto mostly watching from the touchline where, left out of the starting lineup for a fifth game running, he warmed up without getting on even though they needed goals and he’s a striker who joined Elche having scored 45 at Boca Juniors and 17 across two seasons at Marseille. He is also the club’s owner. Well, he is one of them. Benedetto is a client and now business partner of Cristián Bragarnik and a shareholder in Score Group, the company Bragarnik set up and which has owned Elche since buying control in December 2019. Bragarnik doesn’t talk all that often, which is a pity because he would have quite a story to tell, one with a cast of characters to carry a Netflix series, or so it goes. How much of it is true is another matter but this is the man who one interviewer spoke to in his office below a picture of Al Pacino as Tony Montana, two bullets balanced on the frame it was in. “I haven’t found a film that represents me like Scarface,” he told Roberto Parrottino that day, citing memories of the madness he found in Mexico. And if there is one thing Bragarnik knows it is films. That and football. Bragarnik was a striker who played in Primera D – the fifth tier of Argentinian football – but didn’t score a lot of goals, and walked away after a game in 1999. His team scored seven but even then he didn’t get any of them, which he took as a sign to stop. A qualified lawyer, he started working in the Leyland Video Club in Flores, Buenos Aires, where in quiet spells he started taping over VHS tapes no one wanted to watch with clips of football, conjuring up visions of Trainspotting in reverse. One day a customer and a footballer from Tallares called Mariano Monrroy told him he was struggling to get a club. Bragarnik offered to help, and had soon secured him a move to Mexican club Irapauto. And so, it began. More deals followed. Impressed, Querétaro (effectively Irapauto’s owners) employed Bragarnik as an advisor to run the club but it turned out that the main investor there was Tirso Martínez Sánchez. Known as El Futbolista, Martínez Sanchez was extradited in New York because of his connections to the Juárez and Sinaloa cartels, led by Chapo Guzmán, and sentenced to seven years in jail. That ended Bragarnik’s time there but he later returned to Mexico with Club Tijuana, owned by one of the sons of a famous, charismatic former city mayor with a private zoo. Jorge Hank Rhon was arrested in 2011, 88 firearms and almost 10,000 rounds of ammunition found at his home but subsequently released without charge and Bragarnik insisted that the inevitable association of everything in the city with crime was as unfair as it was facile: Tijuana, he insisted, was just a normal club. Bragarnik became one of the most significant figures in Argentinian and Mexican football, representing over 50 players and advising clubs. He took Défense y Justicia up from the second tier and Diego Maradona to Mexico. When there were rumours that Maradona might become the new manager of Elche, he reportedly gave the squad Maradona shirts telling them that was as close as they were going to get but other Argentinians and other clients did come. There are seven Argentinians in the squad now. Elche were promoted to the first division in summer 2020, but Bragarnik – who bought it five months earlier, later expanding his shareholding to over 90%, in a deal valued at a total of around €28m plus the debts taken on – had already informed the coach José Rojo “Pacheta” that he would be leaving anyway, denied the chance to continue. They began in primera with Argentinian Jorge Almirón in charge instead. It was his first time in Spain and it didn’t go well. Elche started by winning three of their first five matches but then didn’t win again under Almirón. He was sacked after 21 league games, having picked up four points from 36. Fran Escribá, born up the coast in Valencia, the man who had taken them to the first division in 2013 and then left in 2015 when despite finishing 13th they were administratively relegated because of the financial crisis that could have put them out of business, returned to rescue them. They survived on the final day with a 2-0 win over Athletic Club, 3,518 people in the stadium on the first day any fans had been allowed in for 18 months. “This is the most important moment of my career,” Escribá said at the end of a dramatic final day. “I’m exhausted and just want to go home now.” Back in May, Bragarnik had given a long press conference to explain his approach. He returned to Elche after the pandemic, taking a hands-on role, no absentee owner. There was a commitment to keep Escribá, a man he described as “belonging” and at the start of this season Elche made eight signings. Then to everyone’s surprise and excitement too, they added Javier Pastore. Those new players included Benedetto, not just a footballer but – along with Gustavo Bou, a striker at New England Revolution – a shareholder in Score Group. Part owner of the club he plays for, in other words. Elche were only beaten once in the opening five games. But now it’s over; now Escribá has gone home. “The president hasn’t taken into account the many things I have done for this club,” he said. “But that’s not a reproach: he’s the owner and he does what he wants. All I can do is respect that decision.” The decision is not without its reasoning, either, and not just because of a disconnect and a hint of distrust revealed by the way it all ended. As Escribá himself put it: “this club’s place is higher up.” Even last year saw them forced to wait on the pitch for the score from Huesca in order to stay up on the final day, their fate not in their own hands. In the end, they survived with 36 points, 18 points from 17 games only just a good enough ratio to remain in the first division extrapolated over a season. Cautious by nature, there has been little creativity, a sense that Escribá has not been sure of his best side as he tries to accommodate a changed squad. Edgar Badia’s absence in goal – out of the blue, he played for the second time this weekend – has been symbolic of that. Lucas Boyé has impressed again, but of the new signings Lucas Pérez has not been consistent, Guido Carrillo hasn’t scored, Pastore has started four times, and Benedetto has scored twice, but not started in five. And the bottom line is simple: they are in the relegation zone. “I felt able to turn it around,” Escribá insisted but Elche have begun the search for a new coach, who they hope can get more from those players and who they hope to have in place within 48 hours. Hernán Crespo is one name to have emerged. “I hope they get the right man,” Escribá said. “Beyond the fact that people might be angry now, when times goes by that will pass, the bad results will be forgotten and all the good things that have happened will be what’s left behind. I’m proud and happy of everything we did at this city and at this club and no one will take that away from us. You can buy a club but you can’t buy the love of the people and in the end that’s what I take with me.”A vehicle ploughed into a Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin, on Sunday afternoon, killing at least five people and injuring more than 40. Here’s what we know so far: A red sports utility vehicle (SUV) drove at speed into marchers at a Christmas parade in Waukesha, about 20 miles (32km) west of Milwaukee on Sunday afternoon. Eyewitnesses estimated the car was travelling at about 40mph (64km/h) when it struck the crowds. Waukesha authorities have confirmed at least five people have died and more than 40 people were injured. Authorities have identified Darrell E Brooks, a 39-year old man, as the suspect. Brooks was in custody and has been charged with five counts of intentional first-degree homicide. The victims have been identified as: Tamara Durant and Jane Coolidge, both 52; Leanna Owens, 71; Virginia Sorenson, 79; and Wilhelm Hospel, 82. Eleven adults and 12 children have been taken to hospital. The Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin said it had received 15 patients from the parade and no reported fatalities as of 8pm Sunday. At least 10 children remain in intensive care, with injuries ranging from broken bones to serious head wounds The Milwaukee Dancing Grannies posted on its Facebook page that some of its members were among the dead. The organization, which describes itself as a “group of grannies that meet once a week to practice routine for summer and winter parades”, wrote: “Our group was doing what they loved, performing in front of crowds in a parade putting smiles on faces of all ages, filling them with joy.” The police department said on Monday morning the toll of dead and injured could rise. Police confirmed an officer fired his gun in an attempt to stop the vehicle. Daniel Thompson, police chief of Waukesha said he is confident Brooks “acted alone” and that “there is no evidence that this is a terrorist incident”. Investigators told news outlets they were questioning Brooks about an earlier crime, which one described as an argument involving a knife. The official cautioned the investigation was still in the early stages. Governor Tony Evers and his wife expressed his condolences to the victims, writing that they were “praying for Waukesha tonight and all the kids, families, and community members affected by this senseless act” and praising first responders and bystanders. In Washington, Joe Biden was being kept up to date on developments. The parade, held every year on the Sunday before Thanksgiving, is sponsored by the city’s Chamber of Commerce. This year’s event, the 58th, had the theme of “comfort and joy”. A vigil has been planned for Monday evening.The Home Office inquiry into the rape and murder of Sarah Everard by a police officer will be chaired by Dame Elish Angiolini, formerly Scotland’s top prosecutor, the department has said. It will examine whether chances to identify her murderer, Wayne Couzens, as a danger to women before he attacked Everard in March 2021 were missed. Angiolini was chosen as chair of the inquiry, which will be in two parts, following consultation with the family of Sarah Everard. The issues involved will be familiar to Angiolini. In 2015 she chaired a review of rape for the Met, after being appointed by the then commissioner, Bernard Hogan-Howe. She led a government review into deaths in police custody, published in 2017. She also recently led a review into Scotland’s police complaints handling, investigations and misconduct published in November 2020. The home secretary, Priti Patel, said: “The Angiolini inquiry will shine a light on the failings that allowed a serving police officer to abuse his power in such a horrific manner and make recommendations for change within policing. Angiolini described it as “a pivotal moment for policing”. Past allegations of sexual misconduct by Couzens dating back to 2015, which are alleged to have been missed by policing, are under investigation, as are police vetting procedures. The results of the inquiries by two police watchdogs will be passed to the Angiolini review. Couzens has been jailed for a whole life term. The officer abused his position and his equipment to trick Everard into a car as she walked home in south London during lockdown. The home secretary had announced that an inquiry would be launched last month after Couzens’ sentencing. The Met has also set up its own inquiry, chaired by Louise Casey. The Home Office has refused to bow to calls to give its inquiry full powers, so it will be non-statutory. The government claims it will be quicker this way, but insists it could be converted into a statutory inquiry if needed. The first part of the inquiry will examine whether warning signs about Couzens were missed, and whether allegations made against him were properly handled. The second part will look at issues raised by part one, and will report to the home secretary as soon as possible. Patel, speaking to MPs in the Commons, described the case as “devastating” and said Angiolini would examine “how this monster was able to serve as a police officer for so long and seek to establish a definitive account of his conduct”. Patel added: “Part one will also seek to understand the extent to which his behaviour rang alarm bells with his colleagues.” Patel said it would start as non-statutory, meaning it cannot compel witnesses or documents, nor can people who mislead or lie to it face prosecution. She said: “Statutory inquiries can be long-running, with limited flexibility. Sometimes recommendations are not made for a number of years. “However, I will not rule out converting this into a statutory footing, should Dame Elish feel that she is unable to fulfil the terms of reference on a non-statutory basis.” Couzens, while serving in the Met, used his warrant card and handcuffs to get Everard, 33, into his car as she walked home in south London at the height of Covid lockdown restrictions in March. The restrictions were his probable pretext for stopping her. Couzens drove her to Kent before strangling her with his police belt and burning her body. Patel said: “Sarah Everard’s life was ended too early by an evil man whose job it was to protect her. We owe it to her and to her loved ones and her family to prevent something like this from ever happening again.” In 2015, when launching her review of rape for the Met, Angiolini spoke of a “toxic psychology” that led victims of sexual violence to blame themselves or feel shame.Keir Starmer has indicated he would bar MPs from using personal companies to reduce the tax they pay on second jobs, saying he would stop any Labour MPs from doing so straight away. Starmer’s comments came after it emerged that at least 10 MPs, one of them Labour, had channelled income from additional work through their own companies, which is legal but reduces the amount of tax they need to pay. An investigation by the Times found the MPs were paid in total about £1m via such arrangements. Sir Alastair Graham, former chairman of the committee on standards in public life, told the paper this “should be stopped as soon as possible”. “MPs should not be avoiding paying the taxes they’ve decided that the rest of the population should pay,” Graham said. Asked on Monday if any Labour MPs found to have put any outside earnings through a personal company should stop doing so, Keir Starmer said they should. “The answer to the question is very easy: yes,” he said during a media Q&amp;A following a speech by the Labour leader to the CBI annual conference in Birmingham. “The whole point of the registration and declaration scheme is that anybody can see transparently what is happening in relation to any income or donations.” Instead of paying income tax at a rate of up to 45%, the personal company will pay corporation tax at 19%. Further tax is then due when owners draw money out of the company, either via income tax or a tax on dividends, the higher rate of which is 32.5%. Starmer has already said that in power Labour would prevent MPs from carrying out any outside work, beyond a few exceptions for public interest reasons, such as MPs who are police or army reservists, or medical staff. The Labour leader, who was director of public prosecutions before entering parliament, has in the past given paid legal advice while an MP. Allies of Jeremy Corbyn have said Starmer was instructed in 2017 to not take a second job with law firm Mishcon de Reya. Starmer’s spokesman insisted Starmer turned it down himself. The investigation over tax minimisation comes less than a week after the Commons backed a plan to limit MPs’ scope to take on second jobs. While the plans are yet to be worked out, the focus is likely to be on political consulting, and on jobs which take up too much of an MP’s time. The vote, which saw the government amend a Labour motion, followed days of outcry after ministers decided to change the system by which MPs are disciplined to protect then-Tory backbencher Owen Paterson from punishment for what an official investigation said was a serious breach of lobbying rules. The government U-turned the next day, and Paterson resigned from parliament.Roman Abramovich will not attend Chelsea’s Champions League tie against Juventus at Stamford Bridge on Tuesday night despite travelling to London and making a rare visit to the stadium on Sunday. Chelsea’s owner, who has not been seen at a home game for more than three years, hosted Israel’s president, Isaac Herzog, at a small event. It was the first time Abramovich, who has not used the trip to meet Thomas Tuchel, has been at the club’s stadium since a delay over his application for a new UK visa led to him withdrawing it in 2018. The Russian billionaire travelled to London as an Israeli citizen and hosted Herzog as part of Chelsea’s ‘Say No To Antisemitism’ initiative. Abramovich also visited the Imperial War Museum to see the Holocaust Galleries he helped fund with donations. However, Abramovich’s schedule did not include space to watch the key match in Group H. A spokesperson for him said: “He has a previous commitment elsewhere to a charity which he supports.” Abramovich was present when Chelsea travelled to Porto to beat Manchester City in last season’s Champions League final. He met Tuchel on the morning after the game and spoke to Chelsea’s head coach about transfers and the club’s plans for this campaign. Tuchel praised Abramovich before his team’s game against Juventus, who lead Chelsea by three points at the top of their group. “He is a football fan,” the German said. “He’s in love with the game and in love with the details. He wants to know everything about it, about what is going on here in Cobham. We keep him posted because he has this genuine interest and genuine love for the game. “This is the most important thing and makes things very special. He wants to be entertained. He wants to be competitive. He wants to have the right attitude on the pitch. This is what he created here and it is amazing.” Chelsea will be out for revenge after losing 1-0 to Juventus in Turin two months ago. The European champions will qualify for the last 16 with a game to spare if they avoid defeat against Massimiliano Allegri’s team, who have already reached the knockout phase. Tuchel said Romelu Lukaku could be on the bench after recovering from an ankle injury, but Kai Havertz is a doubt with a hamstring problem and Mateo Kovacic is still out. Jorginho, Timo Werner and Christian Pulisic are all available.More than 75 people are feared dead after their boat capsized in stormy seas off the coast of Libya while attempting to reach Europe in one of the deadliest shipwrecks this year, according to the UN. Fifteen survivors were rescued by local fishers and brought to the port of Zuwara in north-western Libya. They said there were about 92 people onboard the vessel when the incident took place on 17 November. Most of those who died came from sub-Saharan Africa. According to aid workers, people smugglers are sending hundreds of people to sea this autumn, careless of stormy weather. Many of the journeys ended in tragedy. “This November, despite the bad weather, an increasing number of migrants has departed from Libya to attempt to reach Europe,’’ said Flavio Di Giacomo, Italy’s spokesperson for the UN’s International Organization for Migration (IOM). “These departures are dangerous even when the sea is calm, let alone in these weeks with the storms that have hit the central Mediterranean. That’s why, today more than ever, it is important that there is an immediate response to distress calls. Delaying rescue operations by up to five minutes can make the difference between the life and death of these people.’’ Last week, 10 people were found dead in the lower deck of a severely overcrowded wooden boat off the coast of Libya, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) reported. According to survivors rescued by the charity’s chartered vessel Geo Barents, those who died had suffocated after 13 hours on the cramped lower deck, where there had been a strong smell of fuel. Abdoulaye, one of the last survivors to leave the boat, barely had the time to understand what had happened to his fellow travellers before the MSF rescuers took his arm and helped him into the rescue lifeboat. “Let me see their bodies,” he told the team. “These are my brothers. We come from the same place, we went through Libya together. I need to tell their families they are dead. Please let me see them.” Some had to identify the body of a younger brother or friend who had died in front of them a few hours earlier. “It was horrific and infuriating at the same time. This is another tragedy at sea that could have been avoided,” said Fulvia Conte, MSF’s deputy search and rescue team leader on the Geo Barents. An estimated 1,300 people have died or gone missing while attempting to cross the central Mediterranean so far this year. In April, more than 120 died in a single incident. This autumn, since the beginning of October, nearly 170 people from Africa and the Middle East have died, overwhelmed by the waves or cold on the main migration routes attempting to reach Europe. The volunteer-run Mediterranean rescue hotline Alarm Phone said the most recent shipwreck was a “consequence of a lethal European migration policy that does everything to prevent people from reaching Europe and that does nothing to prevent ongoing mass drowning along its borders”. It added: “It is just a matter of time until we hear about the next shipwreck, and the one after that. We need radical political change, otherwise the Mediterranean will remain a liquid graveyard.’’To many families taking their excited children to Peppa Pig World, the most surreal aspect isn’t the pastel-hued streets or the giant cartoon animals milling around; it’s the soundtrack. Piped from speakers spread around the park, the can’t-get-it-out-of-your-head theme tune plays on a continuous loop, and parents could be forgiven for feeling they’ve entered a nightmare rather than a toddler’s dreamscape. Not so for Boris Johnson. The prime minister was so buoyed by his Sunday enjoying delights such an egg-shaped boat ride overlooked by Grampy Rabbit, where he was photographed grinning alongside his one-year-old son Wilfred and wife Carrie, that he was moved to praise the New Forest amusement park effusively in a speech to business leaders on Monday. Describing Peppa Pig World as “very much my kind of place”, Johnson said the children’s show that spawned it exemplifies “the power of UK creativity”. He cited the £6bn it has brought to the UK economy through its export to 118 countries, with theme parks also in the US and China. For good measure, he added: “No Whitehall civil servant could conceivably have come up with Peppa.” Johnson is no stranger to invoking children’s cartoons in high level speeches – he drew on the experience of Kermit the frog to communicate the challenges of responding to climate change to UN world leaders earlier this month. But Peppa Pig was one allusion too far for many on social media, who characterised Johnson’s rambling speech as “one of the weirdest yet”. Labour condemned it as “shambolic”. Johnson may have been using Peppa Pig to praise the private sector and have a dig at the BBC as well as the civil service, but he is far from the first to find himself fascinated by the mysterious power the show wields. The franchise has been telling the story of Peppa, who lives on a hill with Mummy Pig, Daddy Pig and little brother George, through hundreds of episodes for 17 years. The story has been translated into multiple languages around the world – she is especially popular in China – and has even sparked concerns in the US that children are picking up British accents. The creators have suggested the reason for its popularity lies in its emphasis on family, which is one of the few concepts that makes sense to very young children. They also spotted a gap in the market for an animated show starring a female character, and have tried to achieve a sense of playfulness and silliness that toddlers would find infectious, through the pigs’ snorts and muddy puddle-jumping. Sarah Ann Kennedy, who runs the animation course at the University of Central Lancashire and wrote two episodes of Peppa Pig, credits the show’s global popularity to its focus on “very universal issues”, from learning to ride a bike to going shopping or falling out with a friend. “What’s clever about it is it’s like a soap, they deal with very gentle issues that you have at that age which seem quite big to you,” she said. “Some other things are a bit complicated and can be a bit much.” The show hasn’t been immune to criticism, however. It stands accused of reinforcing gender stereotypes through its presentation of a traditional middle class nuclear family structure in which “daddy pig” works while “mummy pig” looks after the children. While Kennedy was pleased to see the “clever, funny, well-written” show given the prime ministerial seal of approval, she sees an irony in Johnson upholding the franchise as a shining example of British business at a time when funding for arts subjects is being cut in schools and universities. “When he makes comments like that you think, why don’t you put a bit more money towards the arts if you realise how much money it can make?”Alfie Hewett has spoken of the intense relief and his “floods of tears” after he was cleared to continue his career in wheelchair tennis after a change in classification rules. The 18-time grand slam champion had been expected to retire from his sport at the age of just 23 after the International Tennis Federation ruled that Perthes disease, a condition which affects Hewett that limits hip movement, was not sufficiently debilitating to necessitate the use of a wheelchair. A suspended sentence had hung over Hewett for two years as first the pandemic and then an appeal process held off implementation of the decision. But just a week after bidding farewell to his doubles partner, Gordon Reid, with whom he has won an astonishing 13 slam titles, Hewett confirmed he is set to keep playing. Hewett visited Amsterdam last week for new classification tests, with the ITF adjusting their criteria to eliminate from competition only those who could realistically compete while standing. “I barely got a wink of sleep the night before so I was pretty drained, just floods of tears,” Hewett said of the moment he learned of the decision. “I did have a glass of bubbly at the airport but the first thing I wanted to do was get some sleep because I was exhausted. Mentally and emotionally it was a very draining experience but obviously the best one. “Only now I realise how much it all really weighed on me. You’ve probably all felt it in your lives at some point when something so heavy is taken away you actually feel that lift off your shoulders, and I did. I just felt so much relief.” The Norfolk-born player received his assessment last week and revealed the news unexpectedly to a group of students after accepting an honorary degree from Easton and City College in Norwich. “I can actually tell you there will be more Alfie Hewett grand slams and Paralympics in the years to come,” he told the students. “My agent will shoot me for saying this, but I don’t care.” Hewett will now be able to compete in the Australian Open in January, where he lost in the final to Belgium’s Joachim Gerard in 2021. But the prospect of pairing up again with Reid will be just as important. The two men have dominated wheelchair doubles since forming their partnership five years ago and this year completed the calendar slam, winning at Flushing Meadows alongside Emma Raducanu. Last week, Hewett summed up his feelings about the partnership on Twitter. “Gordon, It’s been an absolute pleasure to be on this journey with you, whatever happens next I can always look back on the incredible memories we’ve made as a partnership. Thank you pal.”Boris Johnson has been criticised by senior business leaders and Conservative MPs for a “rambling” speech to top industry figures that saw him extensively praise Peppa Pig World, compare himself to Moses and imitate the noise of an accelerating car. The prime minister’s sprawling address to the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) was accused of lacking seriousness and professionalism. Johnson lost his place during the speech and spent 20 seconds repeating “forgive me” as he shuffled the printed pages on his podium. Some hoped the speech would be a chance for Johnson to announce proper policy in the pursuit of his “levelling up” agenda. However, the speech at the Port of Tyne near South Shields only contained an announcement about changing building regulations to ensure all new homes and buildings in England have electric vehicle charging points installed from next year. One of Johnson’s lengthier tangents was about his recent trip to Hampshire’s Peppa Pig World – an amusement park dedicated to a children’s cartoon character, which he opined on in an apparent dig at civil servants and the BBC. He said that “the true driver of growth is not the government”, but the private sector, whose energy and originality the prime minister praised. To illustrate this, he explained: “Yesterday I went, as we all must, to Peppa Pig World. Hands up if you’ve been to Peppa Pig World! “I loved it. Peppa Pig World is very much my kind of place. It has very safe streets, discipline in schools, heavy emphasis on new mass transit systems. Even if they’re a bit stereotypical about Daddy Pig.” Johnson explained that the “real lesson” he learned on the visit was that the popularity of the main character – who he said resembled a “Picasso-like hairdryer” – was evidence of “the power of UK creativity”. Johnson said the TV show “was rejected by the BBC and has now been exported to 180 countries” and now worth £6bn. “I think that is pure genius, don’t you? No government in the world, no Whitehall civil servant, would conceivably have come up with Peppa.” Johnson also imitated the sound of an accelerating car with grunts that the official Downing Street release transcribed as “arum arum aaaaaaaaag”. He also compared himself to Moses over his plan to help business invest in tackling climate change. The prime minister said: “I said to my officials the new 10 commandments were that ‘Thou shalt develop industries like offshore wind, hydrogen, nuclear power and carbon capture.’” However, senior business figures and some Tory MPs were deeply unimpressed. One senior backbencher said it was a “mess”, while another told the Guardian: “I thought today’s performance was the most embarrassing by a Conservative prime minister since last week’s PMQs. Someone needs to get a grip. He is losing the confidence of the party.” Juergen Maier, vice-chair of the Northern Powerhouse Partnership and a former chief executive of Siemens, told the Guardian it was a “failed speech”. He said the speech was a “massive opportunity” after an absence of detail about levelling up in recent months. But he said: “It was a flop. It was a ramble. There was lots of disjointed initiatives, some that obviously had no relevance at all … As a businessperson passionate about reindustrialising the north, it was just a huge disappointment.” Kitty Ussher, of business leaders’ group the Institute of Directors, said Johnson’s speech offered little to inspire confidence and was “inappropriate” in places. “What business leaders want more than anything is a calm and reassuring macroeconomic environment that gives them the confidence to invest for the future. We haven’t seen much of that in the reporting of the prime minister’s speech.” Two other business figures who were in the audience for the speech said they were surprised by Johnson’s promotion of Peppa Pig World, which is located more than 300 miles from the Port of Tyne where the speech was held. “It was interesting that he asked a group of business leaders in the north-east if they have travelled six hours down the road to Peppa Pig World and then talk about levelling up,” said Michael Stirrup, chief executive of IT consultancy Waterstons. “It shows a bit of a lack of understanding, I think.” “I wasn’t expecting a Peppa Pig reference,” said Neil Whittaker, director of marketing and communications at national training firm Learning Curve Group. “He seemed to lose his way quite a bit.” The GMB union described the speech as “hogwash”. Labour called it “shambolic” and proof of how unseriously Johnson takes business. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, commented: “No one was laughing, because the joke’s not funny any more.” Ed Davey, leader of the Liberal Democrats, said businesses needed clarity, but all they got was “rambling” from Johnson. He added: “The prime minister famously said he was going to ‘F’ business – the least he could do is to deliver a decent F-ing speech.” The prime minister was reported in 2018 to have said “fuck business” when questioned about the sector’s concerns over a no-deal Brexit. After the speech, Johnson was asked if he was OK by a journalist. The prime minister defended his performance, saying: “I think that people got the vast majority of the points I wanted to make, and I thought it went over well.”Netflix has bought Scanline, the visual effects company that has worked on films and television series including Game of Thrones, Zack Snyder’s Justice League and Stranger Things. It is the US streaming service’s first deal to take control of a major player in the in-demand special effects industry. Scanline VFX, which operates seven offices globally from its headquarters in Canada and employs more than 1,100 people, will become a “fully owned, semi-autonomous” Netflix subsidiary. The move comes weeks after Weta Digital, which has built characters and scenes for productions spanning Lord of the Rings to Avatar, sold its visual special effects technology arm to the US-based video game company Unity for $1.63bn (£1.22bn). The Netflix deal will allow the streaming company to focus Scanline’s attention on its ever-growing TV and film production slate. Scanline has already worked on original productions, including the big-budget Ryan Reynolds film 6 Underground and forthcoming titles including the star-studded comedy disaster film Don’t Look Up. Amy Reinhard, vice-president of studio operations at Netflix, said: “From the interstellar landscape of Cowboy Bebop and the ravenous vampires of Blood Red Sky to the exploding underground reactor in Stranger Things 3, we want to surprise and delight our members by pushing the boundaries of visual effects.” Netflix, which is set to spend $17bn this year making and licensing films and TV shows, said that despite its takeover of Scanline the business would still be allowed to work for third parties. “In addition to working with Netflix, Scanline has done groundbreaking work on everything from Game of Thrones to Godzilla vs. King Kong and Zack Snyder’s Justice League,” said Reinhard. “Going forward, the company will continue to operate as a standalone business and work with their variety of clients. Netflix will invest in Scanline’s pipeline, infrastructure and workforce.” Netflix said that despite now owning its own visual effects business it will “continue to rely on many other studios around the world for our VFX needs”. Last week, Netflix said it is to double the size of its base at Shepperton Studios, where it has made productions including the TV series Enola Holmes and films including The Old Guard. Last year, Netflix spent $1bn making about 60 TV shows and films in the UK, its biggest production base outside the US, including The Crown and Sex Education.Gareth Southgate says the decision to extend his England contract was driven by the dream of clearing one last hurdle to success at a major tournament, ensuring he sees his team realise their rich potential. The two-year extension means Southgate will remain manager until December 2024, taking in that year’s European Championship after the 2022 World Cup in Qatar. Although he could potentially double his previous salary of £3m, the terms are performance-based and any increases would be funded partly by tournament prize money. Assuming he remains in place at the contract’s conclusion Southgate will have occupied the position for more than eight years, making him England’s longest-serving manager since Bobby Robson. Only Walter Winterbottom and Alf Ramsey would have spent more time in the job. Under Southgate’s guidance England have progressed from being a side, when he initially took over as caretaker in September 2016, that had just crashed out of Euro 2016 against Iceland to one that has reached a semi-final and a final in its past two major tournaments. He explained the lure of going one step further made it hard to consider leaving. “In football, when you’ve got a team who are a good team, when you’ve done a lot of the work culturally to get them to where you want to be and you’ve got them to a point where they can challenge, then you want to bring that to fruition,” he said. “You want to have a go. We’ve only ever won one World Cup and we still have the belief that that’s possible. It’s an aim we should have as a team and to step away at a moment where we still think the next few years can be very exciting, that would have been difficult to live with. “We’re allowed to dream and we’ve set ourselves high challenges. Did we think three years ago at this point we’d be sitting here on the back of a semi-final and final? Well, we could have all hoped but it might not have been a realistic dream.” England have won 15 of their 19 matches in 2021 and Southgate, whose assistant Steve Holland has also signed a new contract, suggested similarly relentless form would put them there or thereabouts. “We’re in tournaments where the margins are so fine but the levels of performance and consistency with the team, particularly this calendar year, have been exceptional,” he said. “That’s what we have to continue. We have to be a machine that keeps delivering those performances.” Last year the Football Association announced plans to prepare for a £300m loss over a four-year period to 2024, making 124 positions redundant as the Covid-19 pandemic bit. Mark Bullingham, the FA’s chief executive, said the performance‑related element made Southgate’s new contract affordable and that increases in commercial revenue will also contribute to any pay rise. While Southgate is aiming for on‑pitch success in Qatar there have been questions about how England’s setup will respond to the human rights concerns that dog the tournament, with decisions over any public stand yet to be taken. He reiterated he is continuing to “educate myself” about the situation but said recent unsavoury episodes have sharpened his players’ awareness of wider problems. “We went to Montenegro, we went to Bulgaria as a team and suffered from the racism in the stadiums and it was very clear that it was affecting our team, it was affecting the lives of our players,” he said. “It meant that we became much more aware of dealing with those issues as a collective and individually.” As a member of Uefa’s working group on workers’ rights, Bullingham travelled to Qatar in August to meet migrant workers and charities. He believes that, while next year’s host country has made progress in passing new laws to protect workers, implementation is still lacking. “What is very clear … is that the legislation isn’t being applied universally, and that has to be the next step, and that’s where we see the real progress will come through.”Chile’s right wing have claimed a jubilant victory after José Antonio Kast, a former congressman with a history of defending the Pinochet dictatorship, secured a surprise win in the first round of the country’s presidential election. Kast, who campaigned on a platform of public order, migration controls and conservative social values, confounded expectations to take 28% of the vote and beat the progressive former student leader Gabriel Boric by two percentage points. The two will face off in a second-round repechage on 19 December. “I would like to thank God and my family,” Kast announced to rapturous applause on Sunday night in a leafy square in one of Santiago’s wealthiest neighbourhoods. “Chile deserves peace and freedom – and that’s what we’re going to give you.” Across town in a middle-class barrio lined with bars and restaurants, Boric expressed confidence that “hope will triumph over fear”. But the result is a bracing reality check for the Chilean left after two years in which the country has followed a broadly progressive trajectory. Since 2019, mass anti-inequality protests have rocked the country, leading to the election of a broadly leftwing assembly to rewrite Chile’s Pinochet-era constitution. But Sunday’s result suggested that the protest movement’s ability to galvanise support has worn thin. Kast survived a bruising final week of campaigning in which his open support for Genl Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship and its economic legacy were the subject of intense scrutiny. As he took to the brightly lit stage on Sunday night, he had regained some of the composure that had deserted him before the vote, presenting the runoff election as an existential fight against “the intransigent left”. “We are going to chose between freedom and communism – between democracy and communism,” he said. Kast’s campaign spokesperson, Macarena Santelices – a great-niece of Gen Pinochet who briefly served outgoing President Sebastián Piñera as women’s minister – also appeared on stage. Supporters – some wearing Make America Great Again caps, others with the Chilean flag draped around their shoulders – joined in chants hailing “liberty” and mocking the crowds who gathered in 2019. Later, some stopped to cheer officers from the Carabineros national police force, which was accused of torture, cover-ups and a litany of human rights abuses during the protests. Throughout the campaign Kast has managed to project his short, simple messages on TikTok to a younger generation of voters far more efficiently than his competitors. And his vision for Chile has found a solid foil in Gabriel Boric, a former student protest leader who has served two terms in congress since being elected in 2013. Boric’s agenda is feminist, green and progressive, but his strong support among young, middle-class, university-educated Chileans in Santiago appears not to have seeped into other demographics. “It looks like some of the things Boric stands for don’t respond to people’s urgent needs,” says Valentina Rosas, a political scientist at Chile’s Pontifical Catholic University. “They have no bearing on the price of bread or stopping people breaking into your home.” Abstention is a persistent feature of Chilean elections – where rarely more than half of the electorate turns out. Despite the seemingly high stakes of yesterday’s election, participation hit just 47%. An important factor in next month’s runoff will be the votes of those who backed the libertarian businessman Franco Parisi in the first round. Parisi did not set foot in Chile during the campaigns owing to a child support dispute with his ex-wife, but defied expectations to take 13% of the vote. The destination of Parisi’s share of the vote, which largely comprised young, lower-middle-class men from outside the capital according to one early study, is likely to prove pivotal in the second round. The more moderate centre and centre-right candidates Yasna Provoste and Sebastián Sichel took 12% of the vote apiece. “My fear for the second round is that this turns into an election based on fear. People might end up voting against certain policies, rather than in favour of what they actually want,” says Rosas.Germany and the Netherlands have been told they should face still tougher Covid restrictions as the German health minister, Jens Spahn, made the startling prediction that most of his compatriots would be “vaccinated, cured or dead” by the end of winter. With Europe again the centre of the pandemic, ushering in tighter controls mainly on the unvaccinated across the continent, on Monday Austria became the first west European country to re-enter lockdown since vaccination began earlier this year. Stricter rules have already sparked clashes in Belgium and the Netherlands, with the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, describing the rioters as “idiots” and his Belgian counterpart, Alexander de Croo, calling the violence “absolutely unacceptable”. “Probably by the end of winter, more or less everyone in Germany will be vaccinated, cured or dead,” Spahn said. “That sounds cynical, but it’s the reality.” The outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, said tighter restrictions were needed. “We are in a highly dramatic situation. What is in place now is not sufficient,” Merkel told leaders of her centre-right CDU party. About 68% of Germans and 66% of Austrians are fully vaccinated, among the lowest in western Europe. Eastern European countries, where vaccination rates are even lower, have been experiencing some of the highest death tolls in the world, with hospitals overrun in Bulgaria and Romania. More than 38,000 new cases were confirmed in Germany over the past 24 hours, and a sharp rise in the last few weeks has left intensive care units near capacity. The worst-hit regions have ordered new shutdowns, including Christmas markets. In Austria, the seven-day Covid incidence rate hit a record 1,110 per 100,000 people, prompting the government to tell people to work from home if they can and to shut cafes, restaurants, bars, theatres and non-essential shops for at least 10 days. People may leave home for a limited number of reasons, such as going to workplaces if they cannot avoid it, buying essentials or taking a walk. The country has also announced that vaccines will be mandatory from 1 February, one of very few in the world to do so. The Czech Republic and Slovakia also banned unvaccinated people from some shops and services, including pubs, from Monday. In Germany, a Social Democrat MP, Karl Lauterbach, called for a “radical” vaccine pass strategy, adding: “A general vaccine mandate [shouldn’t be] taboo.” Lothar Wieler, the head of Germany’s Robert Koch Institute disease control agency, described compulsory vaccination as a “measure of last resort” but did not rule it out. The outgoing government said it would leave the decision to the next administration. The return of severe Covid restrictions brought about 40,000 protesters on to Vienna’s streets on Saturday, resulted in violent demonstrations in Brussels, and led to three nights of rioting across the Netherlands over the weekend. In Brussels on Sunday, officers fired water cannon and teargas at a protest police said was attended by 35,000, demonstrating against a ban on the unvaccinated from venues such as restaurants and bars. Local media reported a varied mix of people at the demonstration, including the far right and people espousing anti-vaccine conspiracy theories and antisemitism, as well as seemingly apolitical people opposed to vaccination, including entire families. The daily newspaper Het Nieuwsblad reported that healthcare workers stood shoulder to shoulder with people who had pinned Jewish stars on their clothes in protest at what they called a Nazi regime. One nursery nurse, Tina Cleybergh, told the paper she had come to the protest because the Covid pass had created division in society, “in which unvaccinated people feel labelled as criminals”. Belgium’s home affairs minister, Annelies Verlinden, said: “A mature democracy respects the opinion of a minority, but does not accept that a few abuse their protest vote by force. Vaccinated or not, it is important we continue to follow the measures.” The violence has reignited the debate on compulsory vaccination in Belgium, an idea that divides the seven-party ruling coalition. Pierre-Yves Dermagne, the Socialist party deputy prime minister, said on Monday the discussion had to be reopened. “We must have this debate, because we know that we are going to live with this virus for months and even years,” he said. “We cannot limit ourselves to short-term measures.” At least 145 people were arrested after the Dutch protests against the country’s new three-week partial lockdown, which began in Rotterdam on Friday and spread to cities including The Hague and Breda, while four demonstrators were wounded and several police officers injured. Rutte said he would always fight for the right to demonstrate, but added that he would “never accept idiots using sheer violence against the people who work for you and me every day … to keep this country safe, under the guise of: ‘We are dissatisfied.’” He told Dutch media that the protesters’ actions had “nothing to do with demonstrating” but were “a pure explosion of violence directed against our police, against our firefighters, against ambulance drivers”. The caretaker government is also facing calls from opposition politicians to go further, either by banning unvaccinated people from bars and restaurants, or by closing all non-essential shops and other venues.Portuguese authorities investigating the payment of commissions exceeding €20m related to football transfers searched the headquarters of FC Porto and its president Jorge Nuno Pinto da Costa on Monday as part of “Operation Red Card”. More than 30 different searches by officers from the public prosecutor’s office were carried out at a number of addresses in Porto and Lisbon, which included the club’s offices, a banking institution and several residences. It is understood that the €9m (£7.7m) that was paid to two agents as part of the €50m transfer that saw the Brazil defender Éder Militão move from Porto to Real Madrid in 2019 is one of the deals under investigation by the Departamento Central de Investigação e Ação Penal (DCIAP). In a statement, the DCIAP said the investigation is concentrating on transfers to “have occurred at least since 2017 to the present, with a strong international dimension involving commission payments of more than €20m” and includes “the suspected practice of crimes of tax fraud, swindling, abuse of trust and laundering, related to football players transfers and financial circuits involving intermediaries in these businesses.” Porto said in a statement that they collaborated fully with the investigation “on suspicion of judicial authorities of crimes of abuse of trust, tax fraud and money laundering that had their genesis in financial movements related to transfers of football players”. In July, Benfica’s president, Luis Filipe Vieira, along with his son and well-known agent Bruno Macedo were arrested as part of the ‘Cartão Vermelho’ investigation. Vieira later resigned after being placed under house arrest having denied the charges of orchestrating a tax fraud and money-laundering scheme since 2014. Macedo is also believed to be under investigation for commissions paid by Porto to him and his partner – Giuliano Bertolucci – on the Militão transaction when the Brazil defender joined Madrid in June 2019. Militão was sold for a fee of €50m and Porto state in their annual report that they earned €28.4m from his departure. According to the accounts, the remaining €21.6m was received by three parties, two of which were named as Macedo and Bertolucci. A fee of €3.5m was paid to Macedo’s company – BM Consulting – while Bertolucci, the agent for the former Arsenal defender David Luiz, is referred to as having received a fee, but there is nothing within the document indicating how much.Bulb Energy was once the fastest-growing supplier in Britain’s energy market, and one of the UK’s most celebrated startups. But the company may be best remembered as the biggest casualty of the energy market crisis after it handed the responsibility for supplying gas and electricity to 1.7m homes to a special administrator on Monday. Its collapse marks a catastrophic fall from grace for a company that in the space of six years won the approval of government ministers and catapulted its chief executive, Hayden Wood, to leading positions in a string of business initiatives including the government’s Council for Sustainable Business. The company was founded in east London in 2015 by early-thirtysomething entrepreneurs Amit Gudka and Wood with the intention of challenging the remaining dominance of the energy industry’s legacy supply giants. Gudka had eight years’ experience trading electricity and gas at Barclays, and Wood had 10 years as a management consultant, first at Monitor Group and then at Bain &amp; Company. Within six years the company claimed 6% of the energy market, and helped to pioneer a number of tech startup campaigns including the government’s kickstart scheme for unemployed young people, and the Tech Zero climate taskforce in June this year. Wood, 38, gravitated towards the limelight, appearing at events alongside ministers such as the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, and hosting Boris Johnson at his London headquarters in July. As one of a handful of executives on the Council for Sustainable Business, he advised the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) on making companies greener. Bulb’s rapid ascent was powered by early backing from investment fund DST Global, owned by the Israeli-Russian billionaire tech investor Yuri Milner, and Magnetar Capital, and it hoped to grow its business beyond Britain’s borders to reach more than 100 million “members”, its preferred term for customers, by the end of the decade. Instead the company burned through its cash while posting successive financial losses, as fresh concerns over its funding, “toxic work culture” and rising customers complaints began to emerge. By February this year, Gudka left the company to start a new battery firm. And, by June, Bulb was forced to seek a reprieve on its loan repayments by lenders, including Milner. The company’s collapse came as little surprise to anyone in the energy industry. “Sadly, today’s news has been a long time coming,” said Keith Anderson, chief executive of ScottishPower. “If we are to learn anything from this crisis, it is that we need a sustainable and responsible supplier market in which companies are able to withstand market shocks. The government now has a vested interest in working the industry and the regulator to ensure this happens.” Bulb’s major strength was its marketing: it excelled at attracting new customers through lucrative referral payments and green energy claims, and managed to secure willing investors by talking up its credentials as a tech startup. But Bulb’s rivals have long claimed that the company’s business model, green credentials and fundraising were all unsustainable because it relied on greenwashing, and “too good to be true” energy prices to help fuel its rapid growth. Government officials and ministers were also taken in by Bulb’s seemingly unstoppable success, and as one senior industry source said, and “loved them” because “they came in to challenge the incumbent suppliers and grew at scale”. “As an energy challenger, having something which fundamentally differentiates you in the market is really important. I don’t think Bulb ever did,” the source said. “They were always greenwashing. They never had a tech proposition on a par with Octopus Energy or Ovo Energy.” The stellar growth was useful in distracting investors from its limited success in developing its own technology, the source said. But as energy prices began to rise, and investor interest began to wane, Bulb’s ready supply of financial support began to run out. “It was always a struggle to see how this company would be viable over the long term,” the source added. • This article was amended on 23 November 2021 to more accurately describe Milner as Israeli-Russian, rather than “Russian”.A murder investigation has been launched in Kenya into the death of a British woman who worked for the BBC’s international development charity. The body of Kate Mitchell, a senior manager at BBC Media Action, was found on Friday in the capital Nairobi shortly after an emergency alarm was activated in her room. Police in Kenya said the window to her eighth-floor hotel room had been broken and the body of a man Mitchell had been with earlier was found on the ground below. “We are investigating the circumstances surrounding these deaths,” Nairobi police chief Augustine Thumbi told reporters. “The suspected culprit jumped off the eighth floor of the hotel through the room’s window after sensing that the hotel security might be after him,” he added. “We do not know the motive so far, and these are things the investigators are trying to put together.” Mitchell had worked for 14 years for the charity that was formerly known as the BBC World Service Trust. Her most recent post was a senior project manager in Ethiopia’s capital Addis Ababa. It is thought that Mitchell’s death was unconnected to her work for the organisation. Caroline Nursey, the charity’s chief executive, said: “We are all shocked and horrified by this terrible news. Kate was a much-loved member of staff … She was well known across our whole organisation, especially by our teams in Ethiopia, South Sudan, Zambia, and London. “We send our deepest condolences to her family and her many friends around the world.” The charity said: “Kate was positive, fun, driven and extremely talented, and her work made a huge difference to many communities, and to Media Action’s mission of using media and communication to address poverty and inequality around the world.” Kate’s brother, Peter Mitchell, described her as “a deeply beloved daughter, sister and friend”. In a statement released on behalf of the family, he said: “Kate loved her work and was tireless in her efforts to make the world a better place. We are only beginning to realise the magnitude of her loss.” He said the family was working with the Foreign Office and Kate’s colleagues at BBC Media Action to try to understand what happened. He appealed to press and social media users not to speculate on how she died while her death was being investigated. The charity said it was also working with the UK government to establish what happened and was willing to help the Kenyan authorities. BBC Media Action works to use media and communication to reduce poverty, improve health and support people in understanding their rights.The coronavirus pandemic in Australia has caused almost 2,000 deaths and resulted in close to 200,000 cases. In the worst-hit states of New South Wales and Victoria, high vaccination rates have now reduced the rate of hospital admissions. Here we have used an experimental mapping method to show how the outbreak spread across the two states from the start of the pandemic until now. Each dot represents a person who tested positive to Covid-19, and has been placed randomly within their postcode or local government area to visualise the number of cases in a region. It’s important to remember that this is not necessarily where they caught the virus and instead is where they live. Blue dots represent those who probably caught the coronavirus overseas, and red dots are those who caught the coronavirus locally. All dots fade to grey and are removed after two weeks. This first map shows the spread of the pandemic in Victoria: And here’s the same animated map for NSW:On a windswept, bitingly cold day in Folkestone a discreet green portable building is a beacon of welcome on a stretch of the south coast patrolled by Border Force boats and self-proclaimed migrant hunters on the far right. Inside its cheerfully decorated walls are workers from Kent Refugee Action Network. The organisation has supported young asylum seekers who arrive on the south coast for more than two decades. Despite the plummeting temperatures and supposedly enhanced border patrols along the French coast, people continue to head for Kent’s shores in unseaworthy small boats. While the row burns on in Westminster about where the blame lies for the record numbers of people reaching the UK in small boats, KRAN quietly gets on with supporting young arrivals and helping them adjust to life in the UK. A young Syrian refugee prepared lunch for any of the young asylum seekers accommodated in Folkestone who wanted to eat. Many are too traumatised to speak of their difficult journeys and the dangerous circumstances they have fled from in their home countries. Forced separation from parents and siblings is particularly difficult. Unless the young people volunteer information, KRAN does not ask questions about the painful subject of their recent pasts. One big change that KRAN has seen is that previously, people travelled to the UK closeted in lorries away from the eyes of the far right and the media. Now they are travelling in small boats and are easily visible to hostile eyes in their orange lifejackets after they have been rescued from dinghies by Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) or Border Force boats. Many of the new arrivals are placed in poor quality accommodation managed by Home Office contractors. KRAN helps them with day-to-day tasks such as cooking and budgeting. “Nobody explained to one new arrival how the microwave in his accommodation worked nor that metal objects should not be placed inside it,” said KRAN’s Bridget Chapman. “He left a spoon in a dish he put in the microwave and it set on fire. Young people need help with these things to help them adapt to life here.” Chapman has seen many different phases of the hostile environment but says that the situation for refugees is the worst it has ever been under the leadership of the current home secretary, Priti Patel. “Around the time of the Brexit vote the language around migration became significantly more toxic,” she said. “The government’s talk of pull factors is nonsensical. It’s the push factors that are the most important thing. This is not a crisis, and we are not overwhelmed by the small boat arrivals. “Most refugees flee to the country next door when they are escaping conflict. Look at the numbers of refugees in countries like Lebanon. Very few of the world’s refugees are coming to the UK. “What is happening now is that people who arrive on small boats are treated by government with performative cruelty. So many of the young people we have worked with have gone on to make massive contributions to our society – they work in the NHS, in care homes, they do driving jobs, and I’m sure many would be keen to fill the gaps we have at the moment with HGV drivers. “They are not a problem for our society, they enrich it.”The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, announced last week that his controversial farm laws would be withdrawn. With five state elections looming, and his ruling Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) vulnerable in several contests, Mr Modi told the country how important farming had been to him and did something out of character: he ate humble pie in public, apologised and dropped his plans. This was the right thing to do. Mr Modi had proposed the major changes, which threatened the livelihoods of two-thirds of India’s 1.4 billion people, during the country’s Covid lockdown in 2020. The measures had been drafted in secret and then whipped through both houses of the Indian parliament without debate. Agriculture in India does need reform, but not of the kind Mr Modi envisaged – which many farmers reasonably believed would leave them at the mercy of a government in hock to big business. The result was widespread resentment across the farming belt of northern India, and produced probably the largest peaceful protests in the world. Mr Modi’s government responded with water cannon and internet shutdowns. The demonstrators were shamefully characterised by the BJP and its troll army as Maoists and jihadis. There were signs of growing alienation in the breadbasket state of Punjab, which the ruling party foolishly fed by alleging that the protests were being run by Sikh separatists. Instead of the protesters bowing to intimidation, it was the Indian prime minister who was forced to retreat. The mobilisation shattered the strongman image Mr Modi likes to project. It also signals a wider policy failure by the ruling BJP. In 2016, the Indian prime minister promised that farmers’ incomes would be doubled by 2022. This would have needed a rural family’s fortune to grow about 10% a year in real terms. Not only has this never happened under Mr Modi, it has never happened under any leader. Within India’s borders lies about a third of all the arable land in the Asia Pacific region. Size matters and this year India broke into the ranks of the top 10 agricultural exporters of the world. In an economy still reeling from the pandemic and with industrial investment and employment still not picking up, farming GDP has experienced growth in the last year. Mr Modi should hold constructive talks with farmers and develop new proposals that could help deliver better agricultural prices, while keeping essential food stuffs affordable for India’s urban working class. The case is made for India to replicate the success of its giant dairy cooperative by both free-market and left-leaning economists. This would be a way of augmenting incomes and productivity without leaving cultivators vulnerable to corporate exploitation. The Indian government’s biggest obstacle remains a trust deficit. Sections of Mr Modi’s own party question his imperious leadership. The opposition leader Rahul Gandhi’s prediction a year ago that the BJP would be forced to scrap farm reforms will do him no harm. With a poor record, India’s prime minister may fall back to reigniting culture wars in the forthcoming elections. That would be a bitter harvest for farmers who were promised a much better deal by Mr Modi.