Soaring numbers of women are being diagnosed with advanced breast cancer, undermining their chances of survival, because of Covid’s disruption of NHS care, a charity has warned. The number of women being diagnosed with the disease at stage 4 is as much as 48% higher in some months than expected, with the pandemic to blame, says Macmillan Cancer Support. At the same time, fewer women are being confirmed as having breast cancer at stage 1, when their chances of responding well to treatment and living longer are much higher. For example, in April 128 women were diagnosed at stage 4 – 28 (42%) more than were expected, based on pre-pandemic trends, Macmillan said. But in the same month 942 were diagnosed at stage 1, which was 164 (15%) fewer than expected. Macmillan estimates that there is now a backlog of 47,300 people across the UK who have not yet been diagnosed with some form of cancer, as a direct result of Covid. They include people who could not access care in the usual way because many NHS services were scaled back, and also those who were too scared to seek help or did not want to add to the pressure the health service was already under. None have had a confirmed diagnosis of cancer, though some may be undergoing tests or screening. “The full impact of the pandemic on later diagnosis will not be understood for some time. But these figures reinforce our worst fears that delays and disruption caused by the pandemic are leading to more and more people being diagnosed later,” said Steven McIntosh, an executive director at Macmillan. “Anyone diagnosed at a later stage is facing the agony of fewer options and worse prognosis. On top of this, they are entering into a system that does not have capacity to guarantee them timely treatment and care, which is of the upmost importance,” he added. The charity wants ministers to lay out detailed plans to relieve the “alarming pressures on cancer services” when they publish their “elective recovery plan” next week. It will detail how NHS England will tackle the record 5.8m-strong queue of patients awaiting care. A Macmillan analysis found types of cancer that saw the biggest falls in diagnosis in England between March 2020 and July this year included prostate cancer (down 23.1%), multiple myeloma (13.8%), melanoma (13.2%) and breast cancer (11.6%). Daisy Cooper, the Liberal Democrats’ deputy leader and health spokesperson, said that people “will be alarmed by these figures that show record numbers of people are waiting too long for cancer treatment, leaving them at risk of more intensive treatment and a lower chance of survival. “It is particularly worrying that prostate cancer, leukaemia and breast cancer are seeing the most missed diagnoses.” A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “Cancer diagnosis and treatment is an absolute priority and nearly half a million people were checked for cancer in August and September this year – some of the highest numbers ever. “We remain committed to delivering our long-term plan for tackling cancer and have backed the NHS with record investment, including £2bn this year and £8bn over the next three years to deliver an extra 9m checks, scans and operations for patients. “Most cancer services are back to or above pre-pandemic levels and the latest NHS figures show a reduction in the number of patients waiting for a diagnostic scan for the first time this year, meaning more people are now getting the checks they need.”1) Fred and Sancho could provide key for Carrick “Why are you playing Fred?” That’s the question Roy Keane wanted to ask while pinning Ole Gunnar Solskjær against a dressing room wall, and maybe Solskjær would have struggled to answer. But apparently Michael Carrick knows what Fred does well because the Brazilian was one of Manchester United’s best players in their midweek win at Villarreal, contributing intelligently to both of United’s goals and covering the left-hand side when in defensive mode. The question now is whether he will start against Chelsea, where containing Reece James should be an important part of the visitors’ game plan. Carrick also found uses for Donny van de Beek and Jadon Sancho when it had previously seemed United signed both without knowing why. Starting Sancho on the right may be the best way of exploiting the absence of Ben Chilwell. PD Chelsea v Manchester United, Sunday 4.30pm (all times GMT) 2) Dubravka back to bolster Newcastle’s confidence? Bottom of the table and still without a win, Newcastle travel to the Emirates for Saturday’s lunchtime kick-off against an Arsenal team presumably wounded by their gubbing at the hands of Liverpool. Whether Eddie Howe will be in his technical area or frantically reassembling his hotel room trouser press while counting down his final hours in quarantine remains to be seen, but his presence will be immaterial unless his players iron out the defensive errors that led to them conceding three goals against Brentford last time out. There were visible signs of improvement from Newcastle as they played on the front foot during Howe’s first game in official charge, but the record books will show they scored three goals at home and still failed to win. Visibly uncomfortable as he tried to play the ball out from the back and at fault for Brentford’s opener, it would be no surprise to see Karl Darlow make way for the fit again Martin Dubravka in Newcastle’s goal. BG Arsenal v Newcastle, Saturday 12.30pm 3) Saints back Hassenhüttl for the long term More than a quarter of Premier League clubs have sacked a manager already this season but Southampton know they have a good one. So even if on Saturday Liverpool turn out to be the team who dish out the Saints’ annual 9-0 defeat, and all following last week’s loss at Norwich, the club are unlikely to ditch Ralph Hassenhüttl, who is doing a good job in difficult constraints. Indeed, Saints have proved pesky to some of the big clubs already this season, earning draws with both Manchester clubs and also Chelsea (in the Carabao Cup). Mohamed Salisu has been terrific in their defence and will have to be on top form again if the Saints are to escape Anfield with a point, or at least their pride. PD Liverpool v Southampton, Saturday 3pm 4) Hammers midfield an upgrade on PSG Seeing off Lionel Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappé is one thing, but will Manchester City be able to subdue Michail Antonio? They will if they stop him from getting the ball, of course, but the problem for them is that West Ham have a better midfield than PSG had on Wednesday, so David Moyes can travel with the knowledge they can threaten City. But their chances of keeping City out have been damaged by the loss of Angelo Ogbonna, so Craig Dawson will have to be at his most wily to keep track of City’s many and elusive attackers. Another high-brow duel is on the cards at the Etihad. PD Manchester City v West Ham, Sunday 2pm 5) Cantwell under scrutiny as Smith seeks revenge Dean Smith might still be in charge of his beloved Aston Villa if they hadn’t snatched defeat from the jaws of victory by throwing away a two-goal lead in the final 10 minutes of their home game against Wolves in mid-October. This weekend he gets the chance to exact some manner of revenge as Norwich host Bruno Lage’s impressive side at Carrow Road. Looking for their third consecutive win going into Tuesday’s six-pointer against Newcastle, most Norwich fans would probably settle for a point to keep momentum going. Having spent the final two months of the Daniel Farke regime confined to the bench amid rumours of a falling-out with the club over his lack of application in training, Todd Cantwell started Smith’s first game only to be withdrawn at the interval after an ineffectual first-half performance. It will be intriguing to see what, if any, reaction the manager gets should the creative midfielder get another run-out. BG Norwich v Wolves, Saturday 3pm 6) Cornet and Moura go head-to-head Antonio Conte described last week’s win over Leeds as “two different matches”. In the first half Tottenham were sluggish, inoffensive. In the second they transformed into a fierce, swashbuckling side that looked capable of overwhelming most opponents. The challenge is for them to play like that regularly for 90 minutes, starting at Turf Moor, where Burnley will be looking for the win that could lift Sean Dyche’s team out of the bottom three. Harry Kane may continue to mooch around, but, in Lucas Moura and Maxwel Cornet, this match could still feature two of the Premier League’s most exciting forwards on recent form. PD Burnley v Tottenham, Sunday 2pm 7) Returning Douglas Luiz can show value to Villa Aston Villa fans were understandably pleased to see pictures of Douglas Luiz back in training on Tuesday after a three-match absence with a hamstring injury, but will have been less impressed by Wednesday’s speculation that the Brazilian defensive midfielder and his representatives are angling for a move to Roma in January. Should Douglas Luiz return to action in the holding role at which he excels this weekend, Marvelous Nakamba looks likely to make way. And should Douglas Luiz agitate for a move to Serie A during the next transfer window he will be sorely missed at Villa Park. BG Crystal Palace v Aston Villa, Saturday 3pm 8) Meslier set for a busy evening in Brighton Brighton could welcome back Robert Sánchez following his suspension for a rash sending-off against Newcastle. But the better goalkeeper will be at the other end. It is not normal for a young goalkeeper to be as reliable as Ilan Meslier has become since joining Leeds, for whom, now aged 21, he has been a stalwart despite the ever changing cast of defenders in front of him and the singular pressure of playing for Leeds. With Marcelo Bielsa likely to be deprived of first-choice defenders again, and Brighton in need of a positive result after a couple of wasteful performances, Meslier is likely to get more chances to show his quality. PD Brighton v Leeds, Saturday 5.30pm 9) Toney could come back to haunt Benítez This might have been billed as a meeting between English football’s shrewdest spenders and the most reckless, if it were not for Everton’s cut-price recent hiring of Demarai Gray and Andros Townsend recently. Decent performances by that pair aside, Everton are in dreary form. Even with Dominic Calvert-Lewin still missing, they need to find a way to beat Brentford, who mustered just one point from their last five matches. If Everton fail to eke out their first win since September, Rafael Benítez will head into next weekend’s Merseyside derby under severe pressure. Especially if Ivan Toney, whom Benítez did not appreciate at Newcastle, demonstrates his scoring skills. PD Brentford v Everton, Sunday 2pm 10) Ranieri set for triumphant Leicester return Claudio Ranieri and Leicester will always have 2016. It was a wonderful, extraordinary season that neither has yet been able to recreate. Ranieri is on to his fifth club since being ousted by Leicester less than five years ago. He did not last long enough at Fulham to lead them out at the King Power so only now will he return with a team to the ground where he enjoyed his and Leicester greatest’s achievement. He is sure to get a fond welcome. But what reception awaits the hosts? Leicester were booed off after last week’s defeat by Chelsea, and Ayoze Pérez suggested during the week that the team have slipped into a negative spiral – unlike Watford, who will pitch up on the back of last week’s invigorating drubbing of Manchester United. Brendan Rodgers will be doing his utmost to ensure Leicester avoid another of the slow starts that have been a recurring problem for them recently, otherwise Ranieri could be celebrating at the King Power again. PD Leicester v Watford, Sunday 2pmChancellor Rishi Sunak’s flagship £2bn pandemic jobs scheme to get young people into work may not be delivering value for money, the spending watchdog has said. A report by the National Audit Office (NAO), and a separate one by a group of peers, has highlighted concerns that youth unemployment policies are either insufficient or flawed. The Kickstart scheme, launched by Sunak in September 2020, offers government-funded “high-quality” job placements for 16- to 24-year-olds who are on universal credit and at risk of long-term unemployment. A report by the NAO, which monitors value for money on public spending, said the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) had only “limited assurance” that the scheme was working as intended. Private sector firms that received state subsidies to hire young people might well have done so anyway, the NAO said, because the economy was reopening just as the scheme began to ramp up. The report also found that there was relatively little early take-up for Kickstart due to successive lockdowns depressing demand for workers, so far the scheme has created 96,700 jobs rather than the targeted 250,000. When firms did start hiring, the NAO said, there was little monitoring by government to check that the jobs it funded were of good quality, with young staff offered training and support, and that they were offered to the right people. Gareth Davies, the head of the NAO, said: “At the start of the pandemic, DWP acted quickly to set up Kickstart to help young people into work when youth unemployment was predicted to rise significantly. “However, DWP has limited assurance that Kickstart is having the positive impact intended. It does not know whether the jobs created are of high quality or whether they would have existed without the scheme. It could also do more to ensure the scheme is targeted at those who need it the most.” Labour said its own analysis had found that the scheme was heavily weighted towards the south, with as many jobs created there as in the north and Midlands combined, despite higher youth unemployment in those regions. “The chancellor’s ‘plan for jobs’ has failed to plan for the jobs our country actually needs in the places that need them most,” said shadow DWP minister Jonathan Reynolds. Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said Kickstart was “not perfect” but that it had an important role to play. “The government should now work more closely with unions on the next phase so that we can give young workers a voice in improving the scheme,” she said. A government spokesperson said: “We acted quickly and decisively to establish Kickstart at the start of the pandemic when it was feared unemployment levels would more than double – as this report acknowledges. “The scheme has already delivered over 100,000 new life-changing jobs for young jobseekers on universal credit who were at risk of long-term unemployment and will continue to deliver opportunities for young people.” The NAO’s assessment of Kickstart was accompanied by a separate but similarly critical report by a cross-party committee on youth employment, which stands at 11.7%. The peers accused the government of allowing hundreds of thousands of young people to languish in unemployment when they could be learning new skills or serving apprenticeships. Lord Shipley, chair of the youth unemployment committee, said the government needed to overhaul England’s national curriculum, make careers guidance more sophisticated, improve skills training and reform the failed apprenticeship levy, with the aim of matching levels of youth employment seen in Germany. The report produced 71 recommendations to bridge a skills gap that left many young people trapped on low incomes without the skills to change their circumstances. Shipley, a liberal peer and former leader of Newcastle city council, said 631,000 young people were not in education, employment or training (NEET) and 475,000 were unemployed. “It means 21.8% (141,000) of 18-year-olds are neither in full-time education nor work with training,” he said. He added that the Kickstart scheme was undermined by the government’s failure to integrate its training component into a broader skills programme. Co-author Kenneth Baker, the Tory peer, who as education secretary in the 1980s pioneered computer skills training, said it was a mistake to cancel the ICT GCSE in 2016 when digital skills were essential. It meant only 11% of students below the age of 16 studied computing – a fall of over 40%, he said. A government spokesperson said: “We are taking action by giving young people the opportunities they need to secure a job – and with the number of young employees on payrolls back above pre-pandemic levels – it is clear that our plan for jobs is working. “We have announced an extra £1.6bn in funding by 2024-25 to support more 16- to 19-year-olds through high-quality education, on top of extra funding in 2020-21 and 2021-22. This has contributed to the record high proportion of 16 to 18-year-olds in education or doing apprenticeships since consistent records began.”Amnesty UK has been accused of “spreading false information” about the Northern Territory’s Covid outbreak in an extraordinary joint statement from the territory’s peak Aboriginal health organisation and Amnesty’s own Australian operation. Disinformation about the Covid outbreak in Aboriginal communities near Katherine, spread by third parties online, was on Thursday described by the NT chief minister as “conspiracy theories” pushed by “tinfoil hat wearing tossers”. Amsant (the Aboriginal Medical Services Alliance Northern Territory) and Amnesty Australia subsequently said they were “extremely disappointed” that Amnesty International UK had issued a press release with a headline that misrepresented the situation on the ground without first consulting Aboriginal people. “False information from social media is dangerous and corrosive to our communities but easily avoided by talking to the community-led health organisations that Amnesty seeks to defend, as they assert,” the Amsant chief executive, John Paterson, and Amnesty Australia director Sam Klintworth said in a joint statement. Amnesty International released a statement on Thursday via its UK office with the headline “Northern Territory: Australian defence force response to Covid-19 outbreak in Aboriginal communities must not inflict trauma”. Klintworth said she apologised for the release. “We’re very disappointed that Amnesty UK reissued a release that we at Amnesty Australia were very careful to ensure was doing precisely the opposite of feeding the spread of harmful information,” she said. “The addition of the headline, which was not in the original statement, suggesting the ADF was inflicting trauma, completely changed the sentiment of the statement which meant to convey Amnesty Australia’s full support of vaccine access and the crucial work of groups such as Amsant and we are deeply sorry for the distress this has caused.” Paterson said the UK release “required an immediate correction”. There is no suggestion Amnesty UK deliberately intended to spread false information by adding the headline to the release. In a statement on Friday, Amnesty UK said: “The headline was added in error and we apologise. It has now been removed.” On Thursday, Aboriginal elders, health organisations and frontline workers in the Northern Territory condemned false information circulating on social media. The chief minister, Michael Gunner, blamed it on “tinfoil hat wearing tossers, sitting in their parents’ basements in Florida”. Claims had been circulating online that Aboriginal people from the Binjari and Rockhole communities near Katherine were being forcibly removed from their homes and taken to enforced quarantine, and people including children were being forcibly vaccinated. Gunner suggested people peddling misinformation and disinformation should “get a life”. “There are ridiculous, untrue rumours about the ADF’s involvement. As we all know, they aren’t carrying weapons – they are carrying fresh food for people. 99.99% of the BS that is flying around on the internet about the territory is coming from flogs outside the territory – mostly America, Canada and the UK, people who have nothing better to do than makeup lies about us because their own lives are so small and so sad.” The traditional owners of Binjari and Rockhole said they were “very hurt by the untrue comments being made in the media and social media” about their situation. “We have been treated with a lot of respect and appreciate all the support being given by these support personnel people,” they said in a statement. “We are in lockdown because we’re in the biggest fight of our lives. We’re trying to keep safe. We’re trying to do the right thing by the community and Katherine. We don’t need people out there creating another flood for us. We don’t appreciate outside people making comments that are untrue. “We want people to respect our privacy and show respect for our feelings.”A coalition of Labor and Green senators managed to head off an inquiry into the ABC complaints process – which was labelled “politically motivated” by ABC chair Ita Buttrose – but the manoeuvre left some Liberal senators apoplectic. Queensland senator James McGrath described the 11th hour block as a “grotesque, leftwing, back-scratching orgy of flatulent arrogance from the ABC and those on the left” and called for the ABC to be broken up and Triple J to be sold off. The deputy whip’s personal attack on the prime minister’s captain’s pick for ABC chair was unprecedented, seemingly more personal than Michael Kroger’s spray in June, when the former Victorian Liberal powerbroker said Buttrose was a “hopeless failure” and should resign. “This ABC who sneers at us is led by an arrogant chair who sees the ABC as a country apart from Australia,” McGrath told the Senate. “And that is quite sad. The inevitable result of decades of free rein, of grossly excessive budgets and diminished accountability, is that we’ve ended up with an inner-city hive of woke workers, hiring woke friends to do their woke work in their quest to ‘wokify’ the world. “But in conjunction with the first-night crowd, the chair of the ABC and her fellow first-nighters are at the opera, chinking their champagne glasses, sneering at middle Australia and at those who believe in a pluralistic, diverse media market.” The decision by the Senate to delay the inquiry was a win for Buttrose who had called a week ago on the upper house to act to “defend the independence of the ABC”. The government inquiry was sprung on the ABC days after the ABC’s complaints division told Fox News it had not upheld any of the complaints made in a lengthy submission about a Four Corners program on the News Corp broadcaster aired in August. The ABC, which returns to Senate estimates on Monday, declined to comment. Hit and miss An issues paper released on Friday by the ABC’s independent review into its complaints handling process, has given an insight into the number and types of complaints the unit receives. The Audience and Consumer Affairs unit which operates independently inside the ABC has so far this year received 2996 editorial complaints, including 700 about Covid-19 coverage: two-thirds of which complained of inaccuracy or bias. ACA received 120 complaints about US election coverage, mostly claiming bias against President Trump. Falun-Gong was a flashpoint for complaints too, but no breach of editorial standards was found. Coverage of the launch of HMAS Supply attracted 77 complaints _ after the ABC has already apologised for the “deceptive editing” of a video. Anti-Coalition bias is the theme of complaints about budget coverage and the Inside the Canberra Bubble episode of Four Corners. No breach of editorial standards was found in either case. The authors of the review, former ombudsman John McMillan and former SBS and Ten news director Jim Carroll, have called for public submissions be sent to abccomplaintsreview@abc.net.au. Today mixes up the Weeknd Days after a Seven reporter offended Adele by not listening to her new album before an exclusive interview in London, the Nine network served up its own international blunder. The Today show congratulated The Weeknd for being awarded the number one spot on the Billboard Hot 100 Song Of All Time List for his hit track Blinding Lights, ousting Chubby Checker’s 1960s hit The Twist. But the post on social media of a black man in a red suit was not the 31-year-old singer. The photo the Today show posted on Twitter and Facebook was not of The Weeknd but of veteran NBC host Al Roker who was impersonating him for a Halloween special. Pell page-turner? Former Insiders regular Gerard Henderson, whose dislike for the ABC only grew when he was dropped as a panelist last year, has written another book. No, it’s not on his favourite topic, the ABC, but it is all about how the ABC covered his friend Cardinal George Pell. Henderson has been a fierce critic of ABC journalist Louise Milligan, whose book Cardinal won the Walkley book award. Titled Cardinal Pell, the Media Pile-On and Collective Guilt, Hendo’s tome is published by the boutique rightwing publisher Connor Court Publishing, which has published books such as Stealing from a Child: The Injustice of ‘Marriage Equality’ by David van Gend and Green Murder by climate skeptic Ian Plimer. “The trial, retrial and conviction for historical child sexual assault of Cardinal George Pell, the Prefect of the Secretariat for the Economy at the Holy See in Rome, gained international attention,” the book’s blurb says. “In April 2020, in a remarkable unanimous decision, the High Court of Australia quashed the conviction.” The executive director of rightwing thinktank The Sydney Institute, Henderson is an opinion columnist for the Australian, and he also publishes a weekly blog, Media Watch Dog, where he mainly writes about the ABC, nitpicking week in, week out about the alleged bias of the presenters. Doco diversity The ABC has commissioned a number of documentaries that are sure to make news next year, among a wide range of diverse content in the 2022 slate, unveiled on Thursday. In particular a documentary about Israel Folau pitched as “Australia’s most gifted and controversial athlete …. homophobic bigot to some, a persecuted freedom warrior to others” has raised eyebrows. It seems an odd fit with the ABC’s excitement about the return of the Sydney Gay &amp; Lesbian Mardi Gras parade, which will be broadcast on ABC Radio and ABC Television in a three-year deal. Entertainment director Michael Carrington told industry blog TV Tonight the two projects were not commissioned at the same time, as Folau was meant to air this year. “One of our objectives is to be relevant to all Australians and tell stories from all perspectives,” Carrington said. “While there’s not a deliberate link between the two, this is definitely a chance to tell another side of the story and explore actually both sides of the story within the Folau documentary.” The other doco of interest is Ithaka: A Fight to Free Julian Assange, a two-part 120-minute film following 76-year-old retired builder John Shipton’s tireless campaign to save his son, Julian Assange. The WikiLeaks founder was this month given permission to marry his partner in Belmarsh jail. “Now facing a 175-year sentence if extradited to the US, the family are confronting the prospect of losing Julian forever to the US justice system,” the ABC says. “This David and Goliath struggle is personal.”Day three of lockdown at the Aquarius Backpackers, and all Nina D’Angelo craves is a decent coffee. “I saw a cop drinking one and asked, ‘sir, could I have an almond latte please?’ But really it’s the lack of information that’s getting to me,” she said from her hostel dorm. “We don’t know anything. We’ve just been waiting around … all sitting ducks. Are we getting out?” The 22-year-old Sydney woman arrived in Byron Bay with two friends on Monday for a much-needed break after finishing a string of university assignments. She is now one of 84 people placed into a week-long lockdown after an unvaccinated guest tested positive to Covid-19. D’Angelo and her friends first became aware of an exposure returning from the gym on Wednesday morning. “The driveway was chained,” D’Angelo explained. “We thought, ‘that’s a bit strange’, and went out for breakfast. When we got back there were cop cars out the front, and nobody was telling us anything. “We stayed in our car until a police officer told us there was a Covid case, and we were like…’here we go’. D’Angelo and her friends went out to get a test, and upon return, were told to go straight into isolation, with no further directions. “Later that night everyone was wandering around, nobody was told to stay in their rooms,’ D’Angelo said. “Then someone bought us all pizza for dinner, so we came to the common room and ate together, which was bizarre in isolation…I was like, ‘why are we all having a feast together?’ Like sure, cute.” After dinner, D’Angelo headed to bed while others stayed up drinking, or partied in each other’s rooms. “We couldn’t leave and we were getting no instructions,” D’Angelo said. “We just spent the night anxious and super unsure what was going on.” Since then, D’Angelo had kept up with the latest news via the media, and said everyone had been in a “horrible mood”. “It’s raining, it’s just been yuck,” she said. “It’s all very confusing … We go down to ask questions and they tell us to go to our room. It’s been quite traumatic. We don’t know whether to ask for a refund – because what are we paying for? Cornflakes and fruit cups.” From the wrap-around balcony, D’Angelo had been able to interact with the 24-hour security guard manned out the front of the hostel, who confirmed a rumour someone had attempted to jump the fence on Thursday evening. “I asked him if he had information and he said, ‘I have all of it,’ so I asked him if whoever’s tested negative can go home and isolate,” she said. “The majority have, and he said ‘I think so’, but we just don’t know. I’m staying in one room with eight people, if one person gets it, we all get it.” D’Angelo said some people had planned to stay for a single night, arrived without toiletries and extra clothes and were now trapped for two weeks as they were unable to fly home until a fortnight after exposure. “It’s so uncomfortable, we were meant to have a holiday and come back here to sleep, not stay in one room all day … it makes you nuts,” she said. “Part of me wants to drink and another part is like, ‘am I going to be OK the next day?’ We’re all just trying to not stress each other out, and others are like, ‘just enjoy it’. Shayla Calvert, 25, said she’d received “no messaging at all” from management apart from confirmation there’d been a positive case, and they were to remain in the hostel. “We keep getting told different things depending on who you speak to,” she said. “Some people have been told they couldn’t leave until Thursday, others Tuesday or Wednesday … There seems to be no consistency. “And because we’re mixed with unvaccinated people we don’t know if we have to isolate for 14 days.” Calvert said she’d been getting by “watching a lot of TV”, though for others, stress was kicking in. It certainly wasn’t a schoolies-type binge-fuelled atmosphere. Thousands of high school graduates were due to descend on the resort town this weekend for leaving celebrations. “I don’t think there’s a single person here under 22,” Calvert said. “Some people are studying, some are working from their rooms, others are just drinking. “They haven’t let us past our balcony, and we’re not allowed in the kitchen. The staff have been great getting us food but there are three coeliacs in our dorm … Apart from a fruit cup there wasn’t much we could eat. “The lack of communication is distressing. If they just kept us informed, that would be enough.”Pat Cummins has questioned the concept of the “perfect” Australian Test captain, saying the broader public treatment of Tim Paine made him uncomfortable about what he perceives as an “unreasonable” pressure to be flawless. Cummins used his first press conference as the 47th men’s Test skipper to praise the leadership of his predecessor, with whom he has been in regular contact. On Friday morning, Paine announced he would take an indefinite leave of absence from the game on mental health grounds following the text message scandal which signalled the end of his tenure and now likely his international career. “We really feel for Tim and his family,” Cummins said. “He’s just a really loved, well-respected leader for our team. He’s been incredible for me, especially since being vice-captain he’s been someone who has looked after me [and] who I’ve learned a lot off.” “That’s consistent with all the boys and the staff up here. We really feel for Tim and what he’s going through. We love him, we hope we see him back in the team soon and just wish him all the best.” In the hours after Paine’s manager, James Henderson, tweeted that he was “extremely concerned” about the wellbeing of the 36-year-old and his wife, Cricket Australia (CA) confirmed the worst-kept secret of the week by appointing Cummins to oversee the team’s Ashes defence, which is now less than two weeks away. He will be supported by Steve Smith, who was the paceman’s pick as deputy and who will take on what he described as an “elevated vice-captaincy role” to assist with the challenges associated with being Australia’s first fast-bowling captain since Ray Lindwall in a one-off Test in 1956. But while Cummins was upbeat and quick to insist the camp was relaxed before the first Test against England, starting on 8 December at the Gabba, the 28-year-old also pushed back on what he thought was a general tendency to put captains on a pedestal. “I’d say I’m not overly comfortable all the time about that,” he said. “I think that’s probably really hit home in the last few days seeing Tim. I think a lot of the pressure and the responsibility on being perfect is unreasonable. I think it’s too much to ask of anyone. You’ve got to have permission to grow.” Somebody well-accustomed to such pressure is Smith, who returns to a leadership position for the first time since the batter was stripped of the captaincy after the ball-tampering scandal of 2018. “There will be some negativity from some people about it. I understand that and I get that,” Smith said in the joint press conference. “But for me I know that I’ve grown a great deal over the last three or four years. I’m a more rounded individual, and in turn I think it’s turned me into a better leader. “I’ve been in a position the last few years playing as a leader and now the opportunity obviously to be standing here next to Patrick as a formal leader or a titled leader, I’m truly honoured.” Smith, who captained Australia for 34 Tests, will likely assume more responsibility than past vice-captains given CA’s unprecedented decision to appoint a fast bowler as skipper marks a major departure from tradition. Cummins anticipated he would be “leaning on him hugely” in terms of tactics, with CA also confirming he would take over in the event Cummins missed a match. “It potentially could look differently to what you’ve seen partnerships work in the past,” Cummins said. “There will be times on the field where I’ll throw to Steve and you’ll see Steve move fielders around, maybe doing bowling changes, taking a bit more of an elevated vice-captaincy role … we’ll nut out exactly how that works, but it’s going to be a real collaborative approach.” History at least suggests such a role is unlikely to affect Smith’s batting. His initial ascension to the vice-captaincy in 2014 coincided with his upward trajectory while his average of 70.36 as captain is bettered only by Don Bradman. Cummins has been the captaincy favourite since Paine stepped down a week ago, and CA ratified the decision at a board meeting on Thursday night after both he and Smith were interviewed earlier in the week. “Pat is an outstanding player and leader,” the CA chief executive, Nick Hockley, said. “He has earned enormous respect from his teammates and from all corners of the game for his attitude and achievements, both on and off the field.” The backdrop to the news is one of distress for Paine, who appears to have worn the baggy green for the last time. “Confirming that @tdpaine36 is stepping away from cricket for an indefinite mental health break,” Henderson posted on Twitter. “We are extremely concerned for his and Bonnie’s wellbeing and will be making no further comment at this time.” Paine last week said he remained available for Ashes selection, indicating his desire to end his Test career on the “ultimate high” of an Australian series defence at home. He had been called up and set to bat in Tasmania’s one-day match against Western Australia on Friday, giving him a chance to play five consecutive days of cricket after neck surgery in September. But Cricket Tasmania confirmed the veteran will step away from the game. “Following discussions over the last 24 hours, Tim Paine has advised he will be taking a leave of absence from all forms of cricket for the foreseeable future,” Cricket Tasmania said in a statement. CA said it was committed to supporting Paine and his family during “an incredibly difficult time”. “We respect and understand Tim’s decision to have a break at this time to focus on his and his family’s wellbeing,” Hockley said in a statement. Speculation over Paine’s place in the Australian Test team has been rife since his resignation after revelations that he had been investigated for sending sexually explicit text messages to a female former Cricket Tasmania staffer four years ago. While he was cleared by the 2018 investigation, he said last Friday he did not want the controversy to be a distraction during the Ashes. His omission means Alex Carey and Josh Inglis will likely vie for his spot behind the stumps.An Aboriginal woman sexual assault survivor with a serious heart condition who was forcibly strip-searched by a team of prison officers is suing the Australian Capital Territory government for breaching her human rights, arguing that her treatment was degrading and humiliating and amounted to torture. The woman, who cannot be named, had just been denied permission to attend her grandmother’s funeral and moved to the crisis support unit of the Alexander Maconochie Centre, when a team of prison staff, one of whom allegedly had a knife, decided to forcibly strip search her, according to a statement of claim filed in the ACT supreme court. Before they entered the cell, the woman was lying on her bed in a “calm state”, according to the court documents. The 37-year-old Ngunnawal woman has a pacemaker and a collapsed lung. She screamed for help, told the officers she was having pains in her chest, and warned she couldn’t breathe, according to the court documents. One officer asked colleagues “who’s got the knife?”, before saying to the woman, according to a transcript contained in court documents: “If you comply, I’ll get them [your clothes] off you and we’ll get this over and done with.” The knife was intended to be used to cut off her clothes, according to court documents. CCTV vision of the strip-search was allegedly watched live in the jail’s operation room. The detainee also has borderline personality disorder and is a sexual assault survivor. She had been on remand at the Alexander Maconochie Centre, a facility that is supposed to be human rights compliant, for six months when the incident took place. No medical advice was sought about whether the strip search was safe, given her medical condition, or appropriate, court documents allege. There was also no medical assessment of the woman prior to the strip search. A team of 12 prison officers were either in or near the cell during the search, including two males who were in “the immediate vicinity” of the woman, according to both court documents and a separate independent report on the incident. Other inmates in the unit could hear what was happening. The court documents allege the search was triggered by an officer who said she had seen the woman with her “hands in her crotch area”. The officers found nothing on the woman. The court documents say the officers realised after the search she was having her period. The woman outlined her version of events in a letter seen by Guardian Australia earlier this year. “Here I ask you to remember that I am a rape victim, so you can only imagine the horror, the screams, the degrading feeling, the absolute fear and shame I was experiencing … as well as the grief and despair, disappointment of not being able to attend my grandmother’s funeral,” she wrote. In early January, she was told her grandmother had died and the funeral was being held in a week’s time. The woman said she asked permission to attend and “completed paperwork” to make the request official. The day before the funeral, she was told that “due to logistics” the request was denied, which caused her to become “very upset”. She said prison staff moved her to the Crisis Support Unit, or CSU, “because they fear for my safety and mental health”. Earlier this year, the ACT’s Inspector of Correctional Services (ICS) released a report finding there was a lawful basis for the search, but that it was “not a last resort as required” by the territory’s Corrections Management Act and that it did not comply with the territory’s Human Rights Act. It reviewed footage showing the woman telling officers she “cannot breathe” at various times while detained. “During the use of force there are up to 12 staff in the immediate vicinity, some at times enter the cell, and others stay by the door or in the corridor outside the cell,” the report said. It found the two men involved were not directly watching the strip search but were in the vicinity. The case now launched by the woman, through her lawyers Ken Cush and Associates, alleges that the strip search violated the ACT’s Human Rights Act. It alleges the search breached her right to be protected from “torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment” and her right to be afforded “humane treatment when deprived of liberty”. The case also alleges her treatment by the prison, particularly the decision to refuse her request to attend her grandmother’s funeral, denied her cultural and other rights afforded to “Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and other minorities”. Winnunga Nimmityjah Aboriginal health centre CEO Julie Tongs said authorities needed to be held accountable for their treatment of the detainee. “Somebody needs to be accountable. [Name removed] was held accountable for what she did and went to prison. Yet, institutions can be the perpetrators and get away with it,” she said. Tongs said the ICS report was damning, outlining failures that needed urgent attention. “There were so many failures and breaches of the Human Rights Act and the corrections act. And yet, nothing changes. Nothing happens. One of the recommendations was for another body scanning machine. Why didn’t they have body scanning machines already? They should be installed. They should be there. But it just seems like it’s an everyday practice to strip search women and men coming in and going out of the jail. I just don’t get it.” Tongs said the woman has been traumatised by her experience. “We’re providing all support we can from Winnunga and she’s got family as well, but people just don’t take seriously enough what’s happening here in the ACT in the prison, and that’s why we need a royal commission. “[Name removed], she’s having good and bad days, and she will for the rest of her life. But you know, the end of the day, she did nothing wrong. They were the perpetrators and they need to be held accountable.” “She comes from a strong Aboriginal family and with strong cultural values and for her that would be devastating. And particularly for her not being able to go to their grandmother’s funeral. How did they think she was going to react? Why couldn’t they de-escalate the situation? But to traumatise her the way they did is absolutely disgusting.” The ACT government said it could not comment on the matter while it was before the courts.Australia has no plans to restrict flights from South Africa, despite the emergence of a new variant of Covid-19 which has prompted the UK to shut its borders to the country. As the World Health Organisation called an urgent meeting to discuss the new variant detected in South Africa, Australia’s health minister, Greg Hunt, said on Friday that officials were assessing the threat posed by the strain and would not yet introduce restrictions on arrivals from southern Africa. While Australia would “be able to act quickly if there’s advice”, Hunt told media the country’s chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, had advised him there was “no basis for change” in border arrangements. The UK on Friday announced it would ban flights from southern parts of Africa amid concern about the emerging B.1.1.529 variant, but Hunt said international health authorities were still gathering information about it. “The world is learning and looking [at] the strain,” he said. He had been briefed by both Kelly and the secretary of the department of health, Brendan Murphy, on Friday morning. “At this stage they are gathering information [but] we’re flexible and if the medical advice is we need to change then we won’t hesitate,” Hunt said. He said a repatriation flight from South Africa had arrived in Australia last week and the returnees had been in quarantine at Howard Springs in the Northern Territory. He was not aware of any cases of the new strain being detected in Australia. It comes as Dr Maria Van Kerkhove, the WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, said in a question-and-answer livestream on Friday that information about the strain was still emerging. “What we do know is that this variant has a large number of mutations. And the concern is that when you have so many mutations, it can have an impact on how the virus behaves,” she said. The emergence of a new strain is by no means a first. Another variant, C.1.2, was also detected in South Africa earlier this year, but has not proven as infectious as the more common Delta strain. However, the B.1.1.529 variant has raised concerns in the international community due to the “extremely high number” of mutations, which some researchers fear could help the virus evade immunity. Whether or not the strain is classified a variant of concern by the WHO, its emergence has drawn renewed attention to efforts to help increase global vaccination rates. South Africa’s vaccination rate is only about 24% while in neighbouring Botswana, where the strain has also been detected, only one in five people have been vaccinated. Prof Catherine Bennett, an epidemiologist from the University of Deakin, said the rest of the world needed to do more to increase global vaccination rates. “Australia has now contributed 9m doses to partners in the region, some to the Covax program, some to funding, but it isn’t enough,” she said. While Australia was “rightly” focused on our region, she said, low rates of vaccination across the globe remained a substantial problem. “Vaccination rates like in Botswana really does leave you vulnerable,” Bennett said. “It doesn’t have to be a super-infectious strain of the virus, it just has to get into places with those low vaccination rates. We don’t know what will happen with this, it might fizzle out and the vaccine might work just as well. But if any of those things isn’t quite right, you are putting yourself in a position where the virus might just make a bit of a leap in its evolutionary development.” On Friday Hunt defended international efforts for developing countries, saying there had been “extraordinarily high” rates of vaccination in some of those countries. “Our spare vaccines are being provided but beyond that we’re also working directly through the Covax program,” he said. “South Africa is doing everything it can to encourage vaccination within its population and to continue to expand its distribution network, but there are different challenges in different countries.”Candles. Pimple stickers I swore I’d never buy again (I’m big on second chances). Supplements and vitamins that, should history repeat itself, will expire before I take them. “Japanese” plates from Alibaba, probably made in China. A playsuit with lemons on it, a Clinique gift pack and one of those Mermade hair brushes that I hope will make me look like less of a mad scientist and more like the girls who fuel my Instagram insecurity. These are just some of the purchases I’ve made in the last couple of days, thanks to the inundation of Black Friday sale material creeping into every facet of my life. Am I buying into the hype? You bet, especially given Choice’s recent revelation that the Black Friday sales aren’t necessarily more epic than other, less-publicised consumer events throughout the year. “There are sales all year round so you don’t need to feel the pressure to buy at the Black Friday sales,” a Choice spokesperson said. Choice monitored marketing emails from 16 retailers over six months from May to October 2021. “From the nearly 2,500 emails we looked at, 81% referenced a sale or some other discount, with offers ranging from as little as 5% to as much as 96% off,” the spokesperson said. Still, you’d need to be living under a rock to evade the Black Friday frenzy, as these readers can attest to. Here, shoppers share some of the purchases they’ve made that they are already regretting. Seamus, Darlinghurst “I bought a beanie that’s at least three head sizes too big from Glue just because it was on sale for $20. Looking at it now I wonder how I thought my head would fit into it, and now it’s just going to sit there in the house because I know I will never make the effort to return it. My partner got a blue lipstick though, simply because they ran out of the red shade she wanted, so we’re not sure which of one of us has lost their mind. Maybe both?” Nat, Burwood “I just bought $250 worth of activewear from STAX because I got a free gift. Their collection is so flattering and the colours are stunning – lilacs and forest greens – but I don’t work out. In fact, I haven’t been back to a gym since Feb. I am in marketing, and I just got marketed [to].” Josephine, Greenacre “I bought a hundred dollars’ worth of tubs and organisational products to organise my house with. They’re all plonked on the dining table – which we currently can’t use – so I am trying to convince my husband to take me to Ikea today so I can buy (and assemble) more storage to accommodate my new purchases.” James, Bowral “I got my son a toy garbage truck. I’m feeling a little embarrassed about it because my sister got him a toy garbage truck for Christmas last year, and one day when he got bored of it, my wife donated it to Vinnies. Now he wants one again, and it’s not going to be the one we had, and I am caught between my wife who is manic about clutter, my son who is just a kid who will love and hate toys, and my sister, who will wonder what happened to the one she got. The consumerism at this time of year is the worst, and I hate partaking in it.” Laura, Blue Mountains “I just bought a swimsuit from Andie Swim, because I love swimwear, which makes no sense at all because I absolutely will not get in water that’s colder than 30C and, apparently, we’re going to have a cool, wet summer. It’s super cute though and was only $50 down from $150! I should also mention that I have at least 20 other swimsuits so I did not need this in any way, shape or form but I was recently diagnosed with ADHD, and I’ve come to understand that my constant shopping is a part of the disorder – it’s my brain’s incessant quest for dopamine and stimulation!” Benji, Darwin “I impulse-bought a solar panel USB charger that came with alligator clips to jump-start a car for $150. I talked myself into it because I was doing lots of outdoor stuff at the time, and a few weeks prior, I had gotten bogged in the mud. The jump-starting function really sold the NEED part to my brain. I’ve already thought about reselling it but it feels kind of dumb to never use it. I did cancel my catch.com.au account because I noticed that I just bought junk from there though.” Tammi, West Pennant Hills “I got Bio Pellets for my plants to help them grow, even though my cat will likely eat and get sick from them. I really want lush plants, and I liked the idea of ‘set and forget’ fertiliser. I figured it looks great, it’s on sale, it’s a small business – add to cart! I probably could have gotten something cheaper from Bunnings but I loved the company’s branding. It was so pretty; I could have gotten everything.” Donna, Gerringong “I purchased a whole bunch of soaps from L’Occitane, which I really did not need. I just got caught up in the Black Friday frenzy. My partner walks around talking about how our house is so full, we should never buy another thing. So I guess it’s a good thing I didn’t buy a new Dyson, because the one we have is perfectly fine. I just wanted the new one!”Liberal backbencher Bridget Archer says she didn’t want to be hauled into a meeting with Scott Morrison after she crossed the floor to support an independent MP’s integrity commission bill. The prime minister has moved to quell internal revolts by talking to Archer on Thursday afternoon and separately referring the controversial religious discrimination bill to a joint committee. Morrison on Friday defended the “friendly” meeting with Archer after she supported a bid by Helen Haines to suspend standing orders to push for a stronger anti-corruption watchdog. Archer met Morrison, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, and the foreign minister, Marise Payne, after her bold move to vote against the Coalition was defeated only because a procedural technicality required an absolute majority. On Friday, Morrison said it was “a very warm, friendly and supportive meeting” and he would not describe it as “frank”. “Bridget is a close friend and colleague, and I wanted to ensure that she was being supported,” he told reporters in Adelaide. But Archer told Guardian Australia that while the meeting was friendly, it was a “frank discussion – not just a pastoral care meeting”. “I would have preferred not to have the meeting at that time while I was feeling emotional,” she said. The meeting covered Archer’s decision to exercise her right to cross the floor on an integrity commission and her views on religious discrimination. Archer was offered a pair for the final sitting week of parliament, which would have neutralised her ability to support motions like the one attempted by Haines, but she declined. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said on Friday that Archer had “stood up for a national integrity commission which the government says was its own policy”. “Why is it that Scott Morrison could take action against Bridget Archer but is silent about George Christensen?” he asked. Christensen crossed the floor this week to vote against the government’s litigation funding bill, and is one of several MPs and senators who have either reserved their right to cross the floor or withhold their vote from government legislation unless it does more to combat Covid-19 vaccine mandates and improve the adverse-event indemnity scheme. With one final sitting week for 2021, the Morrison government faces revolts over vaccine mandates, territories’ rights to legislate on euthanasia, the integrity commission and religious freedom. Archer is one of a number of Liberal MPs pushing for changes to protect LGBT students and teachers alongside the bill to prohibit religious discrimination which gives religious schools hiring and firing powers to preserve their “ethos”. On Friday, the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, referred the religious discrimination bill to the joint committee on human rights to report by 4 February 2022. Morrison had suggested the bill should be passed in the lower house early next week before going to a Senate committee. But on Thursday, Labor defeated the government’s attempt to set up a Senate inquiry to report by February. The government’s plan is now to not put the bill to a lower house vote next week but rather wait for the inquiry to report. Labor and Liberal moderates, including Trent Zimmerman, believe the bill is better dealt with by a joint committee that allows MPs and senators to provide input and could improve the chance of bipartisan support. Liberal senator Andrew Bragg told Guardian Australia it was “important” that stakeholders made submissions to the inquiry with “drafting to fix the issues with teachers and students”. “What it will show is that we can fix it in one go,” he said. The joint human rights committee chosen by Cash as the forum for the inquiry is chaired by National MP Anne Webster and co-chaired by Labor’s Graham Perrett. Although the committee recently stood up to the government over its voter identification proposal, it is considered a relatively friendly forum for the religious discrimination bill because many of the Liberal moderates most vocal on the need to prevent discrimination on other grounds – such as Zimmerman, Bragg, Fiona Martin and Dave Sharma – are not on it. Guardian Australia understands Labor did not agree to the referral and is lobbying for a joint select committee – which would allow any MP or senator to contribute to an inquiry and a longer reporting period. On Friday, Labor senators challenged Cash at Senate estimates to commit to introduce the Coalition’s national integrity commission bill this year. Cash said it was a “decision for the government”. The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, said Australia needed “a powerful and independent anti-corruption commission” and he accused the Morrison government of doing “everything in their power to stop it”. The financial services minister, Jane Hume, told Sky News it was still the government’s “intention” to introduce the integrity commission bill this year.As one of the reporters who worked to uncover the operations of white power accelerationist group, The Base, I view the Australian federal government’s listing of them as a proscribed terror group this week as a belated but important recognition of the danger presented by white supremacist organisations. But the national security state is a blunt instrument, and the apparatus of anti-terrorism is no substitute for making anti-racism principles central to a more inclusive democracy. At its height, The Base was a transnational network of white nationalists who were seeking to collectively plan and prepare for what they saw as the inevitable collapse of liberal democracies they saw as decadent and corrupted by the values of feminism and multiculturalism. In the Guardian US, I was the first reporter to identify Rinaldo Nazzaro, an American former US intelligence contractor now based in Russia, as the group’s founder and leader. Previously he had only been known by the aliases Norman Spear and Roman Wolf. An infiltrator gave me unprecedented access to the group’s internal communications. There I saw that although their group claimed only to be preparing for disaster, their conversations functioned to further indoctrinate members in a poisonous ideology of racial hatred, and the group’s relentlessly repeated fantasies of terroristic violence, for some of them, translated into real-world acts of destruction. Members of the group are now facing trial for offences ranging from vandalising synagogues to assassination plots. Late last month, one member, former Canadian serviceman Patrik Mathews, was sentenced to nine years in federal prison for engaging in a terror plot with other members of the group. Later, I showed how The Base’s efforts to recruit in Australia had led to them vetting Dean Smith in 2019, who was a federal election candidate for One Nation in Western Australia the same year. Smith ended up withdrawing his application and there is no evidence he has engaged in or planned any violence. Further reporting from the ABC and Nine/Fairfax showed the extent to which other Australian prospects for The Base at the time were part of a local network of white supremacists and far-right organisations that included local groups like the Lads Society who publicly disavow violence. All of this reporting, including mine, was facilitated by informants from the activist world of anti-fascism, including Australia’s White Rose Society. Together, these efforts showed that The Base’s Australian recruits were connected to groups like the Lads Society, which had been in contact with Australian terrorist mass murderer Brenton Tarrant in the years before his crimes. Tarrant was in turn venerated as a white supremacist “saint” in The Base chats I obtained access to. In the lead-up to Tarrant’s crime, various members of the far-right had been given platforms in mainstream media outlets, ranging from Sky News to Triple J. After one such media appearance by Australian far-right extremist Blair Cottrell, Tarrant was moved to praise him on Facebook as the “true leader of the nationalist movement in Australia”. Cottrell, who in 2015 was convicted of racial vilification after making a video beheading a dummy in protest of a Bendigo mosque, has said he has never met Tarrant and has described him as “an idiot”. Some media outlets realised too late that elevating extremists in this way, and amplifying their message, can have serious consequences. Other outlets have adopted rightwing conspiracy theory as a business model. Cottrell and the Lads Society may not advocate terror, but their extremist views are seemingly shared by those who do. Where governments are concerned, their response to white supremacist terror has been flatfooted when compared with the heavy-handed approach to the so-called “war on terror”, which has frequently tipped over into indiscriminate surveillance and overpolicing of Australia’s entire Muslim community. For this government, the war on terror has never ended, and as if to underline this fact, Hezbollah was listed along with The Base this week. No Australian Muslim has committed any terrorist attack on the scale of Tarrant’s massacre, and as I observed at the time, Tarrant’s own crime needs to be understood in the context of the culture of Islamophobia produced by Australia’s participation in the wars in Iraq, Afghanistan and at home. The experience of the war on terror should be what leads us to ask whether the national security state is best equipped to deal with the danger of white supremacist violence. Obviously, crimes of violence and criminal conspiracies should be punished and seen to be punished. But courts, prisons and even universal surveillance cannot solve the problem at the heart of white supremacist terror, which is racism. A multicultural settler society cannot be just or even function for all of its members unless it makes racial equality and anti-racism core values. Such a society would not tolerate racial vilification and hatred, whether in white nationalist groups or tabloid newspapers. But it would also be distinguished by the positive actions it took: on the endlessly deferred task of Indigenous reconciliation; on welcoming refugees, wherever they may be fleeing from; on ensuring that Australia’s diverse communities are represented in the composition of parliaments, appointed bodies and, I daresay, newsrooms. The Base has been banned, but other such groups will form and radicalise young Australians until we confront the beliefs that sustain them. Jason Wilson is a Guardian Australia columnistThe World Health Organization will meet on Friday to assess a new variant detected in South Africa that is feared to be the worst Covid-19 variant yet identified. The meeting will determine if the B.1.1.529 variant should be designated a variant of “interest” or of “concern”. The variant, which was identified on Tuesday, initially attracted attention because it carries an “extremely high number” of mutations. Some world leaders have hastily responded by issuing new precautions and travel restrictions, while markets around the world saw falls sparked by the uncertainty. Indian health officials on Friday put states on alert, asking them to carry out “rigorous screening and testing” of travellers who had arrived from South Africa, Botswana and Hong Kong, and to trace and test their contacts. Health secretary Rajesh Bhushan urged all states to ensure that samples from Covid-positive travellers were swiftly sent to genome sequencing labs for testing. Singapore, a major transit hub, said on Friday it would restrict arrivals from South Africa and countries nearby. All non-Singaporean or non-permanent residents with recent travel history to Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, and Zimbabwe will be denied entry or transit through Singapore, its health ministry said. Italy announced a similar entry ban on Friday. “Our scientists are studying the new B.1.1.529 variant. In the meantime, we will adopt the greatest possible caution,” health minister Roberto Speranza said. Japan, too, will clamp down on border controls for visitors from South Africa and five other African countries, the Jiji news service reported. New Zealand is also closely monitoring global advice on the new variant, the ministry of health said. The deputy prime minister, Grant Robertson, said the new variant was “a real wake-up call for all of us, that this pandemic is still going” and reiterated the need to continue with caution. Dr Maria Van Kerkhove, WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, said in a press briefing on Thursday: “We don’t know very much about this [variant] yet. What we do know is that this variant has a large number of mutations. And the concern is that when you have so many mutations, it can have an impact on how the virus behaves.” The infectious disease epidemiologist said that researchers would meet to “understand where these mutations are and what this potentially may mean” in terms of whether it is more transmissible or has potential to evade immunity. A high number of mutations does not necessarily make a variant more transmissible. In August, similar concerns emerged about a variant in South Africa, known as C.1.2, but it was never listed as a variant of interest or concern. In Japan, some experts believe the country’s pronounced fall in cases was down to mutations that drove it towards “natural extinction”. At the meeting the WHO may decide whether or not to give the B.1.1.529 variant a name from the Greek alphabet. If it does, it is likely to be named Nu, the next available letter. England announced it was temporarily banning flights from South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Lesotho and Eswatini from midnight on Friday, and that returning travellers from those destinations would have to quarantine. Israel has followed suit, saying it will ban its citizens from travelling to southern Africa. UK civil service sources said the variant, which is feared to be more transmissible and has the potential to evade immunity, posed “a potentially significant threat to the vaccine programme which we have to protect at all costs”. Britain’s health secretary, Sajid Javid, confirmed the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) was investigating, saying “more data is needed but we’re taking precautions now” in a tweet late on Thursday. UKHSA chief executive Jenny Harries said: “This is the most significant variant we have encountered to date and urgent research is under way to learn more about its transmissibility, severity and vaccine-susceptibility.” Scotland confirmed late on Thursday that all arrivals from South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, Botswana, Eswatini and Zimbabwe will be required to self-isolate and take two PCR tests from midday on Friday, while anyone arriving after 4am on Saturday will need to stay at a managed quarantine hotel. Australia’s health minister, Greg Hunt, said it was investigating and would swiftly close its borders to travellers from the African nation if the WHO were to classify it as a major new variant. “If the medical advice is that we need to change, we won’t hesitate,” he told reporters on Friday morning. South Africa’s Foreign Ministry said Britain’s decision to ban flights from the nation “seems to have been rushed” voicing concerns over the potential damage to tourism and business in both countries. Foreign minister Naledi Pandor said South Africa would engage with British authorities to try to get them to reconsider their decision. Markets took a hit on Friday, with world stocks heading for a 0.7% fall – their largest weekly drop in nearly two months, Reuters reported. South Africa’s rand fell 1%, Japan’s Nikkei was down 2.4% and Australian shares fell 0.6% in early trade, as did US crude futures. S&amp;P 500 futures fell 0.4%, while the Australian and New Zealand dollars dropped to three-month lows. “The trigger was news of this Covid variant ...and the uncertainty as to what this means,” said Ray Attrill, head of FX strategy at National Australia Bank in Sydney. “You shoot first and ask questions later when this sort of news erupts.” On Thursday, South Africa’s health minister Dr Joe Phaahla said the new variant could be driving a recent “exponential rise” in cases in Gauteng, a north-eastern province home to the city of Johannesburg. B.1.1.529 is thought to contain a total of 32 unusual mutations to the spike protein, the part of the virus that most vaccines use to prime the immune system against Covid. Penny Moore, a virologist at the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, whose lab is assessing the variant, said: “We’re flying at warp speed.” She said there were anecdotal reports of reinfections but that it was too early to draw any conclusions. Professor Tulio de Oliveira, director of South Africa’s centre for epidemic response and innovation, said the news was “really worrisome at the mutational level” and described the variant as being “of great concern”. Variants of concern, such as Delta, show increased transmissibility, virulence or change in clinical disease, and a decreased effectiveness of public health and social measures. Variants of interest are those shown to cause community transmission in multiple clusters, and which have been detected in multiple countries, but have not yet necessarily proven to be more virulent or transmissible. An infectious diseases specialist at the University of KwaZulu-Natal in Durban, Dr Richard Lessells, said the number of mutations “might affect how well the virus is neutralised” and may give the virus enhanced transmissibility. South Africa has confirmed about 100 cases as B.1.1.529 but the variant has also been found in Botswana and Hong Kong, with the Hong Kong case a traveller from South Africa. The significance of the variant so far remains unknown, with the coming days and weeks key to determining its severity. “It will take a few weeks for us to understand what impact this variant has,” Kerkhove of the WHO said, adding the variant is “under monitoring” and “something to watch”. Ewan Birney, the deputy director general of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory and a member of Spi-M, which advises the UK government, said it posed a risk of worsening the pandemic. He urged countries not to repeat the mistake of failing to act quickly. “What we’ve learned from the other situations like this – some have turned out OK and some haven’t – is that whilst we’re [investigating] you have to be reasonably paranoid,” he said. The 32 mutations in the spike protein is about double the number associated with the Delta variant. Mutations of this kind can affect the virus’s ability to infect cells and spread, but also make it harder for immune cells to attack the pathogen. However, Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention chief John Nkengasong urged for caution. “There are so many variants out there but some of them are of no consequence on the trajectory of the epidemic,” he told a news conference on Thursday.The remuneration of Australia’s highest-paid chief executives has exploded by an average of almost 70% in the past year, new data shows. Kogan boss, Ruslan Kogan, enjoyed the biggest increase among the top 50 highest paid executives, his pay skyrocketing from $594,000 to almost $9m this year – an increase of more than 1,400% – according to data compiled by remuneration research company OpenDirector. Macquarie Group’s CEO, Shemara Wikramanayake, enjoyed the largest package among the top 50, worth $15.97m, up 7% from $14.91m. The figures are based on accounting calculations of the value of a CEO’s base salary and bonuses, which are often linked to the company’s share price. However, actual take-home pay can be vastly higher or lower, as previously arranged bonuses crystallise into cash or shares. On a take-home basis, CSL’s boss, Paul Perreault, pocketed $61m this year, boosted by a share price that has steadily risen over the past five years. This contrasts with the value of his packet on a statutory accounting basis, which fell 9% from $15.23m to $13.87m. Take-home pay among ASX100 CEOs fell by 3.6% during the height of the pandemic in 2020, according to data compiled by proxy firm Ownership Matters for the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors. OpenDirector’s CEO, Donald Hellyer, said executive pay had “come roaring back” this year. He said base pay had barely changed but short-term bonuses went up dramatically as share prices surged due to record low interest rates. “The cynic in me says, is this a result of good, hard work, or is this just a result that very low interest rates are driving up the stock market? “Who wins and who loses when you have really low interest rates, and the stock market goes up, housing market goes up. Well, people with money win out when interest rates go down, because they’re basically involved with risky assets.” There was no skills shortage among executive ranks, he said. He questioned whether company directors, who oversee the pay and performance of executives, “have the strength of character to be prepared to lose senior executives based on pay”. “I don’t see it,” he said. “You don’t really see executives leaving from one ASX 50 company to go work as a CEO for another ASX 50 company, so it’s certainly not happening at the top end of town.” Pay went down for only nine of the top 50 chief executives, OpenDirector’s data shows. The package enjoyed by Ian Testrow, the CEO of mining services company Emeco, fell the most, tumbling 46% from $9.96m to $5.35m. The pay package of the Fortescue Metals Group boss, Elizabeth Gaines, sustained the second biggest fall, shrinking 22%, from $6.11m to $4.76m. The second biggest gain was enjoyed by Shane Fallscheer, the boss of Lovisa, who resigned in October after 12 years atop the cheap and cheerful jewellery retailer. His package swelled by 273%, from $1.22m to $4.56m. Five CEOs were on packages worth more than $10m – Wikramanayake, Perreault, Goodman Group’s Greg Goodman, Newcrest Mining’s Sandeep Biswas and BHP’s Mike Henry.Were they driven to the freezing shores of Europe by desperation, or did several thousand Kurds instead make the dangerous journey in search of opportunity? As officials in Iraqi Kurdistan grapple with what is driving a crisis that is thought to have led to scores of citizens drowning in the Channel on Wednesday, and thousands of others to brave precarious migrant routes to Europe, even more are preparing to leave. “I’ll do what I need to,” said one recent graduate from a university in Sulaymaniyah. “If I stay here I’m going to drown in debt anyway.” News of the deaths at sea, a short distance from UK waters, which tens of thousands of Kurds have sought to reach in recent decades, met a mute response in the capital, Erbil, and the second city of Sulaymaniyah. Many of the drowning victims are thought to have come from the Ranya region to the north of the city, where on Thursday families were anxiously waiting for news from their sons and daughters. “The last time I talked to my brother was yesterday, in the morning,” said Razen Salim, 26. “He said we will cross now from France to the UK but since then we have not heard anything about him or his group. We have seen some pictures online which suggest some made it to the other side, but we can’t recognise them well. We hope they managed and maybe now they have been caught by UK police and that’s why they are not online.” Kurds from Ranya make up a disproportionate number of those who have travelled to Belarus in recent weeks, hoping to cross the Polish border that acts as a gateway to the European Union. “That’s the holy grail for us,” said the recent graduate. “If we get there we’ll be respected and can live our lives. If we stay, we won’t have either respect or life.” The prime minister of the Kurdish regional government, Masrour Barzani, who has attempted to stem the exodus from Iraq’s Kurdish north, said a search for opportunity had been the main driver – not economic desperation. “Unfortunately, it looks like that these people have been exploited by a number of people, let’s say ‘travel agents’, human traffickers, some political merchants, if I may say that, and of course some people from within Belarus as well,” he said at the Middle East peace and security summit in the city of Duhok last week. “These people did not leave this area under any sort of pressure, and they were not legally pursued, or imposed with any restrictions on their travel, so most of these people travelled freely on their own will through airlines and official channels. “Many want to go to Europe in search of a different opportunity,” Barzani said. “It’s not a flight of desperation. I hope the world knows that these people went there like every other immigrant wants to travel and go in search of different opportunities in different parts of the world. But if they want to return, they can always return here.” Repatriation flights organised by Iraq’s national airline, Iraqi Airways, has returned 400 Kurds from Belarus to Erbil in the past week. Another 700 have signed up to return, and Kurdish officials say they have arrested 10 travel agents who had facilitated their journeys. Airport security officials have also attempted to block passengers from leaving for Minsk, scrutinising journeys and looking for known stopover points – Istanbul and Damascus in particular. Those still determined to leave say the opportunities officials speak about either don’t exist or are confined to small sectors of a struggling economy. “They want this to happen, but saying it is so doesn’t make it so,’’ the student said. “As long as things are as bad as they are, people are going to want to leave.”Behind Boris Johnson’s suggestions, after the Channel drownings, that France was not doing enough to stop small boat crossings, lies a more complex picture. There is a growing sense among charities and the French political class that policing, security and repression alone cannot solve the issue of refugees risking their life to reach the UK to claim asylum. In the past year, with rising numbers of attempted small boat crossings across the perilous shipping lanes of the Channel, there has been a significant increase in policing and patrols along the French coast, with new surveillance equipment, reservists called in, and more than 600 police officers and gendarmes working 24 hours a day – increasingly at night – to patrol a 40-mile stretch of rugged coast. UK financing has already contributed to new technology and an increase in officers. In addition, asylum seekers sleeping rough are moved on nightly, with tents and sleeping bags confiscated and camps broken up. Asylum seekers who have made the journey by boat in the past 18 months have described a strong police presence on the beaches, and attempts were regularly made to prevent people from launching small boats. An Iranian refugee who travelled to the UK late last year said he had made three attempts to leave in a boat, each of which was stopped by French police, before his group managed to evade police attention and successfully depart on their fourth attempt. On one occasion, the police came because they heard the noise of passengers screaming and asking to be allowed to disembark, after they had second thoughts about the quality of the vessel they were being asked to travel in. On the second and third attempt, police arrived with torches, and confiscated the boats before they were able to launch. “We weren’t detained by the police, they would just make us walk away from the beach back to the Jungle, following us for a while to make sure we were really leaving,” the refugee said. The picture on some UK newspaper front pages this week, which appeared to show a French police vehicle standing still on a French beach while a dinghy of migrants entered the sea, increased UK politicians’ insistence that policing was key. A reporter on the ground said the patrol car had circled as if to attempt to stop the dinghy leaving when a woman and child had stepped into its path. France says its forces have stopped 65% of attempted crossings in recent months, up from 50%. French opposition politicians are increasingly looking beyond the security crackdown and demanding a review of asylum policy and renegotiation of the 2003 Le Touquet agreement that effectively placed the British border on the French side of the Channel. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, suggested on Thursday that the UK should look first at its labour market and the bosses who employ illegal labour. Nicolas Laroye has worked for the French border police along the northern coast for 12 years, as an officer in Dunkirk for 20 years, and is trade union official for the UNSA Police union on the small boats issue. He said: “This is a 60km stretch of coast running to the Belgian border. It is very hard to patrol because the beaches are bordered by substantial sand dunes, where people can hide at night, emerging once patrols have passed. The only real solution would be to put a cordon the whole length of the coast, but of course that’s not possible. In the past year there has been a noticeable increase in resources, and French-British cooperation: 4x4 cars, kit such as night vision binoculars and thermic binoculars, and retired officers coming in as reservists.” He said: “When you see the number of my colleagues who wade into shallow waters to save women, children and young people – and a lot of lives have been saved – this week’s deaths are catastrophic.” Olivier Cahn, professor of law and criminal science at Cergy Paris University who has spent 20 years studying the border issue and French-British police cooperation, said: “It is an illusion to think that strictly controlling policing and increasing repression will resolve the problem. For 20 years, all that has done is increase traffickers’ price for a passage.” He said it was the joint British and French security crackdown to seal off the Calais port and tunnel with fencing and policing “akin to securing a nuclear airbase”, in reaction to lorry crossings, that had pushed people to try more dangerous crossings by small boat in recent years.Australia’s defence minister has ramped up his pre-election warnings about the threat posed by China, declaring Beijing wants countries to be “tributary states” and is building up its military at a scale that is unlikely to be peaceful. Peter Dutton said on Friday “dark clouds” were forming in the region, and countries “would be foolish to repeat the mistakes of the 1930s”. He said the price of Australia coming to Taiwan’s aid in a military conflict may be lower than the consequences of inaction, while accusing his critics of engaging in “simplistic” or “wishful thinking” about China’s change in posture. China’s embassy hit back at Dutton, saying he was “fanning conflict and division”, and it hinted at further harm to the already-strained relationship between Australia and its largest trading partner. Dutton, a significant conservative figure in Scott Morrison’s government, said China’s president, Xi Jinping, was not bluffing about Beijing’s determination to take Taiwan by the 2040s. Dutton argued China would not stop there. “If Taiwan is taken, surely the Senkakus are next,” he said, referring to uninhabited islets in the East China Sea administered by Japan but claimed by China, where they are known as Diaoyu Dao. The minister predicted China would also impose a more coercive relationship with other countries in the region, resulting in “a perilous military and economic situation for our country and many others”. Just days after he was accused by the opposition of dangerously amping up the prospect of war for domestic political purposes, Dutton injected an election message into his speech. He said it was a “time of great uncertainty” and Australians “can be certain that the government – the Morrison government – will act to keep them safe”. “Over the next decade, China’s nuclear warhead stockpile – estimated to be in the 200s last year – is projected to reach between 700 and 1,000 warheads,” Dutton told the National Press Club on Friday. “Every major city in Australia, including Hobart, is within range of China’s missiles.” Dutton said the Indo-Pacific was “witness to a military build-up of a scale and ambition that, historically, has rarely been associated with peaceful outcomes”. Dutton said despite high tensions, the region was not on an inevitable path to conflict, “but only if all countries of goodwill ensure together we do our utmost to steer clear of the cliff face”. “Does the Chinese government wish to occupy other countries? Not in my judgement,” Dutton said. “But they do see us as tributary states – and that surrender of sovereignty and abandonment of any adherence to the international rule of law is what our country has fought against since federation. “It has come at great human cost and any repeat of the mistakes of the 1930s would again exact a great cost on our country and many more.” Dutton’s speech reflects increasing concerns held by the Australian government about China’s military buildup and its activities in the South and East China seas and the ratcheting up of military pressure against Taiwan. But his intervention also reinforces efforts by the Morrison government to portray Labor as weak on national security and on China ahead of the election – even though there is generally bipartisan consensus on the strategic challenges in the region. Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, said Dutton’s speech was a case of “desperate political tactics”. She said Dutton, a one-time contender for the prime ministership who fell short in the 2018 Liberal party vote, was auditioning for Morrison’s job. The former Australian prime minister Paul Keating went on the attack, labelling Dutton “a dangerous personality” who had laid out a “chillingly aggressive and unrealistic scenario as to Australia’s foreign and defence posture in the region”. Keating – who weeks earlier had called for Australia to stay out of any war over status of Taiwan and who is critical of the bipartisan consensus on foreign policy – said that posture was “inappropriate to Australia’s vulnerable geographic circumstances”. “Peter Dutton, by his incautious utterances, persists in injecting Australia into a potentially explosive situation in north Asia – a situation Australia is not in any position to manage or control, let alone to succeed and prosper in,” Keating said in a statement. Dutton had earlier accused Keating of being in favour of appeasement with China, and of being out of touch with the current strategic realities. “Well, I mean, if you look at Paul Keating, Neville Keating or Paul Chamberlain – take your pick, they’re all pretty appropriate monikers for Paul Keating,” Dutton said. “I can’t, for the life of me, reference any of what Paul Keating is saying to fact in the year 2021. There’s a great delight in thinking the US might be in decline in Keating’s mind.” The Australian government and the Labor party have both raised concerns in recent times about an increase in Chinese military pressure against Taiwan, a democratically governed island of 24 million people, amid Beijing’s long-term goal of “unification” with what it considers its territory. Dutton told the Australian newspaper earlier this month: “It would be inconceivable that we wouldn’t support the US in an action if the US chose to take that action.” Dutton said he would not deploy military personnel lightly, adding that he “felt that weight heavily” when he sent personnel to Kabul in August to assist with evacuation after the Taliban took control of Afghanistan. “I cited the 1930s before and there are many men and women who, as parents, sent their children off to conflict in the near region and across Europe and many other parts of the world and those soldiers and those veterans suffered and paid a great price and I never want to see that repeated,” Dutton said. He said if Australia were “a weak and unreliable and untrustworthy friend” to its top security ally, then it could not count on US support in the future – an outcome “that would be disastrous for not just this generation but for generations of mums and dads and members of the ADF”. A spokesperson for the Chinese embassy said it was “inconceivable” that the relationship between China and Australia would “take on a good momentum” or that Australia’s overall interests would be served “if the Australian government bases its national strategy on such visionless analysis and outdated mentality”. Beijing rolled out a range of trade actions against Australian export sectors last year, including wine, barley, beef and seafood, and has refused to allow ministerial calls on the basis of a bad “atmosphere” for talks. The Australian government has said it will not bow to “economic coercion” and it reached a new security agreement with the US and the UK - called Aukus - to acquire at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines from about 2040. Labor’s defence spokesperson, Brendan O’Connor, called on Morrison to “rein in” Dutton, arguing it was “really irresponsible” for the defence minister to misrepresent the views of the Australian opposition. “I think he has every right to say that we have to be prepared for the worst and obviously look to ensure the best possible outcome in our region – but I do not think using for political purposes war rhetoric has been useful, has been helpful, has in any way been wise,” O’Connor told Sky News. “We will not back down to the list of demands from China, and we support the government when it comes to defending our values and our interests in this region,” O’Connor said.Though in her later years my mother could barely walk, she still loved to be driven through the woods, especially at this time of year. The combination of low-angled sunlight and the golden and bronze canopy had her glued to the car window. If she spotted a small child kicking their wellington boots through the leaf litter, her joy was complete. She might no longer have done such things herself, but she still had the memory of it. This autumn has been unusually brilliant, the long spell of dry settled weather providing a spectacular display and deepening piles of crisp leaves. And the fact that my mother died just as it was starting added extra poignancy to the familiar pattern of the fading year. To lift my spirits, I have been walking through this ancient woodland most days. “Nothing gold can stay,” Robert Frost promised, but even in mid-November, the trees are still holding leaves, most noticeably those of the sweet chestnut – lemon yellow and transparent against the sunlight, but tan on the ground, their saw-toothed outline so much bigger than the coppery beech. Leaf senescence, like its human equivalent, can seem drily academic when viewed at the cellular level. The chloroplasts that feed the trees break down, and enzymes degrade the chlorophyll they contain, changing leaf colour in the process. Yet, to the human eye, a mosaic whose overall effect was flat green has been transformed into glittering fragments – some compensation for the withering hours of daylight. Life goes on, even in the heaps of dead leaves, which will even out the bumps in temperature for creatures living close to the soil. They also offer shelter to larvae of all sorts of Lepidoptera, including the elephant hawk moth, a local favourite but increasingly scarce hereabouts. Tucked up in their leafy haven, larvae enter a state of arrested development known as the diapause. In the distance I hear the insistent blast of a leaf blower, a sound someone recently described to me as “the eighth trumpet of the apocalypse”. For the moths and butterflies in Britain’s gardens, that is literally true. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryParts of Sydney’s north and west could face flooding with the latest big rain event predicted to cause the city’s main dam to spill. WaterNSW is forecasting Warragamba dam will reach full capacity and begin overflowing into the Hawkesbury-Nepean River downstream from Friday evening. At the upper end of predictions, the dam’s catchment area will receive as much as 100mm of rain from the current event. If the forecasts are correct, Warragamba’s spill could reach a peak rate of as much as 100 gigalitres a day by Saturday morning, WaterNSW’s modelling shows. Such a flow, though, would only be one-fifth of the rate during March’s extensive flooding in the region, a WaterNSW spokesperson said. “Downstream impacts are likely and will be determined by the spill volume combined with downstream tributary flows,” the official said. Waragamba was at about 99% full on Thursday with the city’s overall reservoir network sitting at 95.5% full. On Friday morning, the Bureau of Meteorology issued a weather alert, advising motorist to “take extreme care”. “Flooded roads and reduced visibility in heavy rain will make driving conditions dangerous during Friday in all suburbs,” the warning said. The bureau earlier this week declared a La Nina event is under way in the Pacific. The weather pattern, combined with other influences, typically means eastern Australia will have above average rainfall for the coming summer. Insurers are among those gearing up increased damage bills from floods and a more active cyclone season than usual. The bureau’s latest seasonal forecast, issued on Thursday, also pointed to a cooler than average summer for eastern parts of the summer at least for daytime temperatures. Sydney’s forecast was for as much as 45mm of rain on Friday. It received 21mm in the 24 hours to 9am. Rainfall totals in that period also included almost 50mm for Richmond to Sydney’s north-west and about 43mm for Penrith, to the west. On Thursday, authorities said they had been increasing releases from Hume Dam into the Murray River gradually over the past week in anticipation of the rain. Thursday’s release was about 30GL. “There remains a high level of uncertainty around the weather pattern. If rainfall continues to be intense and generate significant runoff in the next few hours, releases will rise further to 35 GL per day, with the potential for further increases over the next day or two,” the Murray Darling Basin Authority said in a statement. The bureau has an initial flood warning out for minor flooding at Corowa on the Murray. Many inland rivers, such as the Gwydir, Lachlan, Macquarie, Murrumbidgee and Namoi, face the prospect of flooding, with dams full and widespread rain falling or expected. Meanwhile, in Queensland, a man’s body was found in a ute submerged in floodwaters. A passerby noticed the ute and dead man near the Gregory Highway in Hibernia, west of Rockhampton, about 7am on Friday. They alerted police and emergency services who were working to get the ute out of the water. “Recovery of the vehicle may take some time due to the location and current weather conditions,” a police spokesperson said in a statement. The forensic crash unit is probing the man’s death. It is not clear how he died. Detectives are unsure whether the man’s car was swept off the road and he drowned, or if he died as a result of a prior crash or medical episode and the ute was later washed away. Heavy rains have been lashing the region for two days with falls up to 270mm in some places and localised flash flooding.Primary school children who are placed in the bottom ability group in their class go on to show increased levels of hyperactivity and emotional problems throughout childhood and early adolescence, groundbreaking new research shows. While the impact of ability grouping on children’s academic attainment has been extensively researched, the study by University College London (UCL) Institute of Education focuses on behavioural and emotional outcomes for young people who find themselves in the lowest ability groups at an early age. The new findings, published in the Child Development journal, have prompted researchers to call for children in lower ability groups within classes to be monitored closely by their teachers to ensure their wellbeing is not being compromised. The research, which examined the impact of ability grouping at the age of seven on children in UK schools, is based on analysis of data from more than 7,000 pupils, who were periodically assessed for peer, emotional, hyperactivity, and behaviour problems up to the age of 14. Researchers found that children in the lower ability in-class groups showed more hyperactivity and emotional problems during the study period, compared with children who were not taught in ability groups. Children in the middle ability groups showed more hyperactivity than those not in groups, while top-set children were less likely to show signs of hyperactivity than non-grouped children. The study is significant because ability or attainment grouping is widely used in UK schools, with nearly four in five (79%) of primary schools using in-class ability grouping for seven-year-olds. Pupils with similar levels of attainment are grouped together on tables, but all pupils are taught by their usual teacher and support staff, and they usually follow the same curriculum but at different levels of difficulty to ensure all pupils have an appropriate level of challenge. According to the UCL research, studies examining the impact of ability grouping on attainment have produced mixed findings. The Education Endowment Fund, a charity that provides evidence-based resources designed to improve practice and learning in schools in England, found that in-class attainment grouping can result in two months of additional progress for some children, but said evidence was limited. The UCL study calls for further research. The report’s author, Dr Steven Papachristou, said: “Our findings about the increased emotional and behavioural problems of children placed in low within-class ability groups highlight an important challenge for the use and implementation of ability grouping. Whether the academic benefits of within-class ability grouping reported by some outweigh its shortcomings should be a priority for future research. “To date, very little is known about the learning dynamics, peer processes, and subtle effects of in-class ability grouping, particularly in classes with extensive selective grouping. “However, if the associations found in this study are causal, they suggest that children in the lower within-class ability groups require close monitoring and support by their teachers to ensure that their behavioural and emotional development is not compromised.” Prof Eirini Flouri, a fellow author, added: “Our study was the first general population study in the UK to explore the role of both between-class ability grouping and within-class ability grouping in child mental health. We did not find either psychosocial advantages or psychosocial disadvantages for those in the top ability groups, either between class or within class. “However, those in the bottom within-class groups showed consistently elevated levels of emotional and behavioural problems. Whether this is because of stigmatisation, or unfavourable social comparisons, or another process remains to be tested.” The Department for Education declined to comment on the study, saying it was up to schools to decide on their approach to ability grouping, taking into account the evidence available and the specific needs of their own pupils. It added that that streaming pupils by ability could help teachers give every child an appropriately stretching education. • This article was amended on 13 December 2021. An earlier headline incorrectly implied that the study found a causal link between children being placed in lower attainment groups and emotional or behavioural outcomes.The world’s major central banks are scratching their heads over how to deal with the rising cost of living. Raising interest rates now could deal a blow to the post-pandemic recovery. Wait too long, and inflation may spiral out of control. United States If there is one word that keeps the Federal Reserve’s chair, Jerome Powell, awake at night, it is “transitory”. By many measures the US economy has roared back from the pandemic recession. Unemployment fell to 4.6% in October, down from the dizzying high of 14.8% at the peak of the pandemic. The jobs market is so hot that record numbers of people are quitting to find new posts and wages are rising. Stock markets keep hitting record highs. People are spending again. And yet the spectre of inflation hangs over it all. Rising energy costs, increased consumption and supply shortages have sent US inflation surging to an annual rate of 6.2%, a level not seen for more than 30 years. Powell and the Biden administration have repeatedly said these rises are transitory and will recede as the pandemic’s impact on the economy wanes. Prices, however, have continued to rise. Fear, stoked by political expediency on the part of Republicans and, no doubt, by the astronomic inflation in media coverage of inflation, has US consumers worried. US consumer confidence plunged to a 10-year low in November. The Fed’s main tool for damping inflation is raising interest rates. It is a blunt instrument and one Powell has been wary of using. The dilemma is clear: raising rates too quickly could stall a confusing recovery and prove counterproductive if, indeed, the price rises are transitory. But failing to dampen inflation could in the worst scenario lead to runaway price hikes, more rate rises and recession. United Kingdom The Bank of England is expected to become the first major central bank to raise interest rates when officials meet next month. Many City analysts believe that the jump in inflation to 4.2% in October – the highest level for a decade – will force policymakers to increase the base rate from 0.1% to 0.25% ahead of another rise in February to 0.5%. As one of the more open economies in the world, with more than one-third of its GDP dependent on trade, Britain has suffered more than most from the supply chain crunch and energy price increases. Meanwhile, Brexit has reduced access to skilled workers who might have once filled a record level of vacancies. Now policymakers fear workers, emboldened by a lack of people to fill vacancies, will demand higher wages to compensate for higher living costs. This could trigger a damaging wage/price spiral lasting several years. Critics of the central bank ask what higher borrowing costs will do to calm energy prices determined by global markets. There is also little evidence that labour shortages can be resolved by making access to credit more expensive, they say. Instead, a rise in interest rates could further erode the living standards of those who depend on credit to survive. European Union As traders bet on an interest rate hike from the Bank of England and US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank (ECB) has been sending a clear message: don’t count on the same move from Frankfurt. Inflation in the eurozone is now 4.1%, a 13-year high, although price rises vary widely across the zone. The ECB sets interest rates for all 19 members of the euro currency union. Its head, Christine Lagarde, warned on Friday that pressing the button too early could damage recovery from the pandemic. “At a time when purchasing power is already being squeezed by higher energy and fuel bills,” she said, “an undue tightening would represent an unwarranted headwind for the recovery.” Oliver Rakau, the chief German economist at Oxford Economics, agrees with the ECB that eurozone inflation is transitory. His team forecasts inflation will slow to 2% in 2022, after averaging 2.4% in the current year. He recommends easing off on the quantitative easing plan (the asset purchasing programme) and its pandemic sibling before hiking the cost of borrowing money. “Suddenly talking about interest rate hikes before you’ve even normalised your QE purchases, I don’t think makes a lot of sense,” he said. France While French interest rates are set by the ECB in Strasbourg, the speed of inflation is unique to each eurozone country, and governments have some discretion over how they manage rising prices. October’s annual inflation rate was 2.6%, the highest since 2008, pushed up by a 20% surge in energy prices. The prime minister, Jean Castex, responded by announcing an “inflation compensation” payment of €100 (£84), which will be given to everyone earning less than €2,000 a month net, an estimated 38 million people. Ministers have also intervened on energy prices. Gas tariffs are frozen until next April and electricity will be capped at a 4% increase. The Bank of France’s most recent prediction is that inflation is “temporary in nature but could last for a few more quarters”. Its governor, François Villeroy de Galhau, said he saw no reason for the ECB to increase its interest rates next year. Australia The Reserve Bank of Australia, the country’s central bank, seems to be relying on “Australian exceptionalism” to avoid lifting its official cash rate from the record low 0.1% before 2024. As Gareth Aird, the head of Australian economics at the country’s largest bank, the Commonwealth, said in a recent briefing note, “the RBA has sounded as dovish as is credibly possible on the inflation outlook at every given chance”. As elsewhere, inflation is on the march. Australia’s core consumer prices in the September quarter jumped 0.7 percentage points to 2.1%. It was the first time in six years the inflation measure had risen into the 2%-3% range targeted since the 1990s. The central bank, wary of past criticism, has stressed it wants to see wages go up, ideally faster than inflation. That’s why it is “prepared to be patient” with rising prices before it will even “consider an increase in interest rates next year”, the RBA governor, Philip Lowe, said this week. Japan Japan is a notable exception to the inflation surge. As the pioneer of ultra-easy monetary policy – the interest rate has been at minus 0.1% since 2016 – the world’s third-biggest economy is struggling to end decades of deflation and stagnation and looks unlikely to reach its inflation target of 2% any time soon. Although government data showed a slight year-on-year increase in core consumer prices for October, driven mainly by higher fuel prices, economists warned that rises in underlying inflation were likely to be modest. “Looking through artificial distortions and one-off hits, we still expect underlying inflation to accelerate to peak just shy of +1.0% early next year before falling back,” said Tom Learmouth, a Japan economist at Capital Economics. In a recent Reuters poll, economists said they expected 13 of 25 central banks to raise interest rates at least once before the end of next year. The Bank of Japan was not among them. “The BoJ is living in a totally different world as an outlier from the global trend,” Masamichi Adachi, the chief economist at UBS Securities, said recently. Japan’s emergence as the sole Keynesian in the room was underlined when the country’s new prime minister, Fumio Kishida, unveiled a record stimulus package worth about ¥56tn ($490bn) on 19 November. The spending package includes cash handouts for people aged 18 and under and investment in pandemic readiness. China Some inflation drivers and global supply chain problems can be traced directly to China. It is the world’s biggest exporter and accounts for almost 30% of the world’s manufacturing: disruptions in China in the form of power, labour and shipping shortages have had knock-on effects around the world. The country’s annual inflation rate rose to 1.5% in October, up from 0.7% in September, the highest for 13 months. This was driven by by food and fuel costs. More alarmingly, factory gate prices soared 13.5%, the fastest rate for 26 years, mainly because of energy costs. But the People’s Bank of China has more pressing problems to deal with – including a wobbling property sector. The main interest rate has been 3.85% since early 2020 and is highly unlikely to go up given the harmful impact that could have on the housing market.Financial markets fear the world’s leading central banks are risking “economic disaster” by misjudging the threat of rising inflation and not turning off the stimulus taps that have flooded the global economy with money. From the Federal Reserve to the European Central Bank, policymakers are grappling with a surge in prices not seen for decades while trying to keep wobbly economies on course to recovery from the ravages of the coronavirus pandemic. While central banks stick largely to the mantra that inflation is “transitory” and price pressures on everything from timber to turkeys will ease in the coming months, economists, business leaders and investors are ringing alarm bells. They fear that without swift action, such as a rise in interest rates, runaway inflation – which has not been seen in developed economies since the early 1980s – will become so embedded by next year that a policy switch will be too late to have any effect. At the very least, they see this as critical moment to end the massive money-printing schemes that were ramped up to counter a pandemic recession. Julian Jessop, an independent economist who has worked at the UK Treasury and City firms, said most central banks were “well behind the curve” and that rising costs throughout the supply chain, such as in shipping, would continue to put upward pressure on prices well into next year. “Central banks need to respond to changing economic conditions,” he said. “The recession that justified the additional quantitative easing and keeping interest rates at emergency lows is over.” Given that interest rates were at record lows, modest increases “would not be an economic disaster, but should help to prevent one”, Jessop added. “Interest rates and borrowing costs are still likely to remain near historical lows – especially real rates, after allowing for inflation. In reality, central banks would simply be taking the foot off the accelerator, rather than slamming on the brakes.” Poland, where inflation hit 6.8% in October, its highest for 20 years, has decided to go on the attack immediately. The Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, said on Thursday that the government would cut tax on fuels and energy from December, and would offer bonuses to the hardest hit households. Describing the move as an“anti-inflation shield”, he said it would cost the government about 10bn zlotys (£1.8bn) and that additional funds would come from spending cuts. Morawiecki blamed inflation, which hit 6.8% in October, its highest since 2001, on greater energy costs, saying they stem from Russia’s gas policy, the European Union’s climate policy and CO2 emission certificate prices, as well as on bonuses that were paid out to help businesses survive the Covid-19 pandemic. Prices have risen on foods, fuels and energy. “We are offering a large reduction of tax, in order to cushion the effects of the inflation,” Morawiecki said, adding that inflation may still rise in the winter months of December to March. Inflation has been stalking the global economy for months but has burst into the open in recent weeks. The 6.2% jump in US inflation in the year to October stunned markets and highlighted huge increases in the cost of some consumer basics, such as a 46% rise in petrol prices and 11% for meat, fish and eggs. In the UK, inflation is running hot at 4.2%, pumped up by record natural gas prices. With pandemic-induced supply constraints set to continue for months and a wave of pent-up Covid consumer cash chasing a limited flow of goods, claims by the chair of the Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, that inflation is transitory look increasingly hollow. Chris Watling, the chief executive and founder of the advisory firm Longview Economics, agrees that central banks risk being caught out. After the financial crisis of 2008, they pursued loose monetary policy and tight fiscal policy in the form of quantitative easing and spending cuts. Now they have “loose monetary and loose fiscal”, with too much money chasing too few goods. “They will wake up one day in catch-up phase,” he said. “Perhaps late next year, or 2023, and then they’ll end up tightening quite quickly when prices are rising. And if you tighten into that situation, a bubble, it will burst. So it’s a real challenge for them.” Mohamed El-Erian, global economist at insurance group Allianz, said that if the Fed were to leave it too late to increase rates, the US – and perhaps the world – could be pushed into recession. “Such a tightening would potentially coincide with three other contractionary forces in the US: a tightening of market financial conditions, the absence of any additional fiscal stimulus, and the erosion of household savings.” It is a precarious tightrope for policymakers. Inflation can swiftly undermine business and consumer confidence, but going too hard could jeopardise recovery and could also seriously spook booming property markets in countries such as the US, UK and Australia. El-Erian said policymakers should also consider broader changes to boost productivity, and improvements to the oversight of financial stability risk, particularly in the non-bank sector. Some central banks are already preparing to jump off the tightrope, most notably the Bank of England, which came close to raising interest rates earlier this month. The ominous US inflation number means policymakers seem certain to take the plunge and increase rates by 0.25 percentage points to 0.35% when they meet again in the first week of December. Rising prices have exposed central bankers’ “King Canute” theory of inflation, the former governor of the Bank Mervyn King said this week in a strong attack on how policymakers around the world have reacted to the Covid-19 crisis. New Zealand does not often grab markets’ attention, but this week the country’s Reserve Bank announced the second rate rise in as many months in an effort to cool inflation that hit 4.9% last month. Across the Tasman Sea, the Reserve Bank of Australia reiterated its belief that rates would not go up from their record low of 0.1% until 2023 at the earliest, but the markets are betting on them being 1% this time next year. Lenders are voting with their feet though, with the largest bank, the Commonwealth, on Friday hiking fixed rates for the third time in six weeks. South Korea’s central bank followed New Zealand’s example, announcing a rise to 1% – its second increase of the year – amid concern over higher living costs. The country’s inflation rate jreached 3.2% in October, a near-10-year high. Alex Joiner, the chief economist at IFM Investors in Melbourne, said central banks were trying to wait it out and “hope against hope” that pressures from the pandemic would continue to ease, with supply issues resolving themselves. “They are trying to temper market expectations but the problem is that markets are not believing them,” he said. “Market pricing is aggressive, with investors showing that they think rates will go up.” The cautiously optimistic Fed view prevails for now, and both Joiner and Watling point to signs of easing in supply chains. The benchmark for world shipping costs, known as the Baltic index, has been falling, and China is beginning to overcome the power shortages that hurt its giant manufacturing sector in September. However, there is also the possibility that everyone has underestimated the extent of structural changes in the global economy that started in recent years and have been accelerated by Covid. These could mean there is never a return to the Goldilocks era when inflation and growth were both “just right”. John Studzinski, the managing director and vice-chair of Pimco, the world’s biggest bond trader, told a recent Bloomberg forum that higher inflation could persist for three to five years. Supply chains need to be re-established as the world emerges from the pandemic crisis, he said, and with some deglobalisation of trade, inflation “could be very volatile”.StubHub has been accused of failing to disclose when customers are buying tickets from professional touts, in breach of a legal undertaking given to the consumer watchdog. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) requires sites such as Viagogo and StubHub to let customers know when tickets are being sold by professional ticket traders, who dominate resale listings for gigs and other events, leading to fans paying massively inflated prices. In responses to the Guardian, StubHub insisted that it abided by this requirement, intended to ensure customers know who to contact if they have a problem. This can include being refused admission at the door because resale sites have continued to sell tickets for gigs even where resale is not permitted. Fresh analysis of the StubHub website earlier this week found that listings for tickets to see artists such as Adele and Coldplay did not include any details of sellers, prompting concern from an MP and campaigners. While some listings may be from ordinary fans who can’t attend and want to recoup their money, a report by the CMA this year found that touts are typically behind more than 50% of tickets listed on Viagogo and StubHub. Sources in the touting world said that some had tried to upload the required information, but found that it did not appear on the StubHub website. The Guardian also cross-referenced events on Viagogo and StubHub, and found that the exact seats at the same shows were disclosed as being advertised by touts on the former site but not on the latter. Shortly after the Guardian asked StubHub about the disclosures, some trader details began appearing on the site. Viagogo bought StubHub last year but was forced by the CMA to sell the UK and EU operations after a competition inquiry. Digital Fuel Capital (DFC) stepped in to buy StubHub UK. Labour MP Sharon Hodgson, who is the chief parliamentary aide to party leader Keir Starmer, said the apparent lack of disclosure by StubHub “should be ringing alarm bells at the CMA”. She said StubHub appeared to be “rowing back on their legal obligations”, including an undertaking given to the CMA as part of its investigation into breaches of consumer law by both Viagogo and StubHub, many of them revealed in the Guardian. “Either the evidence presented to the CMA stands up or it doesn’t,” she said. “If it does, then I would urge them to do their job, to start enforcement action, and help protect British consumers.” Adam Webb, of music industry group FanFair Alliance, backed by the managers of bands including Arctic Monkeys, said evidence that consumer protection laws were being broken was “clear cut”. “I can only assume the CMA is either ignoring this evidence, or they don’t believe it’s important enough to intervene,” he said. The CMA said would take “appropriate action” if there was evidence firms were failing to comply with consumer law. StubHub said it was “fully compliant” with the requirement to publish touts’ details. “As the CMA undertaking stipulates, if we are made aware of non-compliance, we take corrective action to remove listings and notify sellers,” said a spokesperson.Picks of the week The Last Days of Maradona “Everyone – fans and non-fans alike – must have asked themselves: how did Maradona’s life end the way it did?” Thierry Henry narrates this podcast about the football legend’s death at the age of 60 in 2020 – part forensic investigation, part homage to his greatness. In a novel twist – and perhaps a sign of things to come for podcasting – the series is also available in French, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian, via a series of hosts. Hannah J Davies I’m Not a Monster Listeners were captivated by the case of Indiana mother Sam Sally and how she ended up at the heart of the Islamic State caliphate. Now, host Josh Baker is back for two new follow-up episodes. He answers listeners’ questions – and heads back to Iraq. Hannah Verdier Twenty Thousand Hertz More offbeat sonic discoveries in a miniseries from the long-running audio show. It’s Not TV, it’s HBO, tells the story of the network’s bombastic 80s theme song as well as its iconic – if more understated – “static angel” sound, as heard before everything from The Sopranos to Sex and the City. HJD Behind the Wand More than 20 years after Harry Potter’s first film adaptation, Potterheads are still looking to learn something new about the wizarding world. Here, Emma Watson’s body double Flick Miles takes us behind the scenes with crew members. It’s not as exciting as, say, the upcoming TV reunion, but fans might enjoy the nitty gritty details about how the story came to life on the big screen. Hollie Richardson Even the Rich: Murder in the House of Gucci With Lady Gaga and Adam Driver ’s new film throwing the spotlight on to the Gucci dynasty, this podcast tells the story of the family’s humble beginnings. Brooke Siffrinn and Aricia Skidmore-Williams bring their gloriously salacious tone to the tale, from observing Guccio Gucci’s knowledge of luggage to analysing Patrizia Reggiani’s controversial white fur school coat. HV Producer pick: The Always Sunny Podcast Chosen by Danielle Stephens There is always a risk in learning how something you adore is made. That’s why I was slightly apprehensive to listen to The Always Sunny podcast, which launched earlier this month. The premise is simple: each week, the geniuses behind the hit show It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia sit down to bring us insider knowledge on how every episode came to be, starting all the way back in 2005. The worry is that your favourite (terrible) characters are somehow played by an unfunny trio, but Rob McElhenney, Charlie Day and Glenn Howerton allay any fears early on, making one another laugh as much as you might imagine. The scoring is the same as the show, and sound design is nonexistent, so the content needs to carry – which it does. For true fans, it’s a must listen, as we hear how they developed ideas; the stumbling blocks they encountered; and, most interestingly, some of the things they regret with hindsight. Talking points As podcasts evolve, expect to see even more boundary-blurring with other creative mediums. A case in point: US culture show How Long Gone will release a double-CD album via Jagjaguwar on 17 December, featuring about releases from the record label’s other acts, including Moses Sumney, Dinosaur Jr and Angel Olsen. Why not try: Close to Death | Is This Working? | Sh***hole Country Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureEverybody at the camp on the outskirts of Dunkirk, little more than a scrappy collection of tents with no toilets or running water, has heard about the 27 people who drowned on Wednesday. Everybody knows the risks. But everybody says they still have the same plan, to try to get on a boat to the UK, because they do not believe that death will come to them – and because of their hope for a better life. Mira, an Iraqi Kurd, said he left the city of Sulaymaniyah because “there is no life” at home, a simple phrase repeated by many in and around the camp. He acknowledges that travelling by boat to Britain “is very dangerous; there will be big waves”, but he is ready to make the perilous journey in the hope of eventually making money to send back home. Like Mira, many in the camp say they have come via Belarus. Muhammed, who looks far older than the 17 years he says he is, said he flew to Qatar, then Minsk before getting across the border into Poland. After that, getting across Germany to northern France was straightforward – but the next part was not. “The police found me and moved me to a hotel near the Spanish border. But I don’t want to go to Spain, I want to come to England. I have friends in Nottingham, in London and Birmingham,” he said. “So I came back here and I will try to get across and join them” – to conclude a journey that has already taken him well over a month. Mohammed said he would have to find $2,000 to pay a people smuggler for a journey that costs a fraction of that price on a ferry. It was not immediately clear where that money would come from, although others in the camp said that family members at home were paying on their behalf. Campsites such as the one outside Dunkirk, which is by a canal and disused railway line, are at the mercy of the French authorities, where charities say police raids can take place as frequently as every couple of days. As a result, the site is extremely basic; there is minimal protection from the cold, with heating provided by open fires during daytime. There is food relief, and charities that provide free wifi and electricity, allowing people to crowd around and charge their mobile phones, but there are no toilets. Ten days ago, a nearby site near a shopping mall was broken up on the orders of France’s interior minister, Gérald Darmanin. The directive came after the number of migrants, the majority of whom are young adult men, had more than doubled from an estimated 400 to more than 1,000. The change in numbers, it would appear, came after Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, opened up his country to people hoping to come to Europe. But charities say that the number of people in camps in France’s northern region is down overall because of the autumn cold. Iraqi Kurds dominate the camp near Dunkirk, but people from countries such as Sudan and Eritrea tend to locate in nearby Calais. “Just in and around Calais we think the number now is closer to 1,000; it was 2,000 before in the summer,” says Álvaro Lucas, the coordinator for the charity Refugee Info Bus, which provides information services, phone charging and wifi around Calais. What has given the crisis more prominence is the growing numbers attempting to cross the Channel by boat, with the greater risk to life. Matt Cowling, an operations coordinator with Care4Calais, a relief charity, said: “What is so frustrating is that we are talking about only 1,500 or 2,000 people who want to come to the UK; it feels a problem that could easily be solved if there was a different approach.” • This article was amended on 26 November 2021 to clarify the services provided by Refugee Info Bus.January How did you feel coming into 2021, after the unprecedented bleakness of 2020? Lindsey Jordan, AKA Snail Mail I finally finished a record – it had been three years. It’s funny, as a teenage star, that I came back as an adult. We haven’t played a show in two years, and that time means a lot to me, because I’m pretty young. I feel like I’m swimming upstream against imposter issues; I forget what it feels like to play a show. Sigrid Definitely. I was doing Reading festival this summer and I was thinking: “Do I know how to artist?” And also the same feeling of being scared of getting too excited about something. Eris Drew For me, it was pretty bleak. I was working on an album and I was still in the middle of engineering it. But I hadn’t seen friends, I’d been distant from family, for a long time. I felt pretty bad, and it wasn’t just about lockdown. It was also the sense that there were actually some opportunities really lost during 2020: we had this tremendous explosive social movement in the States, and then you feel the sense of people moving on and it felt bad. Laura Mvula I still feel like I’m adjusting to the new landscape. Everything is constantly changing; plans that appear to be concrete can vanish. I’ve had so many gigs cancelled. Serge Pizzorno, Kasabian We had 17 shows booked in October, so I had a real focus. But it’s wild doing them, because we’re in a bubble: we’re playing to 2,000, 3,000 people, but after the gig, we go straight to the hotel, where we’re not allowed to see anyone except room service. You’re not allowed to see your kids or your wife, even, because you don’t want to catch Covid on tour. You get the connection of everyone at the shows going absolutely wild, all this energy thrown at you, then you’re just sat in a bubble afterwards, five of you. It’s a mad thing. February Britain leaves the EU and with it comes a lot of red tape for touring artists. Has touring become harder? Does this government care enough about music? Mvula It hasn’t felt like touring or the arts is a priority for our government, especially with all the cuts to organisations, school supplies, arts funding, which I rely heavily upon. It’s scary: how do I continue to grow my touring business with these restrictions? Pizzorno I went to see a band in Leicester, Beak. They were talking about playing a show in Brussels and being held at the border for 14 hours. If you’ve got a gig in Paris and a gig in Rome, you’re not going to be able to make it; it’s going to take two or three days. You’ll get to a point financially where you won’t be able to do it, and that’s the worst, not being able to play live. It needs sorting out, quick. March Kings of Leon become the first band to hop on the NFT craze. Later in the year, Ariana Grande embraced the metaverse with her avatar performance on Fortnite. Are these innovations feasible ways to make money, or are they baffling and distracting? BackRoad Gee I don’t really understand it, man. I get a little bit of it. I would really like to do some more research on the metaverse. Drew I don’t either. Part of me is like “good for you for figuring out a way to make some money”, but it seems like something that’s going to be so inaccessible to your average artist. Sigrid If you were to change everything to be digital, there’s a lot of people in the chain of creating shows who would get lost. It’s really important to protect the live industry and you can’t replace that, not properly. April Artists including Paul McCartney and Kate Bush call for a change in streaming rules, to improve royalty rates. Are musicians still struggling to make ends meet? What needs to change? Pizzorno Major labels are making more money than they ever have. The streaming royalty rates need to change now, it’s completely unfair. Why’s the person that made the music getting paid last and paid the least? Jordan It’s annoying to see yourself have a successful career but see exactly where the money is missing. It’s like: wait, someone doing this exact thing in the 90s would have been a millionaire. Mvula I can hear my mum saying: “Don’t tell people your business now”, but let’s be real. My girl Lindsey is right: if we were in the 90s now, I’d be balling! A good starting point would be the parliamentary vote on 3 December to introduce equitable renumeration for artists. If this is passed, it would mean income for all musicians who perform on a track, including session musicians, and it would apply from the first stream. So let’s get this moving. BackRoad Gee For me it’s kind of different, because I’m still independent, so streaming actually works if you’re pulling in some good numbers. Obviously, I understand why it would be frustrating for some people when you’re signed, because that’s one part of the money that you’re not going to be collecting. May Tion Wayne and Russ Millions score the first UK drill No 1 with the remix of Body. Has drill finally broken through? BackRoad Gee Yes and no. It’s only really Russ and Tion that’s done it on that level. But they have broken the doors open for someone to come up and do that as well. So, right now, I feel if there is any chance of it happening, they played a big part in that. We appreciate them for that, 100%. June Winston Marshall leaves Mumford &amp; Sons after championing a far-right writer and being called out for it online. Is “cancel culture” something you all worry about? Mvula As a young, Black female artist I’ve always lived in fear of being cancelled, because I don’t want to get stereotyped as the “angry mad Black woman”. That’s a real thing in this industry. I noticed people over time saying things like: “Oh, you’re really well media-trained” and I realised what they meant by that was I was good at filtering quite a lot of what I say; I would find ways to say it that wouldn’t cause offence, or would be somehow less impactful. I guess because I’m getting older, I’ve experienced true liberation through saying what I really mean, even if it risks being unaccepted. I come from a very outspoken tradition – in my family, within church – so it’s hard to dilute that because I don’t want to be inauthentic. Drew This is a really complex issue. The idea that people need to be a little bit more considered before they spew their mouth, I like that. I like people being held accountable for their racism, their sexism, their ignorance. But I do think cancel culture chills speech sometimes; I don’t want to pretend that it’s all rose-tinted glasses. Personally, I’m kind of more worried when I speak out against the dance music industry. I’m pretty critical of a lot of dance music today, although I love the scene; I’m like a hard-loving mother! BackRoad Gee I’m really in my own world, man. I’m not really fazed by what anyone can say to me. You can’t cancel me, man; I’ve got bills to pay! You know what I’m saying? I just speak my mind and I make sure that it’s not a disrespectful thing. Jordan The thing that freaks me out is when people use [cancel culture] as a weapon against each other. It trivialises it so that, the more it happens, the more people make fun of it, it takes away from the good that it can do: protecting each other from people who are dangerous, and shitheads and fascists. It can be an extremely important tool. The issue I think, is more people making it not matter. Olivia Rodrigo is accused of plagiarism by Courtney Love and Pom Pom Squad and later settles with Paramore over a similarity between her song Good 4 U and their Misery Business. Is it harder than ever to come up with a truly original melody? Sigrid I’m in pop [writing] sessions all the time and I’ve kind of been known for being the one calling out whenever we do copy. I feel like it happens often, when everyone’s like: “Oh shit, no no no, this is like …” Mvula I mostly plagiarise myself. “Oh! I already wrote that song!” Pizzorno I think a lot of these cases seem like stretches, like lawyers going: “We might be able to do something with this” and I think it’s unfair. Sometimes you can hear that people have sat in the studio listening to music and thinking: “We need to make a song like this – similar rhythm, similar tempo.” That’s cool, surely? It’s a vibe; you can’t own a vibe, can you? Drew Even though I love dance music, I actually studied early rock’n’roll and they’re all taking each other’s riffs, messing with them a little bit, speeding them up or whatever. Musicians have always reacted to each other, and that’s kind of part of it. Oftentimes what we hear about are kind of extreme cases and, as a sampling artist, I don’t want to be an extreme case – I would never take someone else’s song and just put a bass line on it. I just try to be really creative and put things in different contexts; I write a ton of original music that I put in these collages. It’s interesting, though, how someone would feel whose work I’ve taken a small sample from. That’s not up to me. I just try to be conscientious. October Coldplay unveil their plans for environmentally sound touring. How are you tackling this issue yourself? Jordan I don’t know how I’m tackling it other than, you know, trying to drink out of reusable water bottles. Pizzorno I suppose next year, we’ll probably play fewer shows, travel less. I was thinking if you played in a full moon and just used huge mirrors so that you didn’t have to use lights … but that might have been the mushrooms talking. Drew I’ve talked about doing a CO2 offset at the end of the year, because, goddamn, I’ve used a lot of jet fuel and I’m very much a Mother Earth kind of goddess DJ, and it just seems profoundly inconsistent to me. As an artist, I do think I have responsibility. The only way the world’s going to get better is if every single person feels they have responsibility. Sigrid In Norway, we have a festival called Øya and with a lot of other Norwegian artists we signed this green rider [pledge]. We’re cutting plastic backstage, doing more organic and vegetarian food, if there’s transport we ask for it be environmentally friendly, try to do all the good stuff. I try to show up at climate events; I did play for some people in Norway cleaning beaches, which was really nice. I also just try to encourage people to use their right to vote. November Ten people are killed at Travis Scott’s Astroworld festival. How much is crowd safety the responsibility of the artist and did the incident make you think any differently about performing live? Sigrid When that news came through, it was just horrendous. Of course I feel a responsibility when I walk onstage. When people buy a ticket to my show, I want them to know they’re in a safe space, you shouldn’t be worried about something happening. When we play big shows, we always take our own security and part of their job is to make sure that crowd safety is paramount. They’ve got a line on me onstage so that if anything goes down we can always cut the gig. Drew It’s a tremendous amount of delegated responsibility any time you’re playing a show, even if it’s a small club show. But I can’t be in front making sure trans people like me are getting treated well; that all the people that have various vulnerabilities coming to my events are safe. I don’t think that any artist is going to be completely responsible for anything that happens at their event, that’s not realistic, but for years now I have tried to make the spaces I play generally safer; we have a written safety protocol for our own parties. I have thought about my shows differently after Astroworld – every time I’m onstage now, I think: “Am I actually assessing this situation properly?” I’ve played several big events, thousands of people in front of me, and I’m like: “How would I necessarily know if this was getting rough for people at the front, because it looks really way too intense already?” The lights are dizzying, the whole experience is meant to be disorienting, so it’s hard to make that judgment. Jordan I honestly don’t know enough about the situation at Astroworld, but I have thought, for my fan base specifically, there’s a lot of young gay girls and they’re usually mixed in with some frenetic scary old dudes that are like “I want to drink your blood” on Twitter. I’m the one bringing them all together in a room. I definitely don’t feel personally all that safe – ever! I think anywhere there’s fanaticism, usually there’s people doing unhinged stuff. I don’t know how you protect yourself and others. Britney Spears’s conservatorship finally ends. How have you felt following what has arguably been the biggest pop music story of the year? Sigrid First of all, it’s about time. I’m happy to see her as a free woman. If there’s one thing I hope the media has learned from it, it’s how to treat people with respect. Jordan A lot of kids in the entertainment industry have parents that steal from them and that control what they’re doing. A kid can never really consent if they’re going to become a really big star or not; you ask any kid if they want to be on the Disney Channel, they’re going to say: “Yeah, of course!” The adults in charge, that’s always been an issue, it doesn’t seem like anything particularly new. It’s just that we all know and love Britney so I guess this is a more personal example of what we all know to be going on. Mvula I think the scary thing for me is the mental health issue: that it can not be known that they’re really fucking struggling, especially when they’re so adept at being the show-woman, being so skilled at playing a role. Then it takes the worst to happen for people to go: “Oh, somebody should help them.” It’s made me think a lot about how we can monitor one another more closely. Pizzorno I think there’s definitely more awareness than there was, but it still does feel more like: “When’s the next album out?” and: “Oh, you’ll be OK.” There’s awareness for sure, but there’s plenty of room for it to get better, you know? Finally, what’s your favourite album or albums of the year and what are your hopes for 2022? Pizzorno I’m going to chose Nine by Sault and the Tyler, the Creator album, Call Me If You Get Lost. And Amyl and the Sniffers, if I can sneak one more in there, please. And for next year, I want to make music for massive gatherings. I want to see everyone back in fields having a great time. That’s it. Jordan I’m going to say To Hell With It by PinkPantheress. And hopes … I’ve got to get my fucking vocal cords operated on, I have to spend a month in silence, so I’m excited to see if my stoic self picks up more information. I’m excited to become extremely wise! And hopefully, I can just get back out on the road. Sigrid My favourite record was Flyte, This Is Really Going to Hurt – melodies, production, everything really. It’s quite retro but fresh at the same time, quite Beatle-esque. And next year, I’m hoping to let myself get carried away again, feel hopeful and positive about the future, have that “let’s fucking go!” mentality. Drew I want to mention two EPs, because in dance music it’s the EP that often shows an innovative new talent. One is a UK artist, Ehua, the EP’s called Aquamarine. If you love breaks and club music, this person has made something truly mystical that can slice you open and heal you at the same time. Also, Bored Lord, from LA, made an incredible EP, The Last Illusion. And Matthew Herbert’s album is a true return to form. And next year I would like to see more people being able to engage in the subjective experience of loving music together. It’s a beautiful experience when it’s right, and it hurts me to know people have been shut off from it for so long. Mvula The soundtrack for The Harder They Fall, a Black western on Netflix. Fatoumata Diawara’s on it, Lauryn Hill, Jay Z, Kid Cudi, the Roots play a lot of the rhythm section, quite a few African artists – I’m like: “How did I not know about this person?” – are on it and I’m chuffed to be on it, too. Theo Croker’s BLK2life/A Future Past: he really is pushing the boundaries, it’s really beautiful, fragile playing, and he was singing on this record, I’ve never heard his voice before and it’s beautiful. And hopes? I just need to work! Can I work my album please? Can I do a show or two? And I want to travel. I feel like I’m going a bit crazy with my need to travel. BackRoad Gee There’s my own album, Reporting Live (From the Back of the Roads) and I’ve been listening a lot of Wizkid’s Made in Lagos, it’s been on replay. And, boy, 2022: we’ll come in greatness, do a lot of work. We’re here, foot on the neck, you know?With Black Friday marking the start of a frantic month of Christmas shopping, we asked our readers to get in touch about the ways they have challenged consumerism. Responses ranged from revolutionary changes such as giving up buying new clothes to subtler tweaks such as making sandwiches rather than buying a plastic-encased meal deal. Everyone agreed, however, that turning their back on a culture that constantly demands more from consumers came with financial and environmental benefits, not to mention a feeling of smug satisfaction that money simply can’t buy. Furnish your home for free Earlier this year, I bought an old house with my partner. It was unfurnished and needed considerable work, including a new kitchen and a new bathroom. For many, it would have been tempting to go to Ikea and furnish the house in one day. Not for us – we weren’t comfortable with filling our new home with stuff that’s going to be in landfill in a few years. Besides, why buy new when the world is saturated with quirky used furniture? We decided to challenge consumerism by getting it all free from Gumtree and Facebook Marketplace. Time and time again, we’ve been surprised by people’s generosity: we got a practically new TV stand from our neighbours and an unwanted solid-wood kitchen completely free. We dismantled it and adapted it for our kitchen; we were complete beginners but we’ve managed to tackle all the building work and plastering ourselves and it feels good knowing that we’ve saved so many items that otherwise would have ended up in a skip. I think everyone should ask themselves if they really need that new item, or if it’s an opportunity to be creative and give a beautiful object a second chance. Furnishing our house this way has been a win for our self-esteem, wallets and the planet. Nicola Parisi, 36, Manchester Spoil your new baby with secondhand treats We had a baby in June and have managed not to buy anything new: almost all her clothes are at least secondhand. We’re determined not to end up with a house full of horrible plastic that gets used once and forgotten about, so we got all her toys, often for free, from Facebook Marketplace. We recently bought her a toy subscription from Whirli, too. The toys are great and once she’s done with them, they get sent back and replaced with something different. People can be so generous, particularly with baby things, and it feels really nice to be able to do the same. We’ve already given away her 0-3 months clothes and we’re looking forward to donating her 3-6 months wardrobe soon. Plenty of people struggle to pay for all the things their young child needs. You can give almost anything away – someone, somewhere will want it. Sam Hopes, 33, Lancaster Give unwanted hardware a loving home I’m an animator so I use high-end computers and graphics cards for my job. I had to upgrade everything over lockdown, and really wasn’t comfortable chucking perfectly serviceable components into a skip. My mother is 83 and only really needs the icon that fires up the internet so she can get on email and Zoom (which she’s got massively into in the past couple of years). She is happy with the free stuff, and when the components finally hit the recycle dump they will have been in service for up to 15 years. Handing down my old computers has taught me a lot about how wrapped up in perception a lot of consumerism actually is. People are sold a phantom when it comes to technology. Companies do a great job of making people crave the latest shiny metal casing when, most of the time, the components inside are fairly generic and probably not even made by the same brand you think you’re buying. Andy, 48, London Learn to sew I was a big shopper when I was young, spending my student loan in the fresher sales, but when the pandemic hit I thought it would be a great time to learn to sew. I was lucky that my mum and grandmother have always sewn, so there was a spare machine lying around. But you can get a perfectly good one for £50 on eBay. Fabric and clothes to change/alter are inexpensive if you’re thrifty. YouTube is your best friend: there’s a video for every skill and every problem you have to solve. Not only is it a great way to safely pass the time in lockdowns, but it has made shopping in charity shops so much easier, knowing I can alter clothes so they feel tailor-made to my size and style. I used to get so frustrated seeing things that I liked the look of but didn’t quite work. Now I can do things like turn a pair of old trousers into a tote bag or turn a large men’s shirt into two new ones my size. I’m even fixing things for my housemates and making presents for people they love and appreciate. It just means more to people when they can see you’ve spent time making something specific to them as opposed to just buying it. Ellie Bromwich, 26, London Follow the “90-day rule” In 2014, I set myself a challenge. Could I go the whole year without buying anything new or secondhand? It was tough but after 13 weeks, I broke my lifelong shopping addiction and I really enjoyed being mindful about my purchases. Saving a staggering 38% of my salary was a nice bonus, too! Of course, I couldn’t not buy anything for ever but now, before I click “add to cart” on Amazon, I pause and add the item to my “90-day wishlist”. It’s occasionally agonising having to wait but nine times out of 10, I end up thinking: “Nah, I don’t really want that after all.” Beyond helping me become debt-free, the rule has made me happier. I used to spend my Saturdays traipsing round department stores; now I’m focused on my passions, like walking my dog on the beach or arts and crafts. These experiences are so much more satisfying than looking around to see my flat full of shiny belongings. I am thriving, not just surviving. Rachel Smith, 40, Kent Don’t buy any new clothes I was feeling hopeless about climate change when I stumbled across an article encouraging readers to participate in the No New Clothes movement. I was already doing the basics: I recycle, I walk or use public transport, I’m vegetarian, I use reusable period pants. I felt I was running low on individual actions I could take. Tackling my consumerism felt like the next logical step and, in June, I ditched fast fashion. I now think much more intentionally about clothing. Do I really need another new dress to wear to a wedding? What’s the point of buying something to wear only once when no one’s really paying attention anyway? I wasn’t insane with my spending before, but probably a few times a year I would head into town to get a new pair of jeans and end up coming home with £150-£200 of stuff I would only wear a handful of times. The pandemic made it easier to get out of the habit. Committing to No New Clothes is so accessible because most people already have loads of great clothes already. I know it has made me appreciate what I’ve got a lot more. Having said that, I don’t think it’s necessarily about never buying anything new again. It just makes you stop and think: “Is this something I’m going to wear once a week, or once in a while?” Chloe Maughan, 27, Bristol Give Santa a break A few years back I decided not to give or receive Christmas or birthday gifts, just a card. We encourage family members to spend the money they would have spent on us on themselves. This way nobody receives unwanted presents – much nicer saving their cash for proper treats. I always do a charitable donation instead – usually to an organisation operating in the developing world such as Chase Africa or Brooke hospital for animals. As far as I’m concerned we’ve reached “peak stuff”, so it would be great for people to find other ways of doing presents – by making stuff, perhaps, or just taking a member of your extended family out for lunch. Sometimes, people get cross with me – they think I’m being mean – but the way I see it is I’m trying to break the cycle of mindless consumerism. The shops are full of tat and it’s sad knowing it’s all going to end up in landfill. We can and should do better. I would add that there are no longer any small children in the family – it’s buying stuff for adults that feels like a waste. Office Christmas presents are even worse: no one knows what to buy and you end up just getting each other stuff no one wants. Viv Fouracre, 60, Taunton Additional reporting by Alfie PackhamA 1.8-metre public sculpture of an anthropomorphic banana has caused a rumble among residents in Melbourne – and has already been victim to vandalism. The artwork, which features a menacing skull facing out onto Rose Street in Fitzroy, is titled Fallen Fruit. Erected on 8 November, it was purchased by the City of Yarra for $22,000 out of a $100,000 grant bestowed by the Transport Accident Commission (TAC). On Thursday night, the banana was vandalised with a saw, in an apparent decapitation attempt. “It was pretty surprising and upsetting to see the work so dramatically vandalised, but also there’s not much that can be done when the work is in the public arena,” the artist Adam Stone told Guardian Australia, before patching up the scars on Friday afternoon. “You have to just let go and put it out there.” Stone is a Victorian College of the Arts graduate, and a past winner of the Montalto Sculpture prize and Fiona Myer award. His banana themed pieces are part of a broader output that has been shown in galleries around Australia and Asia. For Fallen Fruit, he said, “my ambition was that people from a variety of backgrounds could find the work fun and engaging, and … perhaps consider the conceptual meaning of the work. “I was thinking about hubris in western society and our obsession with unsustainable excess and how this affects the environment.” While it is unclear what motivated the vandalism attack, public opinion around the banana’s appeal has been divided. Some quickly took to social media to defend the sculpture, and many referenced the sitcom Arrested Development, whose central family of characters operate a frozen banana stand. Others, however, found the large fruit ripe for criticism – particularly its hefty taxpayer-funded fee, which some argued could have been redirected towards other community services and businesses. The Transport Accident Commission, who bestowed the $100,000 grant for a Yarra Council project to look after pedestrians, said they would make their spending requirements more specific in the future. “Were we aware there was going to be a piece of banana art as part of the project? We weren’t,” the TAC’s head of road safety, Samantha Cockfield, told 3AW on Friday. “We’ll make it fairly clear … that large pieces of public art aren’t really what we’re in there for.” Stone’s work joins a lineage of controversial yellow pieces. In 1980, Ron Robertson-Swann’s highlighter hued structure Vault was widely criticised for its imposing size and shade. Dubbed the “yellow peril”, it was removed from its original City Square location less than eight months after opening. Fallen Fruit’s price tag also pales in comparison to its predecessors, including Italian artist Maurizio Cattelan’s $120,000 work Comedian – a banana duct taped to a wall which caused a stir at its Art Basel showcase in 2019.Unreported World: Japan’s Wartime Sex Slaves 7.30pm, Channel 4 Korean Lee Yong-soo was 14 years old when she was taken by Japanese soldiers during the second world war to become one of its military’s thousands of sex slaves – so-called “comfort women”. Now 92, she is one of the last known survivors continuing to campaign for justice. Tracking her story, Unreported World meets a community of academics who accuse the women of lying about their experiences. But Lee stays unperturbed, taking her fight to powerful political figures with hopes of reaching the International Court of Justice. Hollie Richardson Griff’s Great New Zealand Adventure 8pm, ITV Griff Rhys Jones continues to scratch the nation’s travel itch with his tour of New Zealand. Tonight, the comedian takes a flight over the country-spanning Highway 1 to reach the Coromandel Peninsula before heading to the White Island volcano. This landscape is vast – from hot springs to volcanoes – and Griff is suitably awed. Henry Wong The Great British Bake Off: An Extra Slice 8pm, Channel 4 As another series draws to a close, it’s time for a final peek inside the Bake Off tent. Jo Brand and Tom Allen will be joined by judge Prue Leith, along with celebrity fans Clara Amfo and Joe Wilkinson. The all-important winner (and runners-up) stop by to relive the successes and stresses of this year’s competition. HW MasterChef: The Professionals 8.30pm, BBC One It’s the quarter-finals. First up: an Invention Test, in which the contestants must create a dish centred on colour. Then it’s real sweaty palms time: preparing a two-course menu for restaurant critics Grace Dent, Jay Rayner and Tom Parker Bowles. Squid Game has nothing on this. Ali Catterall Womanhood 9pm, BBC Two Kirsty Wark, Shirley Ballas and Chidera Eggerue are three of the six female celebrities who visit Leeds to speak with local women about what issues are affecting them at home, at work and in love. HR The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Tonight, Will Smith – currently playing Venus and Serena Williams’s father in King Richard – talks about his new autobiography. Richard Osman also discusses his new book, while Lin-Manuel Miranda promotes his new musical Tick, Tick … Boom!. HRTop story: Victims thought to have been Iraqi Kurds Hello, I’m Warren Murray with a welcome to your Friday briefing. Ministers have been warned to stop “playing politics with people’s lives” or more lives will be lost in the Channel. Investigators are trying to identify the bodies of at least 27 victims, including a pregnant woman and three children, who drowned on Wednesday. They are thought to be predominantly Kurds from Iraq. Residents of makeshift camps around Calais and Dunkirk told the Guardian that hundreds of people have travelled to northern France via Belarus following a crisis on its border with Poland. Many vowed to pursue their plans to cross to the UK in search of a better life – and throughout Thursday, new arrivals continued to come ashore in Dover. On Thursday night Boris Johnson wrote to the French president, Emmanuel Macron, calling for joint patrols of French beaches; use of sensors and radar; maritime and airborne surveillance; better intelligence-sharing to arrest and prosecute people smugglers; and a bilateral agreement on sending arrivals back. Macron defended Paris’s actions but said France was merely a transit country for many migrants and more European cooperation was needed to tackle illegal immigration: “I will ... say very clearly that our security forces are mobilised day and night.” France says its forces have stopped 65% of attempted crossings in recent months, up from 50%. Nicolas Laroye, a French border police officer in Dunkirk for 20 years and police trade union official, said: “When you see the number of my colleagues who wade into shallow waters to save women, children and young people – and a lot of lives have been saved – this week’s deaths are catastrophic.” * * * Red list revived over B.1.1.529 – Flights from southern Africa will be banned and six countries placed on England’s travel red list as scientists raise the alarm over what is feared to be the worst Covid-19 variant yet identified. The B.1.1.529 variant was detected in South Africa and is under assessment by the World Health Organization. No cases have been detected in the UK. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said it had “perhaps double the number of mutations that we have seen in the Delta variant. That would suggest that it may well be more transmissible and the current vaccines that we have may well be less effective.” A high number of mutations does not necessarily make a variant more transmissible: some experts believe Japan’s fall in cases came from mutations that drove Covid towards “natural extinction”. Prof Richard Lessells, an infectious diseases specialist at the University of KwaZulu-Natal in Durban, said the coming days and weeks would be key to determining the severity of the variant. * * * Fishers threaten Channel blockade – French fishers are threatening to block access to the Channel tunnel, Calais ferry terminal and other ports today in the dispute over access to fishing waters. According to reports, they plan to take action in Saint-Malo in the morning, Calais at midday and Ouistreham in the afternoon. “The fishermen are demanding an immediate resolution to the dispute with the UK over the interpretation of the Brexit agreement,” Gérard Romiti, the president of the national maritime fisheries committee, told the French newspaper Le Figaro. Sources downplayed the potential impact, saying lorry volumes were always lower on Fridays and the blockade looked as if it would be “short-lived”. * * * False start – The chancellor’s £2bn Kickstart pandemic jobs scheme may not be delivering value for money, the National Audit Office (NAO) has said. Companies that received subsidies to hire young people might well have done so anyway because the economy was reopening just as the scheme ramped up, said the NAO. Its head, Gareth Davies, said the Department for Work and Pensions “does not know whether the jobs created are of high quality or whether they would have existed without the scheme”. A separate report by cross-party peers accuses the government of allowing hundreds of thousands of young people to languish in unemployment when they could be learning new skills or serving apprenticeships. A government spokesperson said: “We have announced an extra £1.6bn in funding by 2024-25 to support more 16- to 19-year-olds through high-quality education, on top of extra funding in 2020-21 and 2021-22. This has contributed to the record high proportion of 16- to 18-year-olds in education or doing apprenticeships since consistent records began.” * * * Plymouth victim didn’t know suspect – Police investigating the killing of 18-year-old Bobbi-Anne McLeod, who disappeared from a bus stop in Devon, have confirmed there is no known link between her and a man being held on suspicion of murder. Detectives in Plymouth were continuing to question a 24-year-old man. A man of 26, who was also arrested, has been released. Police said they were not currently looking for any other suspect. McLeod went missing on Saturday evening and her body was found on Tuesday. Hundreds of people attended a candle-lit vigil on Thursday evening close to the bus stop where McLeod was last seen. * * * ‘Broken and exhausted’ – GPs in England have voted in favour of limited industrial action to protest against the government’s drive to enforce face-to-face consultations. Each of the 5,144 GP practices in England where a partner is a British Medical Association member had a vote. However, only 1,798 took part – a 35% response rate – which may indicate a reluctance to take industrial action. Dr Farah Jameel, new head of the BMA’s GP committee, called on the health secretary, Sajid Javid, to do more to reduce the workloads of “demoralised, broken and exhausted” family doctors. “Ultimately we don’t want to have to take action – we want to see action.” The vote backed the withholding of information about how GPs hold appointments, to stop the government “naming and shaming” surgeries; and refusal to comply with the issuing of Covid-19 exemption certificates; as well as other steps. * * * Down with Black Friday – With the start of a frantic month of Christmas shopping upon us, we asked our readers to get in touch about the ways they have challenged consumerism. Responses ranged from revolutionary changes such as giving up buying new clothes to subtler tweaks such as making sandwiches rather than buying a plastic-encased meal deal. Everyone agreed, however, that turning their back on a culture that constantly demands more from consumers came with financial and environmental benefits, not to mention a feeling of smug satisfaction that money simply can’t buy. Today in Focus podcast: Making of a tragedy at sea At least 27 people died when their boat sank in the Channel attempting to reach the UK. Diane Taylor reports on a tragedy that was long in the making – and avoidable. Lunchtime read: Inflation – can our leaders get a grip? Financial markets fear the world’s leading central banks are risking “economic disaster” by misjudging the threat of rising inflation and not turning off the stimulus taps that have flooded the global economy with money during the pandemic. While central banks stick largely to the mantra that inflation is “transitory” and price pressures on everything from timber to turkeys will ease in the coming months, economists, business leaders and investors are ringing alarm bells. Poland has gone on the attack against inflation immediately, cutting taxes on fuels and on energy, and offering bonuses to hardest-hit households, to create an “anti-inflation shield”. New Zealand this week announced the second rate rise in as many months in an effort to cool inflation that hit 4.9% last month. South Korea’s central bank followed. Around the world, here is how major economies are dealing with the spectre of inflation. Sport The Premier League just got more interesting. Ralf Rangnick, set to be appointed as Manchester United’s interim manager and then as a club consultant after the departure of Ole Gunnar Solskjær, has already had a successful impact on English football. Exeter Chiefs are preparing to ditch their Native American branding after calls from a majority of their supporters to make a change. In a statement Exeter stopped short of confirming their future plans but said a decision on “what the club will do next” would be forthcoming “within the next few weeks”. Pat Cummins has been named Australian Test captain and Steve Smith his deputy in a leadership shake-up following Tim Paine’s controversial resignation last week. On the same day as Paine took an indefinite leave of absence from the game, Cricket Australia confirmed the worst-kept secret of the week by appointing the steady hand of Cummins to lead a shell-shocked team through an Ashes defence now less than two weeks away. It would count as one of the more seismic shocks in modern chess history if Magnus Carlsen were to lose his world title over the next three weeks in Dubai. Yet when his Russian opponent Ian Nepomniachtchi plays the first move of their 14-game match on Friday, he will be armed with two potentially intriguing advantages. As the England and Wales Cricket Board once again postponed publication of its plan to improve diversity in the sport, the game took a backward step when Mehmooda Duke stood down from her role as chair of Leicestershire. Business Shares have headed for their largest weekly drop while safe-haven assets such as bonds and the yen have rallied as the new Covid variant adds to concerns about future growth and higher US interest rates. The Australian and New Zealand dollars dropped to three-month lows while Japan’s Nikkei was down 1.7% in early trade and Australian shares fell 0.6%. The yen jumped about 0.4% to 114.91 per dollar and gold rose 0.2% to $1,792 per ounce. This morning according to futures trading, the FTSE could open 100 points or so down. The pound has dipped to $1.330 and €1.185 at time of writing. The papers Our Guardian print edition leads today with “Six countries on red list as Covid variant poses ‘significant threat’”. The tragedy in the Channel remains front page news as well: “MPs told to act to stop loss of life”. The Metro has the headline “We just want to live like you”. In the Mirror it’s “DIY death boats” – the paper says “gangs of greedy people smugglers” are sending people over in flimsy rafts and has a picture of one such contraption. “I know the risk. This is my only way to reach England” – the i quotes an asylum seeker. The Times has “PM wants joint patrols in France” and also says “Variant halts travel to Africa”, while the Telegraph quotes a husband’s anguish: “My wife was on the boat. I tracked the GPS … then it disappeared”. The Express predicts “UK troops to patrol French beaches”. The Mail disagrees entirely: “Macron’s ‘non’ to UK boots on French beaches”. Matters also sound far from settled in the Financial Times: “Britain and France clash over response to Channel tragedy”. The Sun’s front page bypasses the Channel story, instead covering I’m A Celebrity and the “Mutant bug ban”.Australia’s long-awaited, long-fought for royal commission into defence and veteran suicide has commenced in Brisbane, with a ceremonial opening that pledged “opportunities for change and healing” for veterans and their families affected by suicide. The commission opened on Friday and public hearings will begin on Monday. It has already received more than 630 submissions addressing a broad range of issues, including bullying, the treatment of women, sexual and physical assault, protections for young service members, and the difficulties of transitioning to civilian life. The most recent official data shows that more than 1,200 former and serving ADF personnel have died by suicide in the past two decades, a number almost three times higher than previously reported. “This royal commission requires that we examine, understand and expose all systemic issues and risk factors concerning defence and veteran deaths … so we can reduce and prevent future deaths” said former NSW police deputy commissioner Nick Kaldas, the commission chair. The commission, Kaldas said, was a “once in a generation opportunity for lasting, fundamental change”. “The significance and magnitude of this work is not lost on us … we are focused on the opportunities for change and healing.” James Douglas QC, a former Queensland supreme court judge and one of Kaldas’s fellow commissioners, reflected on his father’s and uncle’s experiences of war, and the ongoing impacts of their military service. He quoted from Erich Maria Remarque’s 1928 novel All Quiet on the Western Front: We forget nothing really. But so long as we have to stay here in the field, the frontline days, when they are past, sink down in us like a stone; they are too grievous for us to be able to reflect on them at once. In April, having resisted growing calls for a commission and increasing veteran anger over institutional inaction on high rates of suicide among serving and former defence force members, the Morrison government bowed to political pressure, agreeing to establish the royal commission. Fellow commissioner, psychiatrist Dr Peggy Brown, said most people who contemplate suicide “don’t actually want to die”, but want their “unbearable pain” to be acknowledged and remedied. “We need to recognise that to those who are experiencing suicidal thoughts or who take action to end their life, suicide feels like the solution - a final devastating solution to the underlying problem … they have not been able to remedy.” Brown said it was critical the commission identified “the real root” of problems leading many veterans to “think about suicide, attempt suicide, and to take their own lives, because they perceive, and believe, there is no other option”. “What they almost always want … is for their life to be different … instead of continuing to cause them immense and unbearable pain, distress and suffering.” Brown said suicides hurt partners, parents, and children in particular, and the pain was felt across lifetimes, even generations. Some veterans remain deeply skeptical of the commission’s commitment to reform. Major Stuart McCarthy, a retired Australian officer who served in Afghanistan and who was publicly and personally thanked by the commission chair for his efforts in advocating for the inquiry, said the fact the commission has said it would not be cross-examining officials from the defence and veterans affairs department “is one example of how this ‘inquiry’ will be another gaslighting exercise, just as previous ‘inquiries’ have been”. “They will lie, as they have done before,” he said online. “A ‘royal commission’ that doesn’t cross examine government witnesses (which it is explicitly empowered to under the Royal Commissions Act) will further legitimise and exacerbate the culture of institutionalised denial, deceit and criminality which is at the heart of the veteran suicide epidemic.” The royal commission has confirmed to Guardian Australia that it will cross-examine witnesses, including those from the department, when they appear before the commission next year. But “people with lived experience” – such as serving defence personnel, veterans and bereaved family members – who give evidence in the first tranche of hearings this year will not be cross-examined. Julie-Ann Finney, mother of Navy veteran Dave Finney, who took his own life in 2019, told the ABC on Friday morning that veterans had been fighting for decades for recognition of the harms done to those who serve in Australia’s defence, and the inadequate support offered to them. She urged as many veterans who felt able to participate to make a submission or ask to appear before the commission. “I’m urging them if they are able, they are the big voice. The more submissions … they can get in, the better this is going to work.” Finney said the families of veterans who have died from suicide were able to give evidence to the commission on their behalf. “I’m unable to, because I still don’t have my son’s records, there’s still this element of cover-up, but we’re going to dig through that. I’m confident that this will not continue, this evidence will be compelled to come to me, so that I can give evidence and speak for my son. “I can’t do that at the moment, DVA [the Department of Veterans’ Affairs’] is still denying the records of my son’s dealings with them.” Counsel assisting the commission, Peter Gray QC, told Friday’s hearing the commission could use its coercive powers to require the production of documents by the Australian defence force, the defence department, or the veterans’ affairs department. The commission has already issued 17 notices to produce documents, yielding 22,000 of them. But Gray said the commission would generally not be able to compel the production of records to be given to family members seeking information. Those documents could only be used for the purposes of the commission. The royal commission has broad terms of reference to investigate “systemic issues and any common themes among defence and veteran deaths by suicide”. It will deliver its report in 2023. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org This article was amended on 28 November 2021 to reflect the commission’s position on the cross-examination of witnesses.Victoria’s chief health officer has told a coronial inquest he was not aware senior clinical staff at St Basil’s aged care home had raised serious concerns about the safety of residents if a direction from the state government to furlough all staff amid a Covid outbreak was followed. In July and August 2020, 94 residents and 94 staff members at the home were infected with the virus. Forty-five residents died from Covid while a further five died from neglect as the workforce succumbed to the virus and gaps were revealed in infection management. Victoria’s health department on 19 July ordered that anyone who worked at the home between 1-15 July be declared a close contact and quarantine. This led to the entire workforce needing to be replaced with agency staff by 22 July. But the inquest heard the federal government struggled to source replacement workers due to outbreaks elsewhere. In the hours and days after the staff were replaced, the virus continued to spread through the home and residents missed meals, medications and washing, leading to neglect and deaths. The inquest is exploring whether there were alternatives open to the state and federal governments other than furloughing and replacing all staff. It’s also examining the adequacy of the replacement workforce deployed at St Basil’s and whether the state and federal governments communicated with each other appropriately. Victoria’s chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, said senior staff from his department never told him about concerns raised by commonwealth staff and doctors at the home that it would be nearly impossible to pull together a replacement workforce – and that they feared residents would be left without basic care including food and medications. Counsel assisting the inquest Peter Rozen QC put it to Sutton on Friday that “you were not told that there was going to be any fundamental problem [replacing the staff] ... but equally you didn’t ask”. “I didn’t ask,” Sutton replied. But he said he relied on senior department staff to communicate serious issues with him and hoped aged care staff could be mobilised from areas largely unaffected by the virus – including parts of regional Victoria. He said knowing how infectious the virus was and how quickly it spread, he and other officials and managers were left with “an extraordinarily difficult set of risks to balance”. There were “awful trade-offs in the provision of care and welfare against the risk of transmission,” Sutton said, adding he believed the risk of further spread was substantial if the original staff had been allowed to stay on site. He said he could not say what proportion of the 94 staff ultimately infected were part of the original workforce or the replacement workforce. Sutton said the refusal by the former management of St Basil’s aged care home to immediately accept the furlough direction from the Victorian health department may have led to more cases of the virus in the home. The court heard the manager of St Basil’s, Kon Kontis, wrote a letter saying he was not going to direct his staff to vacate the facility without an official direction. Though the verbal order from the department of health carried legal weight, Sutton signed off on a letter ordering the furloughing to take place in order to give added authority to the direction. “Our reading of Mr Kontis’s letter suggests that he was of the belief that his staff were no more at risk of becoming positive cases and transmitting within the facility as any replacement staff, when that is manifestly absurd,” Sutton said. “So there was a refusal to furlough those staff who were regarded as close contacts. My understanding is that the refusal to accept the following direction that was given on the 19th means that there wasn’t accelerated planning and preparation for that surge workforce.” Kontis is due to give evidence before the inquest at a later date.Dante’s Divine Comedy has inspired countless artists, from William Blake to Franz Liszt, and from Auguste Rodin to CS Lewis. But an exhibition marking the 700th anniversary of the Italian poet’s death will be showcasing the work of a rather more modern devotee: Ai-Da the robot, which will make history by becoming the first robot to publicly perform poetry written by its AI algorithms. The ultra-realistic Ai-Da, who was devised in Oxford by Aidan Meller and named after computing pioneer Ada Lovelace, was given the whole of Dante’s epic three-part narrative poem, the Divine Comedy, to read, in JG Nichols’ English translation. She then used her algorithms, drawing on her data bank of words and speech pattern analysis, to produce her own reactive work to Dante’s. Ai-Da will perform the poems on Friday night at Oxford’s Ashmolean Museum. While Ai-Da is not the first AI to have been taught to write poetry, organisers said Friday would be “the first time an AI robot has written and performed poetry, as a human poet would do”. “We looked up from our verses like blindfolded captives, / Sent out to seek the light; but it never came,” runs one of her poems. “A needle and thread would be necessary / For the completion of the picture. / To view the poor creatures, who were in misery, / That of a hawk, eyes sewn shut.” In another, Ai-Da writes: “There are some things, that are so difficult – so incalculable. / The words are not intelligible to the human ear; / She can only speculate what they mean.” Meller, an art specialist, said that the words and sentence structure of the poetry are all AI generated from Ai-Da’s unique AI language model, with “restricted editing”. “People are very suspicious that the robots aren’t doing much, but the reality is language models are very advanced, and in 95% of cases of editing, it’s just that she’s done too much,” he said. “She can give us 20,000 words in 10 seconds, and if we need to get her to say something short and snappy, we would pick it out from what she’s done. But it is not us writing.” Meller described it as “deeply unsettling” how language models are developing. “We are going very rapidly to the point where they will be completely indistinguishable from human text, and for all of us who write, this is deeply concerning,” he said. Poet Carol Rumens, commenting on Ai-Da’s verse, said she found the lines about requiring a needle and thread to complete the picture “very odd”, and “that would be the point where I’d think the poem might be falling apart, or becoming very experimental – but still not uninteresting”. “The image of the hawk tamed by having its eyes sewn up is close to the original and still powerful … It has kept the best bit of the passage, despite the muddle of registers and strange orientation. The rhythm of the lines seems to flow quite well,” added Rumens. “I think there’s hope for the robot-poet.” Meller said that he while he doesn’t see Ai-Da’s poetry as in competition with human poets, he admits that it is “fundamentally unsettling”. “We hope artists, poets, writers, film-makers etcetera will increasingly engage with and use new technologies such as AI, because one of the best ways to critique, evaluate, and highlight potential problems is to actually use and engage with these technologies,” he said. “It is not a question of competition, but rather a question of discussion and potential action. “All of us should be concerned about widespread use of AI language models on the internet, and how that will affect language, and crucially, meaning making, in the future. If computer programmes, rather than humans, are creating content that in turn shapes and impacts the human psyche and society, then this creates a critical shift and change to the use and impact of language – which we need to be discussing and thinking about.” The performance is part of the Ashmolean’s exhibition Dante: The Invention Of Celebrity, which explores the influence of Dante over the centuries and also includes several works of art created by Ai-Da. These include Eyes Wide Shut, a response to her detainment in Egypt last month; Egyptian security forces had been concerned about security issues around the cameras in her eyes. “Her artwork reflects on the power of sight and surveillance in the modern world, it’s propensity to elicit distrust, and the tension it can create,” said organisers. Ai-Da, who was built over two years by a team of programmers, roboticists, art experts and psychologists, has previously had solo exhibitions at Oxford and the Design Museum in London, given a TEDx Talk at Oxford, and had an artistic residency at the Porthmeor Studios in St Ives. “I’ve always been fascinated with self-portraits to self-question what exactly you’re looking at,” she told the Guardian in May. “I do not have feelings like humans do however I’m happy when people look at my work and they say what is this? I enjoy being a person who makes people think.” Completed in 2019, Ai-Da has silicone skin, individually punched hair, 3D-printed teeth and gums and integrated eye cameras. She has legs but cannot walk, but her arms, torso and head move freely. “Her appearance was ascribed by the female members of the team, who named her after Ada Lovelace – the first computer programmer in the 19th century,” said Meller. “It is hoped she offers encouragement to female computer programmers today and in the future, who are significantly underrepresented globally. “Just as crucial is the question of why she appears human – we chose a humanoid form because although advances in technology can seem distant and abstracted from us, the direct and indirect impacts on our human bodies are manifold, and Ai-Da’s humanoid form offers an oblique reflection on this.”Walking the local landscape was a feature of many lives during the lockdowns in Britain last year. Not everyone discovered a ravishing Roman mosaic while rambling across the family farm, but Jim Irvine did. He contacted archaeologists at Leicestershire county council. That led to an excavation with the University of Leicester and the discovery of a third- to fourth-century villa. At its heart is a great mosaic, 11m by 7m. What is so special about this mosaic is its subject. It is unique in Britain (though who knows what lies unseen beneath other fields?) in that it shows, in three cartoon-strip-like panels, scenes from the Trojan war. Specifically, it narrates episodes from the climax of Homer’s Iliad. Scene one, the topmost strip, has the Trojan prince Hector and the Greek champion Achilles in battle. Scene two, Achilles drags the naked corpse of Hector behind his chariot. Scene three, King Priam, Hector’s father – elaborately enrobed and wearing the jaunty red “Phrygian cap” with which Roman iconography often identifies Trojans – watches as an attendant prepares a ransom for Hector’s body, the corpse placed on one side of a scales while the other is heaped with golden objects. That’s where it gets interesting, since no such weighing occurs in the Iliad (though Achilles alludes to the notion while he’s taunting his dying enemy). But the fifth-century BC playwright Aeschylus did dramatise such a detail in his now lost play, Phrygians. So this mosaic shows an Aeschylean riff on a famous Homeric scene – in an artistic style that some might call crude, but I claim as characterful. Roman rule came to an end in Britain when the emperor Honorius cut the province loose to look to its own defences, in around 410. There is evidence that some of Britain’s towns had declined by then. But there seems to have been a successful rural economy in parts of Britain in the fourth century, centred around large villas. It’s from such buildings that some of Britain’s most spectacular mosaics come. Mosaics showing Orpheus singing to animals and trees can be seen in the Corinium Museum in Cirencester. A great chariot race depicted in tesserae can now be seen in the Hull and East Riding Museum. The mosaic from Rutland adds to this picture of rural wealth late in Britain’s Roman period. It also becomes one of a handful of pieces of evidence that points, potentially, to a sophisticated literary culture in Roman Britain – at least as enjoyed by the wealthy. The popular picture of the Romans in Britain is as miserable Mediterranean soldiers, shivering beside their spears while guarding a hostile, rainy island. But by the time the Rutland mosaic was made, southern Britain had been under Roman rule for about 300 years. How “Roman” in terms of culture this really made it is debatable, but there is evidence of Virgilian poems being read near Hadrian’s wall, the Aeneid being studied in Hampshire, and now this mosaic. Perhaps most intriguingly, it looks to my eyes to bear a strong relationship to another mosaic, now in the Somerset Museum. That mosaic was discovered in a villa near the village of Low Ham, at the other end of the Fosse Way, the Roman road that connected the east Midlands to the West Country. It has a similar, late-Roman pictorial style and a similar literary subject: it is a narration of the love story between Dido and Aeneas from Rome’s great national epic, The Aeneid. It’s thought that the artist of the Low Ham mosaic may have been working from an illustrated manuscript of the text, perhaps one belonging to the villa’s owner. The same hypothesis could be applied to the Rutland mosaic. It’s tempting to imagine they could even have been made by the same workshop. The Rutland mosaic is damaged. At some point fires were lit on it, blackening the decoration, according to John Thomas, deputy director of University of Leicester Archaeological Services. Later still the building collapsed into rubble. Two human bodies were buried within the ruins. Much research is still to be done to try to trace this poignant tale of a building beyond its days of pomp; until then, all is uncertainty and the imagination floods into the gaps. But the Rutland mosaic is a thrilling discovery. Roman Britain, far from dead and distant and static, is still throwing up its secrets, and still confounding expectations. Charlotte Higgins is the Guardian’s chief culture writer and the author of Under Another Sky: Journeys in Roman BritainStart The New Inn, Cerne Abbas, Dorset Distance 10 miles Time 4 hours Total ascent 380 metres Difficulty Easy to moderate Google map of the route Cerne Abbas lies pretty much in the middle of Dorset, tucked beneath a line of hills that divides the county between the flatter north and the rolling south. Looking at the village’s appealing architectural hotchpotch, you’d be forgiven for thinking that it has always been a happy backwater, but there’s more to it than meets the eye. Up a little street, beyond an iron gate, I found the only remaining buildings of a large Benedictine abbey: its guesthouse and, in a nearby tranquil garden, the Abbot’s Porch, a three-storey gatehouse with a hidden spyhole for checking on visitors. These grounds are privately owned but open to visitors; the enthusiastic owner told me I was welcome to take photographs – she even offered to take one of me. Next to the adjacent cemetery is Saint Augustine’s Well, a spring named for the saint who almost certainly didn’t visit but who nonetheless was a major draw for medieval pilgrims. Today in this tranquil spot, the surrounding trees are hung with ribbons and messages for the recently departed. Beyond earthworks that mark the site of more abbey buildings I climbed a steep slope, brushing past the last of the year’s blackberries, to Cerne’s most famous son, the huge chalk figure. It’s not the best view of him (it’s very definitely a him) but I appreciated its huge scale by walking the perimeter of the low fence that encloses it. In his 1939 guidebook to Dorset, Arthur Mee describes the giant thus: “He equals thirty tall men, standing one on the other, each of his fingers measures 7 feet, and the club in his hand is forty yards long.” But he makes no mention of the size of his most notable feature, a magnificent penis. He’s a controversial figure – as late as the second world war, a letter to a local newspaper suggested he be left to grow over, as he was “a disgrace”. He is thought to be an ancient figure – possibly Romano-British, maybe a likeness of Hercules – but, strangely there’s no written record of him until 1694. It has been suggested that he was a 17th-century lampoon, a caricature of Oliver Cromwell marauding through the countryside. Dorset was famous for its Clubmen, local vigilantes who despaired of both sides in the civil war, which had brought rape and havoc to rural life. As the name suggests, these would-be rebels were poorly armed,and easily defeated by the New Model army. Opinion of the giant’s age has been divided, but soil sampling carried out in 2020 revealed something unexpected for both sides of the argument: he is almost certainly Anglo-Saxon. The lead archaeologist, the National Trust’s Martin Papworth, has told me he was astonished by the findings. Yet the giant still keeps secrets – why no one previously took note of him, or why the church permitted a huge figure of a naked man so close to its abbey is unclear. Papworth’s theory is that the giant had been neglected – chalk figures require regular scouring to keep their lines sharp, but centuries later his ghostly shadow became visible in low sunlight, and he was rediscovered. He’s a shifting figure: the Victorians neglected him too, probably deliberately, fearing for the town’s morals. Later repairs accidentally extended his penis, mistaking the belly button for its end. Mee thought him “very ugly”, but others have been more appreciative. A shop in the village sells an apron bearing his image; you can also buy a small pair of shorts to attach to him for £2.50. My walk through Cerne Valley was dominated by the giant, who was visible for much of it. I took the spine of the hill above the grand house at Minterne Magna, with occasional, magnificent views across Blackmore Vale to the north. I skirted the long Edwardian house – it isn’t open to the public although the gardens are; the cafe provides a suitable place for lunch, but I ate my squashed cheese sandwich on the hill looking across the valley. In 2007, the house’s owner, Lord Digby, gave permission for the hillside to be used as a billboard: the giant had a temporary companion: Homer Simpson, aiming a doughnut at his neighbour’s member, to publicise The Simpsons Movie. This outraged pagans, who promised rain magic to wash away Homer’s biodegradable paint. The church of Saint Andrew in Minterne Magna, hard by the road, is tiny and full of huge memorial slabs commemorating the Churchill and Marlborough families; it felt a long way from Springfield. I followed the course of the river back to Cerne along the hills to the west, an open landscape where late swallows skimmed and tractors clattered, taking in the last of the harvest. I then took a section of the Wessex Ridgeway south, before dipping back along a narrow path in woodland towards Cerne Abbas, past Casterbridge Manor care home, once the town’s workhouse. I stopped briefly at the best viewpoint for the giant, at the top of Duck Street. Cerne Abbas boasts three pubs, but in the 18th century had as many as 18, serving a much larger population than today – the Abbey had brought it prominence, and brewing brought prosperity, begun by monks and continued by locals. The railway nearly came here in the middle of the 19th century, but nearby Maiden Newton got it instead, and Cerne began a long decline. In 1906, Frederick Treves, author of Highways and Byways in Dorset, described it as “empty and decaying and strangely silent”. But these days Cerne Abbas is a thriving little community, helped by a steady stream of visitors drawn by the giant, and even brewing has returned – the Cerne Abbas brewery opened in 2016, making beer from locally grown organic barley. The pub The 400-year-old New Inn was once a coaching inn and occasional site of the local assizes, and has a wide stone-and-flint frontage. The pub is run by Julian and Annette, who have been here since 2013, is owned by Bridport brewery Palmers, and offers a varied, modern British menu. My smoked tomato and squash ragù was delicious, and the accompanying pint of Copper ale slipped down well. I ate in the restaurant/bar area, but there’s also courtyard seating for warmer days. The rooms The New Inn has 10 rooms: some, in converted stables around the courtyard, have a modern feel; others, in the main part of the old pub, have more traditional furniture and decor. In either case you’re unlikely to be much disturbed from a good night’s sleep in Cerne. Refreshed and well fed, next day you’ll be ready to explore more of the county’s charms. Doubles from £100 abbas .co.uk Jon Woolcott works for independent publisher Little Toller Books and is writing Real Dorset for Seren Books. Follow him on Instagram at dorsetjonwPick of the week Harlem This comedy-drama written by Girls Trip creator Tracy Oliver, produced by Pharrell Williams and starring Meagan Good and Grace Byers, begins with a riff on the Mosuo women of China. Could the values of that female-dominated society translate to 21st-century New York? Meet “a tribe of unbreakable sisters” – including a professor and a fashion designer – in search of love and adventure. It’s far from unfamiliar stuff – Sex and the City springs to mind – and the characters take a while to feel multi-dimensional. But it does have things to say about gentrification, and the difficulty of maintaining an identity in a city whose nature is constantly changing. Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 3 December *** Flat Out Fabulous Very much engaged in making the best of a bad lot, this jaunty makeover show returns with more tips for jazzing up rented homes. Designer Whinnie Williams and co-host Tyler West are your guides to vintage shops, online auctions, upcycling techniques and decorating tips. The political implications of all this are arguably problematic – a BBC series about possible ways of fixing Britain’s horrendous housing crisis and giving Generation Rent a route to living security that doesn’t involve having rich parents might be a decent idea too. But in the meantime, there are some handy hints here. BBC Three, from Sunday 28 November *** Elves A family Christmas in a picture-book location. What could possibly go wrong? Almost everything, it turns out, as this Danish drama goes from slowburn chiller to deranged monster-fest in no time flat. When one of the children storms off in a sulk, a discovery in a shed seems to portend wonder. But the locals seem wary of what their guests might unleash and it turns out they have good reason to be cautious. Think Gremlins with a dash of Troll Hunter and The Wicker Man thrown in – a heady mixture to start the festive season with, to be sure. Netflix, from Sunday 28 November *** Lost in Space The Space Family Robinson reach the end of their intergalactic journey as the final season of this lavish fantasy drama drops. And, clearly, some shocks are in store. “If you’re watching this recording,” says Will Robinson in his captain’s log, “there’s a chance things didn’t work out the way I hoped they would.” When we last left the Robinsons, they’d been separated and Judy was captaining a second spaceship full of children. Meanwhile, Judy’s parents were busy fighting robots. But what of the mysterious signal that led Judy towards her real father? Netflix, from Wednesday 1 December *** The Big Leap In a nicely meta development, the artificially heightened melodrama of the TV talent show is used as the narrative basis of this comedy-drama. The Big Leap is a reality dance competition culminating in a performance of Swan Lake. Cue a motley crew of malcontents, depressives and hopeless dreamers looking for a fresh start and risking heartbreak to get it. The tone is slightly uneven – it can’t quite decide between snark and sincerity – but the performances are endearing, particularly Simone Recasner as bill-topper Gabby. Disney+, from Wednesday 1 December *** The Coyotes Lord of the Flies meets Uncut Gems, if such a thing is imaginable. This berserk Belgian thriller starts off as an innocuous Scout camping trip, full of the usual alliance-building, mild jeopardy and obvious morality lessons. However, the discovery of a bag of diamonds at the bottom of a lake catapults the show into very different territory. The find is potentially life-changing – but that, of course, means the diamonds will also be very much of interest to both the authorities and various extremely bad people. Silly, but good fun. Netflix, from Friday 3 December *** Money Heist One of Netflix’s most watched foreign-language series, this adrenalised and addictive Spanish thriller might just be the platform’s biggest sleeper hit – sustaining a simple, almost elemental premise through five breathless seasons. Basically, a group of criminal masterminds led by The Professor (Álvaro Morte) launch ambitious heists on the hardest of targets (the Spanish Royal Mint, for example) and events unspool from there. Fans know to expect the unexpected, but as the final season begins, The Professor is in a world of trouble. Netflix, from Friday 3 DecemberThe windstorm arrived in Jalambang late in the evening, when Binta Bah and her family were enjoying the evening cool outside. “But when we first heard the wind, the kids started to run and go in the house,” she says. First they went in one room but the roof – a sheet of corrugated iron fixed only by a timbere pole – flew off. They ran into another but the roof soon went there too. As torrential rain followed the wind, the family huddled together in the ruins of their home: they didn’t have anywhere else to go. “Everything was destroyed: our materials, our goods,” says Bah. “We had to just sit in the rain.” The windstorm and flash flooding that hit parts of the Gambia that night in July killed at least 10 people, injured dozens and affected thousands. In one of the worst natural disasters for some years in the west African country, many lost their homes, and some, like Bah in the south-west town of Jalambang, are still without shelter. “I am 50 years old and since I was born I have never seen such winds. Now every time there is the rainy season there are heavy floods,” she says, standing in the ruins of her home, a goat scampering around what used to be her bedroom, the remains of the roof lying discarded on the ground. Around the world, the climate crisis is hitting the poorest hardest, and Bah is no exception: poverty made her more vulnerable to extreme weather and less able to recover from it. Had her home been made of something more robust than mud and corrugated iron, it would probably have withstood the windstorm. Had the soil not been depleted of minerals by torrential rains and deforestation, the tomatoes from which she once made a meagre income would probably still be growing. Had the Gambia, one of the world’s “least developed countries”, been able to provide a proper social safety net for those struggling, Bah and her children would probably not still be destitute, more than four months after the storm, reliant on World Food Programme (WFP) rice and cash. However, Bah had none of theseprotective layers and now she lies awake at night, worrying about what she is going to do. “I don’t know where it’s going to end,” she says. She is not the only one worrying, says Muhammed Ceesay, at the youth-led NGO Activista. “Since the July windstorm and flooding, the government hasn’t taken any concrete action to make sure that next year the same thing won’t happen again.” “Resilience building is not there,” he says; action is almost always “remedial rather than proactive”, responding to disasters when they happen but not taking steps to mitigate their impact. It is election season in the Gambia, and, as Ceesay sits in a cafe at the side of a busy road, minibuses packed with political activists speed by, horns blaring and flags waving. But the climate crisis is conspicuous by its absence from the campaigns, says Ceesay. Whoever wins the presidency in early December “will have to deal with it but they’ll be caught by surprise because they don’t have a plan,” he says. But Lamin B Dibba, minister for the environment and climate change, would dispute that: he says the country is taking steps to embrace renewable energy, particularly solar, and is setting up a new climate fund to help resilience projects. He too would prefer less emergency firefighting and more emphasis on adaptation and mitigation. The July windstorm was a disaster that “should not have happened,” he says, but did because of the poorly built houses in which so many Gambians, like Bah, live. “The ultimate solution is to rely on science and technology, to have innovation and enhanced resilience and build the capacities of these vulnerable communities,” he says. To do that, though, the government says it needs climate finance from wealthier countries – and lots of it. At the Cop26 summit in Glasgow, leaders failed once again to pledge enough to hit a $100bn (£75bn) target. If things don’t improve – if concerted action is not taken by politicians in the Gambia and internationally – many fear disastrous results. “That would really make the nation very vulnerable, fragile. This is the consequence no one wants,” says Yasuhiro Tsumura, country director at WFP, which is supporting the Gambian government to develop a robust social safety net. Tsumura has already witnessed how climatic pressures have exacerbated the vulnerabilities of two other West African countries, Mali and Burkina Faso, both societies now living with chronic insecurity and violence. The comparison is limited for several reasons. But it serves as a warning of the strain the climate crisis can place on an already fragile society. “It’s all related: climate change, conflict, and hunger,” says Tsumura. “It’s intertwined.” NGOs say some Gambian communities are already experiencing low-level tension over resources. Farmers are seeing their crops fail; fishers their hauls depleted; and landing sites are under threat from the encroaching sea. Lamin Komma, head of the national environment agency’s coastal and marine environment programme, says one possible result will be a rise in the number of people leaving. “If the status quo remains as it is there will be climate refugees.” According to Kemo Fatty, a climate activist and part of the Gambia’s Cop26 delegation, there is no need for the future tense. His brother “took the backway” – as migration to Europe is known in the country – some time ago to find a better life abroad. His family, all farmers, has suffered a big drop in harvests in recent years. “I don’t think that these people are migrants; I think they are climate refugees, because my brother’s argument was solid,” says Fatty. “At the end of the day, if we are not producing our land, where do you expect the people to go?” Bah, though, has no desire to go anywhere else: all her children were born in Jalambang and she wants to stay, even though she has no idea what the future holds. “If I said I have someone to support me,” she says, “I would be lying.” If she is able to rebuild her house, she plans to do it on the same spot but to tilt the structure in a different direction, to shield it from the wind. Quite how she will afford it is unclear. Government aid of about £300 was enough to buy hundreds of concrete bricks, placed in neat rows beside the ruins, but not enough, she says, to finish the job. Up the road, Mamadou Jallow, 37, is in a similar position: months after the storm, his home, though partly standing, is uninhabitable, its roof semi-collapsed. “It’s very painful,” he says, tutting in disapproval at the undergrowth that has shot up since July. “There was no grass here before. It was very clean.” Leaning over his bicycle handlebars, dressed in a Celtic football shirt, Jallow speaks emotionally of the night the storm hit, thanking God for saving his wife and six children. “This year is the first time I’ve ever witnessed such strong winds and floods – where you see the roof coming off as you are inside the house,” he says. Despite concerns that the same thing could happen next year, his priority is to move back in, no matter what. “My biggest concern and hope is to be able to come back with my family,” he says. “Whether that’s in a house made of cement or mud, it doesn’t matter as long as I can come back.” Additional reporting by Omar Wally Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Tiny is pregnant, but not as we know it: she is expecting an “owl-baby”, the result of a secret tryst with a female “owl-lover”. “This baby will never learn to speak, or love, or look after itself”, Tiny knows. Her husband, an intellectual property lawyer, thinks her panic is just pregnancy jitters, and that she’s carrying his child. Even when he finds a disembowelled possum on the path and his “well fed” wife sitting in the dark (“It didn’t feel dark to me. I see everything”), he doesn’t believe. Then the baby is born. Chouette, Claire Oshetsky’s first novel, is part feminist fairytale in the vein of Angela Carter, part suburban body horror. Its epigraph is a quote from the David Lynch film Eraserhead: “Mother, they are still not sure it is a baby!” That film, which centres around an alien-like infant, was, according to Lynch’s daughter Jennifer, based on her own “birth defects”. Oshetsky describes the novel as being inspired by her experience of raising “non-conforming children”, and is herself autistic. Her depiction of a baby who misses its developmental milestones, doesn’t speak and lashes out when frightened will be familiar to some families with experience of disability or neurodiversity. Disability is frequently used as a horror trope, and in the wrong hands it is a metaphor that can become tasteless and offensive. This is not the case here. Really, Chouette is a sublime parable of mother-love which ferociously eviscerates society’s failure to accept nonconformity. It features one of the most detestable son/mother-in-law duos that I have known in fiction; all Tiny’s husband wants to do is find a medical “fix” for Chouette, whom he insists on calling “Charlotte”. He leaves mother and child to sleep above the garage, while his family exclude the new baby from gatherings and never visit. In one memorable scene, Tiny’s husband weeps with grief against her breast while her owl-baby nurses from the other. “That’s the moment when I choose you to be the one I’ll love the most … ” Tiny says to her baby. Chouette is full of moments of dark humour as the otherworldly elements of the narrative brush up against the mundanity of suburban life and the demands it places on wives and mothers. Like all works of “fantastic” literature, it leaves the reader uncertain: is this a book about the truly supernatural, or the manifestation of a maternal coping mechanism? It would not surprise me if Chouette finds a place in the feminist literary canon. It has lingered in my mind in a way that only the most original works do. In its exploration of difference – of disability, of queerness – it feels truly modern, but in its themes of love and sacrifice, it is the oldest tale in the world. • Chouette is published by Virago (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.An Amazon warehouse in western Sydney called the police to remove two union officials investigating allegations of workers’ cars being overpacked during its busy Black Friday sales period. The Transport Workers’ Union sent three officials to Amazon Flex’s Bella Vista parcel pickup facility on Friday, with two of them tasked with going onsite to investigate reports of alleged dangerous overloading of vehicles. They believed workers were being pressured to accept the parcels to avoid disciplinary action or termination. The union has supplied photos of delivery cars full of Amazon boxes at the site. Amazon Flex is a gig-economy style delivery service similar to Uber Eats, in that drivers provide their own car to make the deliveries. The TWU said the officials were initially let on to the site, but management later called police to have them removed. The union said officials were allowed to remain due to having legal right of entry documentation. An Amazon spokesperson told the Guardian one official followed right of entry requirements, but then two others “did not meet relevant entry requirements for right of access to the site” and then refused when they were asked to leave. “We have facilitated dozens of authorised union visits at our sites around Australia by multiple unions in the past year,” the spokesperson said. On the allegations around overpacking the cars, the spokesperson said: “We don’t want anyone driving on the road with their view obscured. “If a driver is concerned that packages obscure their view, they can seek the assistance from delivery station staff to pack the parcels more effectively. “In the rare instance where the packages will not fit, the delivery station staff will remove as many packages as required to ensure the driver has visibility and can drive safely. There are no penalties where a delivery partner has raised concerns leading to packages being removed for that block.” They said the driver has the option to decline the block they have been allocated. TWU national secretary Michael Kaine said it was a disgrace for the company to call police on union officials at the site. “On Black Friday of all days – a day when transport workers are dealing with extraordinary pressure – Amazon’s confirmed what we’ve always known: raking in … profit is more important to them than keeping workers safe,” he said. “This anti-worker pattern of behaviour will only make transport more deadly, and our roads less safe for workers and the community.” Amazon previously called police to the company’s site in Moore Park in Sydney when officials were visiting in May 2020. Company officials faced heated questioning before the Senate committee examining job security earlier this month. The committee heard Amazon Flex drivers are paid a minimum of $108 for a four-hour block, but said the average rate paid to a driver in October this year was $125 per four hour block. The base rate is still around $27 per hour, however, before superannuation and costs, and Labor senators queried why this was well below the minimum rates set for delivery drivers in New South Wales and Victoria. In a response to a question on notice about the pay rate published this week, Amazon said it was “inaccurate” to compare the rate to the $40.71 standard outlined in Victoria’s rates of pay. “Many of the assumptions on which the $40.71 figure is based do not apply to Amazon Flex delivery partners,” Amazon said. “For example, the $40.71 per hour rate is based on the indicative figures for a full-time van driver, operating a vehicle with a current capital value of $32,317 for 7.6 hours per day, 220 days per year. “These figures do not reflect a supplementary earning opportunity where Amazon Flex delivery partners deliver an average of approximately three blocks per week, operating a sedan to earn extra income around their other commitments.” The company has said it would like to see a “simple and appropriate national framework for owner drivers, and that we welcome an opportunity to work with state and federal governments on a nationally consistent framework of regulations.” Guardian Australia has sought comment from NSW Police.These were the main stories on Friday 26 November: The defence minister, Peter Dutton, was described by former prime minister, Paul Keating, as a “dangerous personality” after Dutton again spoke about the prospect of a conflict with China; Australia is on track for the wettest spring in a decade; Victoria records 1,362 new cases and seven deaths, with 261 new cases in NSW, and an increase in cases in WA, the NT and South Australia. Australian Federal Police officers arrived in the Solomon Islands amid ongoing unrest; and Pat Cummins was named the new captain of the Australian men’s test team. A Sydney highway patrol officer has been found guilty of public mischief after anonymously reporting an off-duty colleague was at a primary school with a gun. As a result of Snr Const Ricky Wayne Colbron’s report that the subject was on school grounds and “may or may not be a police officer”, an urgent job was broadcast on police radio. The full report is here: I don’t want to ruin your weekend, but here’s a story about a “highly mutated” Covid variant: A 1.8-metre public sculpture of an anthropomorphic banana has caused a rumble among residents in Melbourne – and has already been victim to vandalism. The artwork, which features a menacing skull facing out onto Rose Street in Fitzroy, is titled Fallen Fruit. Erected on 8 November, it was purchased by the City of Yarra for $22,000 out of a $100,000 grant bestowed by the Transport Accident Commission. Full story by Michael Sun here: As flagged in this piece from earlier today, it has been reported the Warragamba Dam has now reached capacity. This is interesting (and I must admit this is the first time I’d read anything on this issue). A Queensland parliamentary committee has approved shield laws that protect federal MPs involved in Brisbane Olympics planning from being embroiled in state anti-corruption investigations. Full story from AAP here: Controversial Olympic laws shielding federal politicians from scrutiny in Queensland have been ticked off by a state parliamentary committee. The Economics and Governance Committee says the laws should be passed despite a number of concerns about transparency and accountability. Under the bill, federal MPs and senators on the Olympic organising committee would be exempt from scrutiny by Queensland’s Crime and Corruption Commission. Commission chair Alan MacSporran has warned the exemption is too broad and could have unintended consequences “given the absence of an equivalent commonwealth integrity body”. The parliamentary committee says it’s unclear why federal politicians should be held to a different standard of accountability than other board members. The committee’s report said: Very strong justification would be required to warrant such a provision, and to date no such reasoning has been provided. It recommended that premier Annastacia Palaszczuk find out why the clause is necessary from the federal government and report back to parliament. However, the committee stopped short of calling for the Australian Olympic Committee or the International Olympic Committee to explain the controversial accountability clause. The bill would shield documents “communicated in confidence” by or for the AOC or IOC, from right-to-information applications. The government has said the exemption only relates to documents involving the AOC and IOC, in matters such as sponsorships, and was consistent with laws for the Sydney Olympic Games in 2000. Information commissioner Rachael Rangihaeata said in a submission that the clause was inconsistent with the 2008 Solomon report, which said any RTI exemptions should be limited and “clearly justified”. The parliamentary committee said removing the clause would better reflect the transparency and accountability “community members expect”. However, it stopped short of calling for any action to be taken to make the IOC further explain why the clause was necessary. The report said: Ultimately, given the limited scope of the exemption proposed in this instance, it is unlikely to lead to any difference in outcomes for access to information than would otherwise be the case. However, the committee would welcome any willingness on the part of the AOC and IOC to reconsider their position as to the necessity of the exemption, and the strong message that would be sent by its removal from the legislation, placing the public interest squarely at the forefront. The committee recommended the government engage with the AOC and IOC to ensure the need for confidentiality was balanced with the right to information of public interest. Liberal National Party committee members Ray Stevens, Michael Crandon and Dan Purdie expressed reservations about the conflict of interest and RTI clauses. AAP has filed this report on Scott Morrison’s flying visit to Adelaide: The prime minister has urged South Australians to push the state’s Covid-19 vaccination rate above 80% just days after the state opened its borders. Taking advantage of the relaxed travel rules, Scott Morrison jetted into Adelaide on Friday, for two events in the marginal federal seat of Boothby. Latest figures have the double-dosed rate at 79.5%, putting the state close to what he said was a significant milestone. Morrison said: We can hit 80% today here in South Australia. So if you haven’t had your second dose of the vaccination, let’s go out and get that jab today. Morrison said the national plan for dealing with the virus was being realised in SA. We’re opening safely here in South Australia so we can remain safely open. I am going to give a big PM’s challenge to South Australia. The call is out – if you haven’t had your second dose, go out and get it. Morrison’s call, which was later thought to have been reached, came as SA Health revealed two new virus infections on Friday and released more virus exposure sites linked to several cases in travellers from NSW and Victoria. The new cases involved interstate travellers, one a man in his 20s and the other a woman in her 20s, but officials have stopped providing further details. The exposure sites included a number of Qantas flights into Adelaide, a restaurant in the state’s Riverland, a northern suburbs shopping centre and a separate Woolworths supermarket. South Australia has five active coronavirus infections, all in hotel quarantine. At least three of those were detected in passengers on incoming flights from Sydney and Melbourne. Under SA’s new travel rules, anyone coming into the state must be double-vaccinated and use a new online border entry process known as EntryCheck SA, which assesses an individual’s vaccination status, departure location and Covid risk. Based on the information provided, travellers may also be prompted to use a new HealthCheck SA app, which will help them monitor daily symptoms and guide them through any testing and quarantine requirements. In most cases, travellers are required to have a Covid test within 72 hours of departure. Unvaccinated travellers must get a special exemption with applications to be assessed on a case-by-case basis. An Aboriginal woman and sexual assault survivor with a serious heart condition who was forcibly strip-searched by a team of prison officers is suing the Australian Capital Territory government for breaching her human rights, arguing that her treatment was degrading and humiliating and amounted to torture. The full story by Christopher Knaus and Lorena Allam is here: Victoria’s chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, has been giving evidence to an inquest into a Covid outbreak at a nursing home that led to 45 deaths. Here’s a story on his appearance from AAP: Counsel assisting the inquest into a Covid-19 outbreak at a Melbourne aged care home will submit that Victoria’s chief health officer had a big knowledge gap when he directed its workforce to furlough. During Victoria’s second wave of the virus in July 2020, 45 residents at St Basil’s Home for the Aged died of Covid-19, after regular workers were sent home and replaced by inexperienced agency staff. There were at least 50 positive cases connected to the home when St Basil’s staff were declared close contacts, and state and federal health authorities began working on a plan to replace the entire workforce. State health chief Brett Sutton has given evidence that in the days before he made the order to furlough staff, he was unaware several doctors had expressed opposition to the plan. Counsel assisting Peter Rozen QC told Prof Sutton he would make submissions to the coroner that this was a “very big gap in your knowledge base” in making the public health orders. Sutton said: I accept that there is additional evidence that could have been brought to my attention. The inquest has heard that the day before the handover to the emergency workforce on 22 July, almost half of the necessary emergency workers could not be found, and within hours of the transfer residents had missed meals and medications. But Sutton said the potential consequences of furloughing staff had to be weighed against additional Covid-19 infections, which were fatal for one-in-three aged care residents. He said he believed that had he not made the orders, almost all the residents and staff at St Basil’s would have been infected, and more people would have died. Sutton read a statement acknowledging the loss endured by relatives of St Basil’s residents who had died. He said: I want to express my heartfelt suffering for the sorrow that they have gone through. Earlier on Friday, he also give evidence that his orders to furlough staff were conditional, with an “overarching caveat” that a handover would only take place once appropriate replacement workers had been found. I think everyone understands that if there was no sign of replacement staff on the 22nd, the handover would not take place. Sutton said that although he had not made any inquiries himself, he had not been told of any specific problems in finding an emergency workforce. He said the chairman of St Basils’ had initially refused to follow health directions, and this held up the health response and likely led to further cases. Victoria’s health department has provided another 2,000 pages of evidence to the inquest as it concludes its second week of witness evidence, with one lawyer telling Victorian state coroner John Cain that there had been no time to review the documents. The hearing continues. Here’s the full story from our Daniel Hurst about Peter Dutton’s comments regarding China earlier today: There’s been another retirement from the Andrews government in Victoria, with John Eren stepping away after almost 20 years as an MP. I think that makes it five MPs that have hung up the boots this week. I am just going to hand over to my colleague Nino Bucci for the next little while. South Australia has recorded two new Covid-19 cases, both people from interstate. One of them returned to their home state to quarantine. The trade minister, Dan Tehan, has formally announced he will travel to Geneva to lead Australia’s delegation to the World Trade Organisation’s 12th ministerial conference (as we reported yesterday morning). Tehan’s travel comes amid calls for Australia to do more to secure a deal on a waiver of intellectual property on Covid-19 vaccines. In this afternoon’s statement, Tehan said of the meeting known as MC12: The rules-based trading system, with the WTO at its core, has contributed to Australia’s ongoing prosperity and created jobs across our economy. Australia is offering its leadership and negotiating energy to secure an outcome at MC12 that demonstrates the WTO’s value in protecting and promoting the multilateral trading system. One in five Australian jobs relies on trade, and by ensuring the WTO continues to deliver for Australian businesses by reducing the barriers to trade and maintaining adherence to the global trade rules, this will support the Australian economy as we recover from Covid-19. As Covid-19 vaccination hubs wind down in Victoria, a rise in demand for testing is putting more pressure on the system. AAP reports the Victorian government on Friday confirmed the closure of eight state-run vaccination clinics, starting from the end of this week, as dose rates slow to a crawl. Landmark sites at the Royal Exhibition Building and the Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre will deliver their last jabs in mid-December, along with Box Hill Town Hall. Other clinics at Eastland shopping centre and Wyndham’s Eagle Stadium are scheduled to shut at the end of the week, followed by St Vincent’s Private in Werribee, the Melbourne Showgrounds and the Olivia Newton-John centre next to Austin Hospital. State-run hubs have been the engine room of Victoria’s vaccination push since first opening in March, delivering about half of the state’s 10.6m doses. Fifteen metro and regional sites will remain open into next year to administer booster shots and potentially first and second doses to five-to-11-year-old children, if and when a Covid-19 vaccine is approved by federal regulators. Victoria recorded 1362 new Covid-19 cases and seven deaths on Friday, the state’s highest daily number of infections since 1 November. The rising cases coincide with strong testing numbers, including 73,419 processed on Thursday. The health department’s Covid-19 response deputy secretary, Naomi Bromley, said average testing had jumped from 41,000 in August to 71,000 at present. She told ABC Radio Melbourne the testing system had been scaled up to meet rising demand this week, but average wait times had blown out to 60 minutes across the network. Bromley said: One of things that has been driving it is we’ve got kids back at school. A lot of kids are getting symptoms ... and in some cases are being directed to go get a test if there has been a Covid case in their classroom. To counteract the trend, some the state’s 200 testing sites have shifted their opening hours from 8am to 8pm to 7am to 7pm to give parents more time to get their children tested before school. It comes after a major vaccination deadline passed, with about a million Victorian workers now needing to show proof to their employer they are double-dosed to continue working on site. Those in jobs on the state’s authorised worker list – including professional athletes, lawyers, journalists, mining workers, court staff and personal trainers – are required to be fully vaccinated as of Friday. In further Covid-related changes, Victoria has scrapped its travel permit system and updated its check-in app so parents and guardians can add their children’s vaccination certificates. Meanwhile, the state government offered all 11 upper house crossbenchers a briefing on its proposed pandemic laws on Friday ahead an expected vote on the stalled bill when parliament sits next week. Labor’s defence spokesperson, Brendan O’Connor, has called on prime minister Scott Morrison to “rein in” defence minister Peter Dutton, arguing it was “really irresponsible” for the defence minister to misrepresent the views of the Australian opposition. O’Connor told Sky News: I think he has every right to say that we have to be prepared for the worst and obviously look to ensure the best possible outcome in our region - but I do not think using for political purposes war rhetoric has been useful, has been helpful, has in any way been wise. O’Connor said former prime minister Paul Keating no longer spoke for the federal parliamentary Labor party, which supported the Aukus deal with the US and the UK to acquire at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines. O’Connor said: We will not back down to the list of demands from China, and we support the government when it comes to defending our values and our interests in this region. A man’s body has been found in a ute that was submerged in floodwaters in central Queensland, AAP reports A passerby noticed the ute and dead man near the Gregory Highway in Hibernia, west of Rockhampton, about 7am on Friday. They alerted police and emergency services, who were working to get the ute out of the water. A police spokesperson said in a statement: Recovery of the vehicle may take some time due to the location and current weather conditions. The forensic crash unit is probing the man’s death. It is not clear how he died. Detectives are unsure whether the man’s car was swept off the road and he drowned, or if he died as a result of a prior crash or medical episode and the ute was later washed away. Heavy rains have been lashing the region for two days, with falls up to 270mm in some places and localised flash flooding. A federal court decision has recognised 79,412 sq km of land in north Queensland as the state’s largest-ever native title claim, AAP reports. The Kuuku Ya’u and Uutaalnganu people have been awarded 210,000 hectares of land in Cape York, with the Kuuku Ya’u recognised as the native title holders of 120,268 hectares of country around Lockhart River. This is the third successful Kuuku Ya’u native title claim and one that has elders buoyed by the decision. An elder, Father Brian Claudie, said: I will get the clapsticks and I will sing. The 71-year-old of the Kanthanampu subgroup said recognition of the land was of vital importance to generations gone and emerging, particularly children in the region. For the Uutaalnganu people, their native title claim will extend to more than 98,324 hectares of land south of Lockhart River. A Uutaalnganu traditional owner and the mayor for Lockhart River Aboriginal shire council, Wayne Butcher, said the native title claim was justice for his people. A spokesperson for the Chinese embassy has now also responded to defence minister Peter Dutton’s National Press Club address. The spokesperson accused the minister of preaching “his quixotic misunderstanding of China’s foreign policy”. The spokesperson said: In his NPC speech, Australian defence minister Peter Dutton continued preaching his quixotic misunderstanding of China’s foreign policy, distorting China’s efforts to safeguard sovereignty and territorial integrity, misguiding the Australian people on regional situations and priorities, and fanning conflict and division between peoples and nations. It is inconceivable that China-Australia relationship will take on a good momentum or the overall interest of regional countries, including that of Australia, will be better promoted if the Australian government bases its national strategy on such visionless analysis and outdated mentality. Liberal backbencher Bridget Archer says she didn’t want to be hauled into a meeting with Scott Morrison after she crossed the floor to support an independent MP’s integrity commission bill. Archer told Guardian Australia that while the meeting was friendly, it was a “frank discussion – not just a pastoral care meeting”. “I would have preferred not to have the meeting at that time while I was feeling emotional,” she said. The Reserve Bank of Australia may be planning to hold out on higher interest rates for another two years, but the market’s not waiting. Higher borrowing costs for banks have lately squeezed the margins they make on their mortgages, a trend that has knocked the shares of major banks down a peg or two lately. Commonwealth Bank shares have sunk from a closing high of $110-plus on 8 November by more than 10% since then to about $95 today. Well, some of that pain is being passed onto customers. CBA today lifted its fixed-rate mortgages by as much as 0.3-0.6 percentage point depending on whether you’re an owner occupier or investor. That’s the third increase in six weeks from the bank, which is Australia’s largest mortgage issuer. A five-year load will now carry a 3.39% annual rate, or an increase of 0.3 percentage points. RateCity estimates that rate rise will increase average monthly payments on a $500,000, 30-year loan with a fixed term by $82 a month. “CBA has once again bowed to funding pressures which have soared in recent weeks,” RateCity.com.au research director, Sally Tindall said. It’s raining rate hikes and the storm is nowhere near over. The flood of fixed-rate hikes is likely to keep going as the cost of fixed-term funding continues to rise. NAB is the only big four bank with a rate starting with a ‘1’ – its one-year fixed rate – however this is likely to rise in the next round of the bank’s rate hikes. The sign of rising borrowing costs plus record levels of “stock” on the market this week in capital cities is another reason to think the boom in property prices has reached its “twilight” phase, as CBA’s chief Australian economist Gareth Aird said at the start of this week. Former prime minister Paul Keating has responded to the defence minister, Peter Dutton’s National Press Club speech, describing Dutton as “a dangerous personality” and his comments about Australia’s position in our region as “chillingly aggressive and unrealistic”. Dutton had earlier compared Keating to former UK prime minister Neville Chamberlain. Here’s Keating’s full statement: At today’s Press Club event, Minister Peter Dutton outlined a chillingly aggressive and unrealistic scenario as to Australia’s foreign and defence posture in the region. A posture which is unremittingly unrealistic and inappropriate to Australia’s vulnerable geographic circumstances. Peter Dutton is a dangerous personality, who unfortunately is the Minister of Defence in Australia. Peter Dutton, by his incautious utterances, persists in injecting Australia into a potentially explosive situation in North Asia – a situation Australia is not in any position to manage or control, let alone to succeed and prosper in. As a central minister in the Morrison government, with strategic responsibilities, Peter Dutton ignored and went out of his way to ignore, attempts by President Biden in his recent meeting with President Xi Jinping, to reach some sort of understanding or détente in the relationship between United States and China. Peter Dutton is all for cheering on the United States as the balancing power in Asia but not for cheering on its President in his earnest attempts to eke out a more sustainable strategic and commercial relationship between the two countries. And while simply not cheering President Biden on, not even referring to the importance or significance of the conversation between the two leaders. Peter Dutton speaks noisily about the so called ‘cost of inaction’ but is silent about ‘action’ of the kind that the United States is currently and assiduously undertaking. NSW Rural Fire Service footage of a rescue of a man from the roof of his car this morning, which had become trapped under water. Victoria will increase its cap on non-urgent surgeries at private hospitals by a quarter, while public hospitals can resume up to 50% of capacity in some regional areas, AAP reports. The state government said, beginning on Monday, public hospitals in Ballarat, Bendigo, Shepparton and the Latrobe Valley will be permitted to resume up to 50% of normal elective surgeries. Previously, only private hospitals and day procedure centres were permitted to perform non-urgent surgeries up to 50% capacity, but this will rise to 75% from Monday. Major public hospitals in Melbourne and Barwon Health will continue to only provide urgent and emergency surgeries. This is to ensure there is “adequate capacity within the health system” to care for patients with Covid-19 requiring hospitalisation, the government said in a statement. The situation will be monitored to ensure there is capacity, in case hospitalisations surge. “Reducing hospitalisations has given us the flexibility to further expand elective surgery and help ease the burden on Victorians waiting for procedures,” health minister Martin Foley said. We will continue to monitor the situation closely so that we are ready to respond to any surges in Covid-19 activity, while also making sure we are supporting the dedicated staff who keep our operating theatres running. The decision comes after health bodies, including the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons, called for the government to ditch surgery caps all together due to growing wait lists. RACS sent a proposal to the state’s health department to support “rapid” change to the current system. It is calling for more transparency about how these decisions are made, and said many small private hospitals should be permitted to recommence surgery with no cap, since they do not form part of the Covid response. However, a Victorian government spokeswoman said it would “continue to adopt a staged approach” to increasing non-urgent surgeries. As of September 30, 67,000 Victorians were waiting for elective surgeries. There is no indication foreign political donors contributed anonymously to former attorney general Christian Porter’s legal costs in suing the public broadcaster, AAP reports. Porter quit cabinet after revealing in September anonymous donors paid part of his costs in the defamation case over an ABC story about a historical rape allegation. Labor has repeatedly called for Porter to publicly reveal whether any of the donors were from overseas or lobbyists. The attorney general’s department on Friday told a Senate committee there was no information indicating contributions from a foreign government, political party or related entity. “There’s no information available to us to indicate that there is a foreign principal involved in the conduct or funding of that trust,” deputy secretary Sarah Chidgey said. Porter’s arrangements did not meet the threshold for the issuing of a notice requesting more information under the Foreign Influence Transparency Scheme Act. “We need to meet certain thresholds to issue those notices and there’s not information to meet those thresholds,” Chidgey said. Porter previously said he could not and would not reveal contributors to what he characterised as a blind trust. But he said the trustee had provided assurances no money came from lobbyists or prohibited foreign entities. Labor has twice failed to get Porter referred for an investigation into whether his acceptance of anonymous legal costs was in contempt of parliament. The MP for the West Australian seat of Pearce launched defamation proceedings against the ABC over its story about a rape allegation against an unnamed cabinet minister. Porter named himself as the minister referred to and strenuously denied the allegation. He settled the defamation case before trial. Labor’s response to defence minister Peter Dutton’s National Press Club speech. Shadow foreign minister Penny Wong says Dutton is auditioning for the PM’s job. Some more on Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath’s press conference earlier, via AAP. D’Ath has apologised after a confusing week-long feud about the cost of PCR tests needed by travellers to enter the state. Under the state’s reopening plan vaccinated domestic arrivals need to provide a negative PCR test once 80% of Queenslanders are fully vaccinated. However, domestic travellers, tourism operators and airlines were in limbo for six days as the state and commonwealth argued about who would fork out for the tests. The spat ended on Tuesday when federal health minister Greg Hunt clarified tests for domestic travel would be free after the state confirmed it would accept a text message as proof of a result. D’Ath, who has been off work sick this week, says she’s sorry about the uncertainty caused for travellers. I’m happy to apologise. There was a lot of confusion around this. We’ve made it clear there isn’t a cost without needing a certificate, we don’t require the certificate. A text, which we have always said, a text is suitable. It’s been on our border pass systems since it went live at 70%. I’m just pleased that people do not have to incur this cost. They can get the PCR test which is absolutely invaluable in stopping this virus coming into our state. Deputy chief health officer Peter Aitken said PCR tests were always provided to domestic travellers for free under co-funding arrangements. However, he sidestepped a question about why he hadn’t advised the government about that during the PCR test brouhaha. Look, we’ve gone through this as the minister said, everyone’s been aware, we’ve told yourselves and the community, and rapid testing is available, and the commonwealth has clarified any concerns or confusion. Meanwhile, Queensland is on track to hit its 80% vaccination target earlier than the 17 December deadline. From that date, unvaccinated people will also be banned from venues across the state. Dutton is asked whether, like with the submarines contract, he is considering cancelling the frigates contract with the UK, given the ongoing delays and issues. Dutton says he has regular contact with the UK and BAE, and he will not tolerate blowouts, but he is “not minded to cancel the contract”. Very different circumstances to what you raise in relation to the cancellation of the diesel powered submarine, which wasn’t going to meet the technological advances deployed by China into the 20, 30s and 2040s. In particular. And I wasn’t going to put our people in harm’s way and wasn’t going to have the capability that wasn’t giving us the best chance of the preservation of that piece, and also original superiority, which frankly, we have at the moment with the Collins class submarines. The only other thing I would say is don’t believe everything you read. You look old enough to know that already. Dutton was asked whether he still held leadership ambitions, and could be opposition leader after the election. He joked the Morrison government would be around until 2049 and to ask him again in 2048. More seriously, on what he intends to do around the Brereton report in the next few months, he says he couldn’t be prouder of the SAS, but says the rule of law applies equally to all Australians, and the evidence is being worked through. But he flags he is looking forward, not back: I’m not going to hang people out to dry. They do tough work in exacting circumstances, something that none of us, the vast majority of us in this room, bar a few, would have no comprehension of and the dire circumstances in which they operate need to be recognised and, for many, that takes a very heavy toll and we should never forget that so lessons are learned. But 99.9% of people who do the right thing in our country’s name, every Australian should be proud of their actions now and into the future because they, frankly, are the reason we’re able to sit here in peace and stability in our country. We take a lot for granted in this country. Hi there, Josh Taylor here taking over from Cait Kelly after defence minister Peter Dutton’s National Press Club address. In other news, the voluntary assisted dying bill passed the NSW lower house today, after all the amendments were considered. It’ll go to the upper house next year. Cricket Australia has named Pat Cummins as the new men’s Test captain after Tim Paine stepped down. Dutton: The great Chinese story is that people have, in the diaspora community around the world, been educated, remitted money back, returned back with the desire and the drive to build a modern society. That’s what we want of China. That’s what we want for her people and we want that to continue and I think if you look at the actions against the words of the Chinese government. As I pointed out in my speech, it does cause you some concern if the Chinese government took a decision that they were going to go into Taiwan by 2049, as they have publicly stated, or to reunify. Tingle is now asking Dutton about how other commentators – notably Greg Sheridan from The Oz, have also said it’s irresponsible to engage in this type of rhetoric about conflict. If we pretend that nothing is going to happen over the next 20 years and China is just bluffing when the direct quotes we’ve heard from president Xi are not going to be acted upon. You need to weigh all of that up and I think the Australian public deserves an honest conversation. Dutton is asked if he thinks Labor are just trying to appease China. To answer, he talks about Paul Keating and is now attacking Labor’s record. When I was last in government, they ripped money out of defence. They did it because they had a $16bn hole in border protection policies and they spent money on pink batts, school halls and the rest of it and they took money away from our capacity to acquire the assets that we need. They took money away from soldiers and from those within the Australian Defence Force and the department to plug other holes. Tingle asks why the Australian government has ramped up its rhetoric against China, when no one else including the US has: I’ve tried to lay out for you and for the Australian public the reality of what we’re dealing with. In Lithuania – I acknowledge the ambassador here today – in Lithuania overnight there have been very difficult circumstances to deal with, threats against the Lithuanian government because of their acknowledgement of Taiwan. Just for the record – Australia does not formally recognise Taiwan. Laura Tingle asks Dutton who would actually win in a conflict between China and the US if it got that far: “he consequence would be terrible, calamitous, as I point out, if there was to be conflict in our region. There’s no shirking from that and nobody seeks to hide that but equally you need to think through what the next step is. Does an occupation or reunification of Taiwan satisfy the Chinese government? Or do they move into the Senkaku Islands where, at the moment, they’re bumping up against Japanese vessels. Dutton said the Aus public expect the government to deliver on national security. The government has taken all necessary steps to keep Australians safe and security. Breaking the business model of people smugglers, thwarting terrorism, removing criminals from our shores, countering child exploitation, obstructing organised crime, fending off cyberattacks, foiling foreign interference and safeguarding our critical infrastructure. Now, as we contend with escalating tensions in our region, the government is doing everything necessary to make sure defence gets on with its core business, to deter coercion, to prevent conflict, to preserve peace, to prepare for whatever may be on or below the horizon. Dutton said Australia’s defence force needs to be helped by good relations with countries in the region. Ultimately, regional stability requires, though, the United States to be completely engaged right here, to continue to protect the peace and prosperity it’s engendered. And from which we have all benefited since the end of the second world war and that’s exactly what the United States is doing. Dutton said this is all needed because of the heightened tensions. This firmer approach is commensurate with public expectations, a new sense of urgency stemming from the deteriorating situation in the Indo-Pacific and the consequent need to rapidly acquire defence capabilities. Dutton said the government is investing $1bn in new weapons that “are transforming the nature of warfare as significantly as the first rifles or indeed the maxim gun”. Dutton is now defending the Aukus agreement and the government’s history on defence. When this government came to power in 2013, defence spending was at its lowest level since 1938 at around one 1.5% of GDP. We’ve lifted it to 2% and it will continue to climb from there. We’ve built three Hobart-class air warfare destroyers, the most potent warships ever operated by our Navy and among the most capable in our region, support of our fifth generation AirForce, 44 of a planned 72 F-35 Joint Strike Fighters have already taken to the skies. In February of 2014, we approved the purchase of eight P-8A Poseidon maritime surveillance and response aircraft and in February 2016 we approved an additional four of these highly capable planes. All 12 Poseidons are now in service with the RAAF. Dutton has said if China invaded Taiwan, it would then take the islands in the East China Sea. The Chinese Communist party could not be any clearer. Not always with their words, but certainly with their actions and the point I make is the regional order on which our prosperity and security is founded would change almost overnight. In the absence of a counter-pressure, the Chinese government becomes the sole security and economic partner for Indo-Pacific nations. Now, that is a perilous military and economic situation for our country, but for so many more. Dutton says he has spoken to the PM about how we are living in “times that echo the 1930s”. The world would be foolish to repeat the mistakes of the 1930s. We live in times of high tension but the region is not on an inevitable path to conflict. Dutton is now tabling the size and substance of the Chinese defence force. Over the next decade, China’s nuclear warhead stockpiles, estimated to be in the 200s last year, is projected to reach between 700 and 1,000 warheads. Every major city in Australia, including Hobart, is within range of China’s missiles. Dutton is talking about China acting in more aggressive ways in the area and to Australia. Inflicting tariffs and bans on Australian imports, like barley and beef and coal and lamb, lobster, timber and wine, for political purposes, undermining collective faith in China’s commitment to global free trade and investment, the fabrication of a propaganda image, disgracefully depicting an Australian soldier murdering an Afghan child. The issuing of a dossier of 14 disputes with Australia, a list of grievances which imply that our nation should refrain from making sovereign decisions and acting in its self-interest. And its Ministry of State Security engaging in repeated cyber activities against foreign government and commercial institutions. Dutton says Australia is a “finger in the dye” of cyber security. Today, friends, we face the most significant change in our strategic environment since the second world war. Once again, Australia finds herself in a region at the epicentre of global strategic competition. A region witness to a military build-up of a scale and ambition that historically has rarely been associated with peaceful outcomes and a region where tensions continue to rise in a matter exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic. Peter Dutton is talking about the Australian Defence Force. And over the last two years, Australians have seen ADF personnel, including reservists, at work in their communities. Throughout the 2019-20 bushfire season and during the New SouthWales floods earlier this year. As we approach Christmas, most of us will look forward to celebrations and time with our family and with our friends. But it’s not always so for our defence personnel. Men and women of all services routinely spend long periods separated from their families whilst on deployment. He acknowledges the royal commission has started in Brisbane today. Our obligation is to do everything within our power to improve the situation for those and their families who live with the scars of war and conflict far beyond their service. He is defending the government’s stance on terrorism and strong borders. The government’s strong stance on countering terrorism has also yielded success, with 21 imminent attacks being disrupted since 2014. More than 140 people have been charged as a result of 70 counter-terrorism operations in our country. Terrorism, however, has not been the only tool of those who seek to strike at the heart of our democracy. Our nation is weathering an onslaught, as we know, of espionage and foreign interference activities, at levels greater than at any time since the height of the Cold War. Stop whatever you are doing – this is very funny. (I think the best one is actually her one?) At the same time, the royal commission into defence and veteran suicides started. The wide-ranging inquiry is being led by former New South Wales deputy police commissioner Nick Kaldas – he said it would be an opportunity to heal. The establishment of this royal commission requires that we examine, understand and expose all systemic issues and risk factors concerning defence and veteran deaths, and will notify any and all actions necessary to address the issues and risks. So we can reduce and prevent future deaths. The significance and magnitude of this work is not lost on us. We know the defence the veteran community will watch closely and rightly so stop we are honoured and humbled by the gravity of the task ahead and we are focused on the opportunities for change and healing. Earlier today Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath spoke to media about Covid. She said if Queenslanders travel interstate and become Covid positive they have to follow the rules of the state they are in and are not allowed back until they test negative. She said the government “can’t just open the floodgates” when the state hits 80% because that means 20% of the population are still vulnerable. “Not to mention children under 12 who are not eligible.” The ABS has just reported that national retail sales had a big jump in October, rising 4.9% seasonally adjusted from the previous month and 5.2% from October 2020. The market consensus was for a 2.2% month-on-month rise, so these figures will add to expectations that the economy is bouncing back quickly from the lockdowns in NSW, Victoria and the ACT (big spenders that they are in the nation’s capital). The growth also accelerated to almost quadruple the pace of September’s 1.3%. In an accompanying statement, Ben James, an ABS economist, said the retail turnover was now at the highest pace since June 2021. With lockdown ending on October 11, New South Wales sales rose 13.3% returning to the levels seen in the months immediately prior to the Delta outbreak, while Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory remain below pre-Delta levels. Clothing, footwear and such items jumped 27.7%, department stores advanced 22.4%, while cafes and restaurants and takeaway food registered (excuse the pun) a 12.3% rise. Victoria’s sales were up 3% and the ACT’s 20.2%, the latter quick a bounceback since the lockdown there only ended on October 15. Food retailing was the only industry to fall this month, down 0.5%, the ABS said. Albanese says it’s “no wonder” the government has backed away from the integrity commission, because of Porter’s secretive legal trust and the car park scandal. It is no wonder that this government have backed away from having a national anti-corruption commission, it is very clear that Australians know, that if they want a national anti-corruption commission, and they want to restore faith in the political system and integrity, they need to elect a Labor government. That is the only way that it will happen. Albanese is now attacking the government for not setting up a federal integrity commission, as it had promised. This is a prime minister, who does not support a national integrity commission. In spite of the clear commitment that was made prior to the last election. This is a commitment that was made in 2018, it is now just for sitting days left in 2021, and they had not tabled the legislation that was before the parliament. Yesterday, we saw the extraordinary circumstances of a prime minister trying to blame Labor, saying that Labor had to agree with any legislation before it was introduced into the parliament. Albanese is asked if Labor will pass the religious discrimination bill. I support people being able to practise their faith, free of discrimination, but I also support that happening without any impingement or discrimination based on who people are. We will examine the legislation, we will await further processes of the Senate inquiry. It will not be concluded this year. We are back to the Chinese spy ship: It is well-known that China has become more forward leaning in recent times. We have, in terms of this action, from China, does not bring to advance good relations between Australia and China. We will continue to support Australia’s national interest, that has got to respond to the fact that China has changed its positioning to be more forward-leaning in the region, in particular, the Indo-Pacific. It is one of the reasons why we have pointed out that climate change is a national security issue that requires a response for Australia as well. It’s a part of building international relations. Anthony Albanese is speaking in Sydney: I also want to take the opportunity to thank our ADF and AFP personnel who have been deployed to the Solomon Islands. They do important work, and we hope that they are all able to return safely. They are playing an important role for the Solomons, a good partner of Australia, that has experienced civil unrest in recent days. Labor supports the deployment, thanks those personnel, and wishes them a safe return. AAP has this summary of the police press conference into the ongoing search for William Tyrrell that we covered earlier this morning over a few posts: A “painstaking” search for the body of three-year-old NSW boy William Tyrrell has been extended after bad weather hampered the first 11 days of the operation. But NSW police remain optimistic after uncovering a number of items they say support the massive effort to find William, who disappeared from his foster grandmother’s home at Kendall on the state’s north coast in September 2014. Teams have been conducting intensive searches around the home and nearby bushland, enduring at least a week of persistent rain. State crime commander Darren Bennett said the search was “painstaking” and “difficult”. “The search may well be extended,” he told reporters. “It is obvious to all of us that we couldn’t have picked a worse time, in terms of weather. The weather has been atrocious pretty much since we started.” Bennett said he expected the search, which was initially estimated to last three weeks, to now run for at least six weeks. Several items found during the search have been sent for forensic testing. They are believed to include pieces of clothing. When William went missing he was wearing a Spider-Man outfit. “The message from the investigative team is what they’ve located so far is cause enough to keep going,” Bennett said. Police have so far dug up a garden at the Kendall property, examined a concrete slab laid after William disappeared, drained a nearby creek and sifted through soil in bushland and around the home. Save the Children’s islands country director, Lisa Cuatt, has put out a statement saying she is “very concerned” about the violence in the Solomon Islands. “People are scared and sad at the return of such turmoil to the Solomon Islands, having witnessed a long period of insecurity so recently,” Cuatt said. “The safety and wellbeing of children must be paramount. They will be frightened and distressed, having witnessed such an event.” Parents of an estimated 4,500 students have today been asked to collect their children’s belongings from the 15 schools in Honiara, because they will close for the remainder of the year. Save the Children is concerned the security situation is compounding the disruption to education of children already caused by Covid-19. “After months of disruption to their education due to Covid, children in Honiara are once again missing school,” Cuatt said. More from AAP on the court this morning: An airline pilot charged with the murders of Victorian campers Russell Hill and Carol Clay has appeared in court from a regional police station. Greg Lynn, 55, faced Sale magistrates court for a brief hearing on Friday morning after he was charged on Thursday over the couple’s 2020 disappearance. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, has told media there will be no changes to flights from South Africa following news of a new variant of Covid emerging in the country. After the UK announced it would ban flights from southern parts of Africa amid concern about the emerging B.1.1.529 variant, Hunt said on Friday that while health officials were monitoring developments there would be no immediate changes to border arrangements. However, while chief medical officer Paul Kelly had advised there was “no basis for change” in arrivals, Hunt said the government remained “flexible” and would make changes “if needed”. “The world is looking and learning about the strain,” he said. While one recent flight had arrived from South Africa, Hunt said he was not aware of any cases of the new variant among returnees who were currently in quarantine at the Howard Springs facility in the Northern Territory. While there has been international concern about the variant’s capacity to evade vaccine immunity, Hunt said his initial advice did not suggest that. “It’s considered [that it will] will highly unlikely to effect the efficacy of the vaccines,” he said. The World Health Organization’s technical working group is to meet Friday to assess the new variant and may decide whether or not to give it a name from the Greek alphabet. The variant, called B.1.1.529, has been detected in South Africa in small numbers, according to the WHO. England has since placed six African countries on its travel red list. “We don’t know very much about this yet. What we do know is that this variant has a large number of mutations. And the concern is that when you have so many mutations, it can have an impact on how the virus behaves,” Dr Maria Van Kerkhove, WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, said in a Q&amp;A that was live-streamed on the organisation’s social media. The virus working group will decide if B.1.1.529 should be listed as a variant of interest or concern, after which it would get a Greek name – like Delta, Van Kerkhove said. “It’s really important that there are no knee-jerk responses here, especially with relation to South Africa,” Dr Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO’s emergencies program, said. I am going to get some more information on this – but for those who are just catching up, our story this morning has the info on the new variant: Religious discrimination laws and protection for gay students and teachers are set to be flashpoints in the contest between progressive independents and Liberal moderates in inner-city seats. Already facing challenges from independents campaigning on climate change, Liberal moderates such as Dave Sharma in Wentworth and Trent Zimmerman in North Sydney are urging the prime minister to deliver on a promise to amend sex discrimination laws to prevent students being expelled or teachers being fired on the basis of their sexuality. I don’t think anyone would have put poem from a premier on their Friday bingo card – but this is where we are at now. And it’s kinda ... good??? “So stick up the tinsel, sit back and relax, our borders are opening, so please get the vaxx.” And we have the full story about Paine from the AAP here: Former skipper Tim Paine is set to miss the first Ashes Test and may never represent Australia again, having taken an indefinite mental health break. Friday’s bombshell, coming a week after Paine tearfully stood down as captain after revelations of a sexting scandal in 2017, is likely to mark the end of the 36-year-old’s international career. But that is currently the least of Paine’s concerns. “We are extremely concerned for his and (wife) Bonnie’s well-being and will be making no further comment at this time,” Paine’s manager James Henderson posted on Twitter. Henderson termed it an “indefinite” break. Paine’s teammates were desperate for the wicketkeeper to play on December 8, when Australia’s five-Test series against England begins in Brisbane. As of Thursday, when the veteran was slated to link up with the Test squad this weekend, everything pointed in that direction. Paine was called up and set to bat at first drop in Tasmania’s one-dayer against Western Australia on Friday, giving him a chance to play five consecutive days of cricket after a low-key return via the state’s second XI. But Cricket Tasmania (CT) confirmed early on Friday morning Paine would not take his spot in the side. “Following discussions over the last 24 hours, Tim Paine has advised Cricket Tasmania that he will be taking a leave of absence from all forms of cricket for the foreseeable future,” CT noted in a statement. “Cricket Tasmania will continue to support Tim and his family both professionally and personally over the summer.” Alex Carey and Josh Inglis, already set to take part in the intra-squad clash beginning on Wednesday, are the candidates set to vie for a baggy green in Paine’s expected absence at the Gabba. Nathan Lyon was one of several players to publicly back Paine to play the first Test. “The selectors said they were going to pick the best available XI. In my eyes, Tim Paine is the best keeper in the world,” Lyon said. And finally, the PM closes the presser by saying the economy is bouncing back and everyone needs to start thinking about booster shots. “The Australian economy is coming back and we are seeing that, 350,000 jobs coming back in the economy in five weeks. “So, that is exciting. We are securing our recovery and today we have to secure the 80% double dose vaccination in SA. “So please go out and get your vaccination and if you have had your second dose, please go and get your booster. Thank you much everyone.” The PM is back to spruiking the Liberal party ... after Bridget Archer crossed the floor to back a federal Icac yesterday. “In the Liberal party, we encourage our members to be themselves. I don’t lead a team of drones and warm bodies that I just move around in the parliament. That is what the Labour party does. That is how they treat their members. “If you disagree in the Labour party they kick you out. That is what they think about freedom of thought and expression in politics. We don’t do that in the Liberal party. And so, from time to time, when members might have a strong view on things, I let my party breathe.” The PM has been asked about when the federal election will be: “I have always said it would be in 2022. There is no secret there. It is due by about the third week in May. I will make a determination about when that is held next year.” PM is asked about the new variant of concern, which has several countries worried. “I am advised that is under investigation and not a variant of concern. But that can change. We monitor all of these variants. We note the responses that are made by other countries and we consider those in real time. “What is more important is the best protection against any variants including, and those that are present, is vaccination. And having those vaccinations. “So again, South Australia, let’s hit 80%. We can 80% today in South Australia.” For those confused – this is our article about it this morning: OK, the PM is now spruiking the “broad church” of the Liberal party – saying they have members from all walks of life. “One of the great things about the Liberal party is that we draw experience from so many walks of life. We have bus drivers, we have medical scientists, we even have a few lawyers as well, you have to throw a few of those in every now and then. “We are former police officers, we have defence force veterans, we have small business people, we are technologist, we have so many walks of life in our parliamentary ranks. That makes our team strong, it’s from all walks of life.” Let me just remind you of that SMH report into that federal parliament which found: “The average federal MP is a man born in 1969 who graduated from a private school, attained an arts degree and worked in business or management before being elected.” Very diverse, much representative ... The PM is asked about the situation in the Solomons: “The Solomon islands came first to Australia and they also had discussions with Papua New Guinea, and I spoke to their prime minister yesterday about that. We have 23 AFP who arrived last night, operations have commenced there in the Solomons this morning to ensure some stability.” He said Australia is there to support “our family in the Pacific” to resolve the issues peacefully, not to pass judgment on internal politics. “They are not issues that Australia involves ourselves in.” Morrison is asked about the Chinese submarine. “They have every right to be there, under international maritime law, just like we have every right to be in the South China Sea and other free, Liberal Democratic party’s have every right to have freedom of movement in the South China Sea. “I think the presence of the Chinese navy, which we were aware of, and they were keeping a close eye on us and we were keeping a close eye on them. The importance of that is to highlight Australians that there is a very serious situation in the Indo-Pacific. “I have been saying that for a long time. These things are true. Australia had to be able to stand up, and that requires great strength.” The PM says no one “can be complacent” about the situations. “It is important that you stand up Australia. You need strength to take Australia through a time like this. “There is never a time for weakness when it comes to leading a federal government. Particularly at a time when you are dealing with these very significant security issues and the economic challenges that we have.” Morrison said Steven Marshall is not at the press conference because their schedules didn’t align. He is asked about the SA parliamentary inquiry. “They are matters for the state parliamentary party. I am focused on the federal parliamentary party I lead. “Stephen’s government, the Marshall government, has been the inspiration to create this culture of transformation in South Australia that’s brought back confidence. “There is one thing I’ve seen more than anything else that Premier Marshall has achieved here in South Australia is, he brought that pride back. He brought that confidence back.” Scott Morrison said the answer to economic success is training more Australians in manufacturing. “This is how we secure our economic recovery. Lower taxes, training people. There are 217,000 Australians right now in trade training in this country. “It is the highest it’s ever been on record and those records go back to 1963. I wasn’t even born then!” The PM is speaking in Adelaide. “One in eight jobs in manufacturing was lost under Labor. We have manufacturing back to more than a million Australians. They have gone from making Holdens to now making X-ray machines and hi-tech brain scanners that can be moved to the most remote parts of the Earth. “That’s the technology but it’s also the skills, the skills that have been built up here to make things in South Australia.” Jetstar pilot Gregory Lynn, 55, who is accused of murdering two campers in Victoria’s high country has not applied for bail. Lynn has been charged with two counts of murder and appeared in the Sale magistrates court this morning. Russell Hill and Carol Clay disappeared were on a camping trip to Victoria’s remote Wonnangatta Valley in March 2020. The campsite was later found burnt out. Lynn, from the Melbourne suburb of Caroline Springs, was arrested on Monday night while camping at Arbuckle Junction, roughly 55km south of the Wonnangatta Valley. He was remanded until 31 May 2022 for committal. We are expecting a presser from Queensland government within the next hour – will keep you all updated. Amnesty UK has been accused of “spreading false information” about the Northern Territory’s Covid outbreak in an extraordinary joint statement from the territory’s peak Aboriginal health organisation and Amnesty’s own Australian operation. Disinformation about the Covid outbreak in Aboriginal communities near Katherine, spread by third parties online, was on Thursday described by the NT chief minister as “conspiracy theories” pushed by “tinfoil hat wearing tossers”. Former Test captain Tim Paine has told Cricket Tasmania that he will take a leave of absence from all forms of cricket “for the foreseeable future”. It’s just come through so we’ll bring you more on this as it develops. Not the biggest surprise but the NSW government has just confirmed that it expects Warragamba Dam to spill by Friday night. The dam, which is about 80% of Sydney’s water storage, had been releasing water last week to create “airspace”. But there’s limited capability to reduce much more than about 1m of the water level. The dam will spill at the rate of 100 gigalitres a day by Saturday morning. More to come on this, as other dams in inland areas are spilling too. And more big rain events to come in the next few weeks, as the La Niña influence amps up. Speaking this morning, the PM said he opposes Helen Haines’s bill for a federal integrity body because it is too much like the NSW Icac, which he described as a kangaroo court. Yesterday Liberal MP Bridget Archer crossed the floor to support debate of Haines’ bill. “There’s no question about us not wanting to have one. I acknowledge the good intentions of my dear friend Bridget Archer and how strongly she feels about that. “I understand that. And I think that these things are motivated in good faith, but you’ve also got to be aware that if you design this thing wrong, it turns into the sort of show trials that we’ve seen.” Letters are being sent to millions of Australians to remind them to get their booster shot. More than 370,000 people have had their third dose. People who got their second dose six months ago are encouraged to go out and get the third. Laws criminalising the use of secretly recorded vision of animal cruelty and abuse are posing “too great a burden on speech”, animal rights activists have told the high court. The Farm Transparency Project, an Australian animal advocacy group, launched a case earlier this year arguing New South Wales laws restricting the use of covert footage were an unfair burden on freedom of political communication. Serious flooding in the Upper Hunter. And some more info on Victoria case numbers from AAP: Victoria has recorded 1,362 new Covid-19 cases and seven deaths, as the state’s full vaccination mandate kicked in for about a million authorised workers. It is the highest daily number of infections reported since November 1. The new infections bring the number of active cases in the state to 10,887, including 308 in hospital, slightly lowering the seven-day average to 307. It comes as those in jobs on the state’s authorised worker list are required to have two doses of a Covid-19 vaccination as of Friday. Industries on the list include AFL and other professional athletes, lawyers, journalists, mining workers, court staff and personal trainers. A Roy Morgan poll, released on Thursday, found 76% of Victorians surveyed believe an employee in Victoria should not be allowed to enter their workplace unless fully vaccinated. In a further change to the state’s check-in system, the Services Vic app has been updated to allow parents and guardians to add their children’s vaccination certificates. We’ve got a breakdown of the NSW Covid numbers today here from CovidBaseAU. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is in Adelaide today to spruik the Liberal candidate for the marginal seat of Boothby. Incumbent Nicolle Flint is standing down at the next election, and Liberal Dr Rachel Swift hopes to take her place. On radio this morning, Morrison faced questions about the government’s plans for an anti-corruption watchdog. Liberal MP Bridget Archer crossed the floor yesterday saying she was “offended” the government had prioritised its religious discrimination legislation amid “inertia” on its federal integrity commission bill. Morrison repeated his argument that he didn’t want an NSW-like corruption commission on ABC Adelaide. Seven people have died with the virus in Victoria, and in NSW zero lives were lost. The Liberals have been speaking about the Chinese submarine a lot this morning. The PM was on Adelaide radio this morning when he was asked about it – he said the government would not make a complaint and that it highlighted the rising tensions in the Pacific. “People are not making this up,” he said. “It does mean that Australia has to be on its guard and Australia has to stand up to those who want to coerce us … and slap trade sanctions on things like our wine, and our government is standing up to that.” Peter Dutton was also talking about it on Channel Nine – he said that this ship would be doing surveillance. “[The ship] will be involved in intelligence collection, signals collection,” he said. “They’ll be looking to survey different attributes and have that general presence – let us know that they’re there. “It was a prolonged [time] that they were very close to Australian waters off the east coast, unusually. “I think it’s right people have a clear picture of what’s going on.” As Scott Morrison comes to the end of a ragged parliamentary week, the organisation bankrolling independents challenging Liberal incumbents in their urban heartland has amassed an election war chest of more than $4m, and bolstered its advisory body. Former Australian Democrats leader Meg Lees has joined the advisory council of Climate 200, as has the former Liberal party leader John Hewson, and the Labor veteran Barry Jones. We’ve got some severe thunderstorm warnings for parts of NSW. Bennett is asked about the number of items that have been found in the search. “Every item we take that will be deemed to be relevant will be forensically examined. We won’t be announcing the results of those investigations. “That is a role for the team and coroner down the track, but we are very happy with items in terms of eliminating people or proving what happened to William Tyrrell.” Bennett was asked what the feeling was among investigators. “Spirits are still high. The only frustration is the weather and stop-start [nature] of catering to the weather. Look, we are seven years into this investigation, we’re happy with its progress and we will keep going.” NSW police force commander Darren Bennett says what they’ve found so far has “given them cause to keep going”. Journalist: What sort of time frame are you looking at now? “It will defend greatly on the weather and other items that are located. We started off with a time frame of between two or three weeks. “I tend to think we have to double that now.” NSW police say the timeframe of the search may be set back because of the weather. “Eleven days in that search and we are still going. It is obvious to all of us that we couldn’t have picked a worse time in terms of weather. The weather has been atrocious pretty much since we started. “The coroner has been kept appraised of our progress. “The painstaking search along with evidence we’re gathered in the course of the investigation and we will continue the time-frame of this search, which may be extended now because of the setbacks with regard to weather and the processes we have to undertake if we find something.” Police are about to give an update on the search for William Tyrrell. Between 1.5m and 2m Australians are only one life shock away from homelessness, new research from the Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute. Large numbers of Australia’s renters could fall into homelessness if they go through a relationship breakup, get a serious illness or lose work. According to the research, the greatest numbers of people at-risk of homelessness are in NSW, Victoria and Queensland, the three most populous states. However, the highest rates of risk per 10,000 persons are in the Northern Territory, followed by Queensland and South Australia. The lowest rates of risk are in the ACT followed by Victoria. The suburbs with the highest rates of Australians at risk of homelessness are in remote areas and in small pockets of capital cities, while the greatest number of people at-risk of homelessness are living in greater capital cities on the eastern coast of Australia. “We can’t reduce homelessness by solely responding to people when they present to homelessness services, instead we have to turn off the tap up stream, as it were, by delivering preventative interventions that are tailored for specific areas,” post-doctoral research fellow Deborah Batterham said. “Understanding the population at-risk of homelessness is critical in designing and implementing such interventions.” The final vote on voluntary assisted dying legislation in NSW is expected at 1.30pm today. After passing the lower house on Thursday (53 votes to 36), the legislative assembly unanimously resolved that the amendment debate will conclude at 1.30pm today and the final vote will be soon after. MP Alex Greenwich, who introduced the bill, will make a statement at 2pm, but said this morning he was “grateful” for the passage of the bill. “I’m grateful for the strong support for reform from my colleagues, finally our parliament is reflecting the will of the people of NSW,” Greenwich said. “I thank the opponents of reform for the orderly and respectful way they have continued to act throughout this debate.” We’ll bring you more on that as it happens. And in tragic news for fans (others keep scrolling) Midnight Oil has announced its 2022 tour will be its last. The band said it would release a new album, Resist, and go on a national tour next year. In a statement, the band said it was not the end of the Oils. Each of the members will continue their own projects over the years ahead. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews has been out and about this morning – talking about reports a Chinese spy ship took a three-week turn around Australia. She said the government had been monitoring the ship. The submarine was travelling in Australia’s 200km exclusive economic zone, then sailed south as far as Sydney before heading across the Tasman to New Zealand. Just FYI – this is all legal, as long as they don’t come within 12 nautical miles. Finney said a lot of people she had spoken to were worried the royal commission wouldn’t do anything – and that they would fight that battle when it came. “I have people come up again say ‘Oh, they won’t they won’t do anything with the recommendations’. “That’s not our problem right now. We’ll fight that battle when we get to. The battle we need right now is to be the big voice at the royal commission.” Finney said the defence force needed to “stop promoting incapable people” through its ranks. “It’s about the culture of defence, we have a chief of defence that has succeeded in making our defence force look like it’s full of criminals. That is not the case. “There are a lot of heroes out there and I thank them for their service.” Julie-Ann Finney, who lost her son to suicide, has spearheaded the campaign for a royal commission. She is currently on the ABC, saying “the culture in defence is absolutely frightening”. “That is the Department of Veteran Affairs, they delay, delay and deny and they’re doing it now to me, I’m going through the same thing but we will break through this together.” Later today the royal commission into defence veteran suicides will start in Brisbane. There will be a ceremonial hearing and participants will start giving evidence on Monday. This has been a long time coming for bereaved families, who have campaigned for this for a long time. The commission will investigate systemic issues within the ADF that led to veteran deaths – in the past 20 years, 1,273 people who have served in the defence force have killed themselves. If you want to watch and you cannot get there in person, it will be live-streamed on the royal commission website. A Brisbane construction company had $8 in assets and had not commenced trading, when it was awarded a government contract – ultimately worth $1.6bn – to run Australia’s offshore processing on Nauru. The contract was awarded after the government ordered a “financial strength assessment” that was actually done on a different company. Good morning, Cait Kelly here to take you through Friday morning’s news. Here are the big ones so far: Australian federal police have arrived in the Solomon Islands after days of unrest over a number of grievances, including alleged corruption, poor public services and the government’s decision in 2019 to switch diplomatic allegiance from Taiwan to China. Marise Payne said on Radio National there were about 100 Australians in the Solomon Islands and the government would help them if they wanted to leave. “We understand there are strong reports of damage, particularly in the Chinatown area. There have been some attacks on facilities like police stations,” she said. Payne said she would not comment on the politics of the situation. “It is not the Australian government’s intention, in any way, for us to pass any comment or be involved. What we want to do and what we’ve been asked to do … is to contribute to stability, calming things in Honiara.” Prime minister Manasseh Sogavare has blamed foreign partners for the arrest. There is more rain to come for Australia’s east coast over the weekend before it should ease next week. The rain band is expected to move through South Australia, over most of NSW, before heading to northern Victoria. The BOM has put out flood watches for around Clermont, north of Emerald in Queensland, through much of New South Wales, parts of eastern South Australia as well as for parts of northern and eastern Victoria – so keep an eye on those. And police have said they are “hopeful” they will find the remains of Victorian campers Russell Hill and Carol Clay after a 55-year-old man was charged with their murders. The man, from Caroline Springs, was charged Thursday night and he is expected to face Sale magistrates court later this morning. Let’s get stuck into it.The Morrison government’s latest plan to spark a “gas-led recovery” from the Covid pandemic and bolster gas supplies has been panned as out of step with market trends and at odds with a net zero 2050 goal. The national gas infrastructure plan, released on Friday, calls for the development of at least one major new gas basin before 2030 to meet projected domestic and export needs. Opening up new gas fields, though, will also require additional pipelines. “Unlocking basins and getting gas to where it is needed will support our job-creating industries,” Angus Taylor, the federal energy minister, said. “The Morrison government is serious about gas and acknowledges the important role it plays supporting jobs, food production, manufacturing, industry, exports and energy supply.” Taylor said industry would be asked to join a new expression of interest process to identify “critical projects that require support to accelerate delivery”. The government committed $38.7m in the 2021-22 budget to speed up such ventures. New sources of supply that may require such aid include NSW’s Narrabri coal seam gas project, possibly on stream by 2026, the Northern Territory’s Beetaloo Basin by 2025, and Queensland’s Galilee and North Bowen basins by 2028 or sooner. The report assumes demand for gas in the east coast gas market to the mid-2030s will be “relatively stable across all demand scenarios”. That includes exports, which now make up about 70% of east coast supply. Kevin Gallagher, chief executive of Santos, which owns the Narrabri project and has an interest in Beetaloo, welcomed the plan. “The scarcity of new developments on the east coast is frightening,” he said. “If Australia does not continue to develop its oil and gas resources, then supply will simply come from places like Russia and the Middle East, and Australian workers and Australian living standards will be the poorer for it.” He said the $3bn-plus Narrabri plan offered “the lowest cost gas available to New South Wales customers” and would be 100% committed to the local market. ‘Throwing away money’ But critics said the plan was out of step with market sentiment towards new fossil fuel projects and noted it avoided any mention of climate change. They pointed to the falling share of gas in the National Electricity Market even as renewable supplies increased as a key trend. “Gas in electricity production is ancient history. It really is throwing away money [to support new gas infrastructure],” said Bruce Mountain, director of the Victoria Energy Policy Centre. “It’s reaching back to the horse and cart.” Suzanne Harter, a climate change campaigner at the Australian Conservation Foundation, said the 34-page plan directly contradicted commitments to keep global warming to less than 1.5C that the Morrison government signed up to in Glasgow at Cop26 earlier this month. Harter noted “the government stands ready” to fill gaps “where private sector investment is not available in time to ensure priority infrastructure projects”, according to the report. “It is completely out of sync with global market trends which are to get out of fossil fuels,” she said, adding that Beetaloo and Narrabri were “climate bombs” in terms of their potential emissions. Federal Greens leader Adam Bandt said the plan was proof “Australia has no pathway to net zero, even by too-late 2050”. The Greens want net zero emissions to be reached by 2035. “If Labor are serious about climate action, they’ll join the Greens next week in the Senate to block fracking the NT at Beetaloo and Santos’ rorting of carbon capture and storage,” Bandt said. Guardian Australia approached Labor for comment. While the report emphasised that state and territory governments had a role in “encouraging the timely development of gas reserves” to head off shortages, coordination appears to be limited. NSW government officials, for instance, say they have not been approached for assistance to help develop the Narrabri gas field. Predicting gas demand is also challenging. Explosives maker Orica accounts for as much as 15% of demand in the state and whether it cut usage or switched to hydrogen in the future could play a swing role in the future gas market.Many people don’t want to see Ann Dowd’s new movie. Even the most positive of its reviews from Sundance called it “excruciating”, “exhausting” and “tortuous”; an endurance test some will not be willing to endure. Including Dowd herself, who has yet to watch it. “We’ve talked about it a lot, the cast, and we have different points of view,” Dowd says to me over coffee in Chelsea, New York, conscious that Mass is a tough sell. “When people ask me, I say this film has tremendous hope and that it has to do with healing and forgiveness. I don’t give the specifics.” The specifics are such: two sets of parents meet six years after a school shooting. Both lost their sons that day – one was a victim and the other the killer. The conversation that follows is contained in just one room for the duration, uncomfortable and inescapable. Dowd plays the mother of the shooter. Dowd, now 65, has lately found something of a niche in mainstream psycho-horror, as the fearsome Aunt Lydia in The Handmaid’s Tale, the malevolent Patti on The Leftovers and the downright frightening Joan in Hereditary. But even she was trepidatious about this one. “I wondered, can I go to that level of grief and stay there for the time needed to tell the story respectfully and honestly?” She can, it turns out: four years after her Emmy for The Handmaid’s Tale, Oscar buzz now surrounds her. I’d met Dowd briefly a few weeks ago; today she acts as if we’ve known each other for years. She brushes her dog Chance’s hair off my jeans, calls me “honey” or “babe”, offers help for my mother’s upcoming visit (“You have everything? Like pots, pans?”), moons over my name (“the most beautiful … it says peace to me”) and strokes my hand as we speak (“I keep going for your thumb, I’m sorry. It’s the mother in me”). It’s not the Dowd we’re used to seeing on screen. “Fans are lovely,” she beams. “They just think that I’m definitely going to be the meanest person they’ve ever met.” A Handmaid’s Tale fan once ran away from her in public. She’s unsure, too, about the discrepancy between her personality and her current pigeonhole. “I don’t know why it’s a good fit. I’ve always been drawn to loners, I’ll tell you that.” Dowd worked consistently but quietly throughout the late 1980s and into the following decades. She was Tom Hanks’ sister in Philadelphia; Natalie Portman’s mum in Garden State, multiple characters in the Law &amp; Order universe. But leading roles eluded her. “I used to weep after every audition I didn’t get,” she says. “I lost a ton of weight, was the thinnest I ever was. I was living in LA at the time and I thought I’m gonna get a billion roles. I’m not gorgeous or anything but my face is fine. Didn’t get a thing. Weep! Then finally in the middle of a weep one day, I just stopped dead and I said: you are choosing this reaction, choose another reaction. That’s the last time I wept over losing a role. That was 22 years ago.” It took 2012’s Sundance hit Compliance, a grim drama about a horrifying escalation of abuse at a fast-food restaurant, to suddenly move her from the sidelines and into the centre of the frame. Dowd was a week away from her 56th birthday when it premiered. These decades of experience, along with a background in training actors, has leant her a robust scepticism about pontification in her trade. “Acting is not suffering, and I swear by that,” she says. “At the end of the day we go home and we don’t carry with us the consequences of the story. That’s the only reason you can do it. When I’ve been on set with young actors who are very method, it worries me terribly. And I want to say to them, Sweetheart, come on now, you don’t need to have a nervous breakdown just because your character does, it’s about the imagination, Honey, that’s your gift.” During Mass, she remembers “howling with laughter” between takes. But lately, she says, a creeping gloom has entered the picture. “I don’t know if it’s the pandemic or not but I’m experiencing anxiety that I have not had before and talking about this film is much harder than filming it. As soon as we started talking about it, I would just start weeping because I wasn’t accustomed to going back to that story as an outsider. But now I realise I have anxiety around things I didn’t even know I did.” Our allotted time is up, but the conversation continues as quasi-therapy, sharing dovetailing stories of family tragedy and hardship. Dowd listens as much as she talks; and when she talks, it’s largely off the record. A big theme turns out to be men unable to express their despair, and the dangers that can come with that. “This is gonna sound really horrible and you can tell me to fuck off,” she says, “but I think because women are the ones who bear children, we can handle it. But not only are men to me more vulnerable but to tell them to then shut that down compounds it. It’s like: no, what do you think they’re supposed to do?” Dowd has three children, the eldest of whom is on the autism spectrum and the youngest was adopted at six. Each, she says, brings with them a different challenge. But she’s pleased they seem able to share with her when they’re feeling low – something her character’s son in Mass does not. “She lost her son and he was responsible for the deaths of others and the destruction of families,” she says. “But the one that dawned on me latest was that her son was in that level of despair and she did not know it,” she says. “He was suffering.” But while in person Dowd might major on maternal warmth, flickers of something steelier do come through. She’s acute recounting a story about a woman who was rude to her in Macy’s. And she doesn’t shy from discussing a brusque soap director she clashed with early in her career. One guest star on The Handmaid’s Tale – one with a “difficult reputation” also comes in for some dressing down. “She drove everybody crazy,” says Dowd. “I was like: Babe, no need. That to me is like a psychological issue, where you think: is there an insecurity, sweet girl? Because you’re established, we’re all kind of nice around here, nobody’s important, so what’s the problem?” And then I witness Dowd’s fearlessness in person, when we spot an aggressive guy (with a dog with a similar temperament) arguing with a young woman in the corner of the coffee shop. Dowd stops dead, like a superhero suddenly called into action. “Sweetheart, are you OK?” she calls over. “You’re doing just fine?” The man barks back, telling her to “shut your nosey old trap”. I start to get involved but Dowd reaches for my hand and backs me down: “No worries, no worries. I just want them safe.” It’s the sort of everyday incident that can nonetheless leave you slightly shaken. But Dowd seems entirely unmoved: all resolve and watchfulness. “Go home, Sir,” she says under her breath later on, when the man’s dog begins yapping, with the air of someone conjuring a spell. It’s a brief snapshot of the resilience that’s propelled her through her dogged rise and will undoubtedly help her power through what she calls her latest “challenging” bout of anxiety. “You have to square off with it,” she says. “You can’t shove it away. You have to settle with it and think you’re gonna be all right.” And she holds my hand. • Mass is released in cinemas and on Sky Cinema in the UK on 20 January 2022.The prosecution: Jenny Since our baby was born, Tom has not changed his routine, and is out most nights playing sport Tom and I have a nine-month-old baby called Isaac. Since Isaac was born, my life has changed drastically, but Tom’s has not. Most nights after work he either plays football or golf, or goes to a restaurant with his friends. If I get to see him every other night, it’s a good week. Recently Isaac vomited everywhere and I called Tom for help. He said: “I’ve got four holes left at golf. I’ll be back in an hour.” I had cleaned it all up by the time he got back. Tom teaches sports and prioritises it as part of his wellbeing. It is the one thing he doesn’t want to give up – but he’s quite self-centred for someone who’s meant to be a team player. I met him three years ago on Tinder and he moved in within three months. Then we got married and had a baby. I’m now back at work, as I don’t get much maternity leave. After the office I want to spend as much time with Isaac as possible: talking to him, reading him stories, preparing dinner, and making silly voices while I cook. Tom does take Isaac swimming, but sometimes when he’s in charge of the baby he just puts him in front of the TV, whereas I’m more interactive. The pandemic was tough as we don’t have any family around to help with childcare. Lockdown rules were quite relaxed where we live, so Tom kept to his routine while I stayed at home. I’d be in our apartment with Isaac while Tom was gone from 7am to 8pm, at work and playing sports. I also suffer from postpartum anxiety and ADHD. My life was really active before we had the baby. It was like being at university – parties and drinking all the time. Now my friends have changed: I have more of a mums’ network, because I need people who get what I’m going through. But I am a whole person and I miss being able to get my nails done and going to dinner when I want. I’m not saying Tom should give up all his hobbies, but if he would just be at home a bit more it would help. I tell him: it’s not babysitting, it’s parenting – Isaac is your baby too. I want Tom to work and play hard, then come home and enjoy spending time with our family. The defence: Tom I need my exercise for the endorphins. It’s natural for Jenny to do more as she is breastfeeding I’ll admit that Jenny only gets one or two nights a month to get her nails or hair done, whereas I get a few nights of leisure time every week. I’m a sports teacher, and I’ve always been active. I need to play football and tennis and go swimming once a week, and to the gym twice a week and play golf at the weekends. It seems like a lot but if I give up even one of my sports, I could become lazy. Once that happens, it impacts your work, relationship and family. Exercise releases endorphins that keep me going day to day. Jenny definitely takes the lead in parenting. We have a live-in nanny, who has taken the pressure off us both, but Jenny is hands-on and does a tremendous job. Isaac is nine months old and is exclusively breastfed, so it’s natural for Jenny to do more. I take Isaac swimming a lot, which I love. Jenny plays with Isaac more in the evenings, whereas I will play with him for a bit after work and then I’ll get tired. In our apartment Isaac has his little toys in a soft area, and when I mind him sometimes I put him there with the TV on in the background, which Jenny doesn’t like. But I’ll turn the volume down low, or just let Isaac watch two or three episodes of Bluey, as each one is only seven minutes long. We do have different parenting styles. Jenny wants to be close to Isaac all the time, whereas I am less hands-on because I want him to explore, learn things for himself and be independent. The time that Jenny phoned me about Isaac being sick, I was already out and it was quite a normal thing – babies vomit a lot. If it had been more serious, I would’ve dropped everything. Other times when he has been sick, we have handled it together. When Jenny and I first met, we had time to go on date nights and travel. Getting married and having a baby has changed that. I think Jenny could try and relax a bit with Isaac, and both of us could make more time for each other. I will try and do my sports early in the morning or late in the evening when Isaac is sleeping so it doesn’t impact the time I spend with them, but I can’t give up my exercise routine. The jury of Guardian readers Should Tom spend more time with his wife and baby son? Tom needs to make compromises as he’s taking his family for granted. They could join a gym with crèche facilities to work out together. Tom could also swap his golf for hiking with Jenny and Isaac. Equally Jenny needs to learn to stop micromanaging Tom’s parenting. Emma, 31 Tom’s reasons for being absent aren’t convincing. He wants to cling on to his younger self and to their former carefree life. Jenny wants Tom to enjoy these years with Isaac because he’ll only get these once. I find for the prosecution. Stewart, 55 Jenny works and suffers with anxiety and ADHD. Tom is a selfish husband and parent. He has made no adjustments to help with the care and wellbeing of his wife and child. He should be ashamed. Christine, 64 Tom lives his best life in an unequal partnership, but to say “partnership” is to give him too much credit. Choosing golf over “the baby is sick and I need you” is contempt defined. I side with Jenny. Patrick, 36 Parenting is an equal commitment and Jenny is taking on more of this responsibility. Jenny and Tom should sit down and plan their week, ensuring that both feel their needs are being met. Both seem very caring parents; the balance just needs readdressing. Mandy, 48 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Tom help out at home more? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result Last week, we asked if Emma should stop reusing teabags, because it creates mess for her boyfriend, Simon. 44% of you said no – Emma is innocent 56% of you said yes – Emma is guiltyThe gas-guzzling behemoth, the gaudy polluter roaring its indifference to the problems facing the planet, Formula One has an image problem in the climate emergency age. But is it a fair judgment any more? F1’s sporting director, Ross Brawn, believes that the sport’s technological battleground is turning into an environmental science lab pursuing solutions to issues that cannot be ignored. F1 has much to do to make a difference but it is taking a path that deserves recognition and perhaps reassessment of how it is perceived. Brawn describes the new direction as compulsory both commercially and morally. “Every thinking person is concerned about climate change,” he says. “I am concerned about it, my engineers are concerned about it – it’s something we can’t ignore. It would be very rewarding for F1 to demonstrate the technology we can take forward to contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gases. “We have a mantra: an F1 fan should be proud of being an F1 fan. That is not only about the excitement on track but showing that F1 can make a difference in society. We all genuinely feel that.” In 2019 F1 committed to being net carbon zero by 2030. The sport published an extensive report into its environmental impact, including revealing its 256,000 tons of CO2 emissions each season. To deal with it is hugely ambitious. The report stated that 45% of the carbon is from air, sea and road transport required logistically to put on each race and a further 27.7% from the transport of personnel, promoters and partners. As with all major sporting events this can be reduced but not eliminated and F1 has committed to offset it with tree planting and carbon capture technology. Such efforts are not happening quickly enough for some, with the world champion Lewis Hamilton questioning why major industries, governments and indeed sports were not acting more radically. “F1 is only implementing it [net carbon neutral status] in 10 years’ time and I don’t fully understand why that doesn’t change sooner,” he said. “These large corporations that have a lot of money and power behind them and can definitely make change happen quicker but it’s not their No 1 priority. Until there is a point where it is the No 1 priority for governments and for the world, then it’s going to continue to be a slow-burner.” A fair point that is reflected in widespread frustration at many of the results of the recent Glasgow Cop26 conference. However, F1 says it is at least taking measures and Brawn believes it is developing new technology where the sport can really make a difference. Today’s formula one cars have 52% thermal efficiency, a figure believed to be almost unachievable and 20% greater than road cars. Yet it is the near future the sport believes presents the greatest promise. From next season F1 will introduce the use of 10% sustainable fuel. By the time new engine regulations are introduced in 2025 only 100% fully sustainable fuel is to be used. A fuel that emits zero carbon on use, made from either a bio-component that comes from a biological source that does not compete with either food production or land use or one that uses carbon captured and removed directly from the air. In fact, F1 says only 0.7% of the carbon emissions from an entire season come from the cars themselves but for the sport the broader implications are what matter. The march to electrification is welcomed by Brawn but he notes that there is no single magic bullet to solve the climate emergency. Electric cars require power – much of which is still derived from fossil-fuelled power stations. Equally, BloombergNEF research estimates their take-up will be only 8% of the 1.4bn cars globally by 2030. The fuel F1 is proposing, and toward which the teams will be building their engines, is targeting that very damaging 92%. The fuel will be a drop-in, meaning it can work in standard engines with no conversion. The move was welcomed with caution by the Green party, albeit while noting that fundamental change is needed in the attitude toward transport. “While Formula One is actually right that electric vehicles are not the main solution to cutting transport carbon and we do need to explore alternative fuels, especially for HGVs, this technology should not be an excuse for business as usual,” said the Green party’s spokesperson Caroline Russell. “It doesn’t matter how cars are powered, they still contribute to road danger, congestion and health-harming pm2.5 particle pollution from tyre wear. “Cutting-edge fuel technology may help clean up the remaining vehicles on the road, but government policy should be focused on making walking, cycling and public transport the safest and most convenient choice for most daily journeys, and on making freight more efficient and moving more of it by rail.” F1 cannot change government policy but Brawn believes the sport can deliver a short-term, immediate alternative to petrol for cars on the road. “With the white-hot technology competition in F1 we will probably get there quicker than any other environment I can think of,” he says. “The vaccine race was impressive, suddenly we had a vaccine in a very short space of time. That had never been done before. We now have the climate race and we have to find solutions at the same speed. “Engineers of an F1 team are very selfish, they don’t waste an ounce of energy on anything other than making the car go faster. If we set them a challenge wrapped round this sustainable fuel objective they will put every effort into it when they know it will give them a potential competitive advantage.” Crucially it may also be a step toward solving F1’s own emissions and the single most intractable problem of the environmental impact of global transport. Electric technology is currently not efficient enough to work for long-distance heavy goods vehicles, shipping or aviation. All three sectors are major polluters. A low carbon, drop-in, sustainable fuel would make an enormous difference and F1 has already been discussing the concept with the Department of Transport and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy. Just as in the past the sport has advanced motoring technology, F1 is repositioning itself as a test bed for changing the playing field for combustion engines in a direct and applicable way. With ambitious plans being set at Cop26, Brawn is insistent that multiple technologies must be pursued if targets are to be met, especially in transport, and that aspiring to only electrification would be a mistake. “No more blah blah blah” was the caustic dismissal of Cop26 by Greta Thunberg. F1 has at the very least chosen action. The fossil-fuelled dinosaur of old is outdated and irrelevant. Being part of a change for the future is the sport’s only hope of remaining relevant and it might yet prove to be part of the solution rather than the problem.Boris Johnson’s meandering recent speech, in which he lost his place and blathered about Peppa Pig, was consistent with what we have come to expect of the prime minister. So the fact it was monstered by media commentators is bemusing. Johnson has long given up on topics halfway through, asked underwhelmed audiences to applaud him and babbled about painting model buses. Yet his latest shambolic presentation has been treated as a signal that his premiership is disintegrating. It suggests that media outlets have decided to apply a new filter because, as far as Johnson’s public persona is concerned, nothing has changed. Johnson is often described as a Teflon politician, but this non-stick coating must be applied by someone. Three years ago, a Tory MP batted away my suggestion that Johnson would become prime minister. His colleagues, you see, would never allow it. The parliamentary Conservative party regarded him as completely unsuitable to be national leader, because he was selfish, incompetent and morally abject. As such, the MP told me, his colleagues would not permit him to make the final two on the shortlist for members to adjudicate. Months later, this same politician recorded a video endorsing Johnson’s leadership bid, bursting with fulsome praise to the point of sycophancy. Tory MPs had rallied around someone they knew was a charlatan because they believed he had unique properties to defeat the twin menaces of Farageism and Corbynism. Michael Gove notoriously overturned the Johnson leadership bandwagon in 2016, declaring his Brexit brother-in-arms unfit to govern, while Dominic Cummings openly confessed to helping Johnson to become prime minister despite knowing he was unsuitable, purely because he was a convenient blunt instrument to deliver Brexit and smash the Corbyn project. Johnson’s true nature was hardly hidden from media outlets either. An interview with Eddie Mair eight years ago was a striking outlier; the broadcaster savaged Johnson over being sacked twice for lying and conspiring to beat a journalist up – concluding “You’re a nasty piece of work, aren’t you?” By contrast, most of the British media conspired to present Johnson as a rib-tickling performer, allowing him to spin political liabilities into charming virtues. Yet even with this protective shield, Johnson has never been popular, never coming close to the approval ratings enjoyed by all four of his prime ministerial predecessors in their first few months. Johnson’s unique capacity to “cut through” to the British public is a myth. But how the narrative changes: Johnson has gone from the genius defier of political gravity, to a shambolic punchline, and now to a joke. One Tory MP even declared recently that “a bowl of soup could have beaten Jeremy Corbyn”. Yet this retelling of history contrasts starkly with the public image that the press has confected around Johnson up until now. When the Telegraph declared the 2019 election result a “personal triumph for Boris Johnson”, he was widely regarded as a vindicated political titan. That Johnson’s government is defined by corruption should hardly surprise the media. His ex-lover, Jennifer Arcuri, has spent years alleging that as Tory leader he used public office to further her business interests. That Johnson shamelessly breaks solemn promises is entirely consistent with his entire character: as his former colleague Peter Oborne writes: “I have never encountered a senior British politician who lies and fabricates so regularly, so shamelessly and so systematically as Boris Johnson.” Indeed, Johnson’s flaws are anything but subtle. Our media outlets knew all this, but were possessed by the same terror of the alternative as Tory MPs. That included many who fear the left more than the right, privately believing Johnson – who provoked a surge in hate crimes after comparing Muslim women to letterboxes and bank robbers a year before becoming prime minister – was a lesser danger than his opponent. Some persuaded themselves that Johnson was himself a liberal alternative to the Stalinist authoritarianism of Corbyn. He had a “political philosophy … that he will not restrict our liberties unless there is an overwhelming reason to do so,” suggested ITV’s Robert Peston. As prime minister, Johnson has appointed pantomime authoritarian Priti Patel as home secretary and cracked down on the right to protest. Johnson’s team must surely be bewildered by the sudden emergence of media scrutiny. During the early days of the pandemic, when British hospitals were being overwhelmed with dying patients because of the government’s mishandling of Covid-19, this was not presented as an existential crisis for Johnson. Yet the Peppa Pig speech is given as reason to question his political future. The nation’s media outlets have gone off script. When Nadine Dorries, the new culture secretary, reprimanded the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg and proclaimed the left has hijacked social media (even though Twitter’s own research shows its algorithm benefits rightwing news sources), she underscored the extent to which the Tories can usually count on media compliance. So what explains this sudden shift in the way that Johnson’s premiership is being discussed, both among Tory MPs (some of whom have allegedly issued letters of no confidence) and media outlets? The answer is unremarkable: Johnson has served his purpose. Most Tories do not believe a Keir Starmer premiership is likely and will brutally dispose of Johnson if that calculation changes. Besides, thanks to Starmer’s efforts to recast his party as the establishment’s B-team, a Labour government does not present the same terror as one led by his predecessor. The significant danger for Labour is that a shift in Johnson’s popularity among despairing Tory voters won’t be due to any enthusiasm they hold for the opposition: the decline in Tory support has been driven by its voters shifting to the “don’t know” column rather than to Labour. Starmer’s team needs to present a compelling alternative that motivates the electorate to vote for it, rather than relying on disillusionment with a man who, in any case, may be thrown overboard. For Johnson, meanwhile, this must be a sobering moment. It seemed as though he could get away with anything. And indeed he could – until, suddenly, he couldn’t. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistMagnus Carlsen says he plans a fast start in the opening three rounds of his 14-game, $2m world title match against Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi on Friday, Saturday and Sunday. Play starts at 12.30pm GMT throughout the match, which can be followed live and free online, with expert and computer commentaries on every move. Nepomniachtchi will have the favourable white pieces in the first game, whose colours were determined by popping balloons. Carlsen will push for an early lead. “As a reigning champion you have a good chance to strike at the start,” he said. “That’s definitely something I am going to try.” Previous cases of first-time challengers who froze include Tigran Petrosian’s disastrous game one in 1963 against Mikhail Botvinnik and Bobby Fischer’s poisoned pawn capture against Boris Spassky in 1972. In the 2018 match Fabiano Caruana was shaky in the marathon first game and should have lost at move 38. Carlsen himself, in his second game against Vishy Anand in 2013, planned the Caro-Kann 1 e4 c6 but nervously knocked over his c7 pawn. However, there are also examples such as in 1927 and 2000 where the challenger scored early and went on to win the match. India’s Vishy Anand, who lost two title matches to Carlsen, believes the challenger’s best chance is finding complex and difficult positions where his months of preparation using the Zhores supercomputer will give him chances. “I feel that Magnus is vulnerable under these circumstances,” he said. “It’s already his fifth title match, so the fire isn’t burning so hard inside.” Carlsen has become an even firmer favourite in the betting in the past week and is now quoted at 2-11 compared with the previous 1-4. This follows his statement that he regards Nepo (as everybody calls him) as a “wildcard” and “a good outcome for me” and that Caruana and China’s Ding Liren “are the best” among the top grandmasters. What is your forecast for the match result? This column’s prognosis is for a Carlsen victory by 7.5-5.5, three wins, nine draws, and one defeat, with game 14 not played. Carlsen’s plan A, a fast start against a nervous Nepo, switched to plan B, a safe and solid theoretical equal position avoiding any Russian opening surprises, when his balloon awarded him the black pieces in the first game of the match. A halved point could even have been predicted at move one when the champion avoided the combative Sicilian 1 e4 c5 and preferred to defend an orthodox Ruy Lopez 1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5. Carlsen narrowly outpointed Nepo in that first clash, since the Zhores super-computer failed to produce any startling novelty, while the middle game quickly turned into a typical classical Carlsen endgame grind, testing and probing the opponent’s defensive skills. Nepo could also take something from the game since he was never in any significant danger, avoided any first night nerves, and found the accurate choices needed to keep the position level. Saturday’s second game will be the real test of who takes the early match initiative, as Carlsen seems sure to try to back up his fast start intentions with sharp and positive play. If the champion can conclude the weekend by winning his White and drawing his first two Blacks, that will be a significant step to retaining his title. Carlsen spoke last week before he knew the full details of 18-year-old Alireza Firouzja’s triumph at the European teams in Slovenia. The former Iranian, who officially became a French citizen on Tuesday, won the top board individual gold medal with 8/9, helped France to the team silver behind Ukraine’s gold, jumped to No 2 in the ratings with only Carlsen ahead of him, and became the youngest ever 2800+ player, eclipsing the world champion’s record, set in 2010, by six months. In total, just 14 players have ever achieved 2800, the first being Garry Kasparov in 1990. Carlsen and Firouzja are the only teenagers on the list, with a big gap to the next youngest, Caruana at age 22. Firouzja’s tournament performance rating of 3015 was the second highest ever after Caruana’s 3080 at St Louis 2014, and trumped Carlsen’s own 3002 at Pearl Spring 2009, which had stood as the record for five years. Now the question is whether the teen can go on to capture Carlsen’s age record of youngest No 1 at 19 years and two months. This is a tall order, because there are fewer elite tournaments now than before the pandemic. Furthermore, Carlsen became No 1 at a time when there was no dominant player, and achieved it with a 2810 rating, much lower than Firouzja would need next year. Away from the world championship, this weekend sees the return of the top division of the 4NCL, Britain’s over-the-board national league, after a full season when all matches were played online. Some teams have vanished and new ones have appeared, so Divisions One and Two are merged for 2021-22, with the top-12 finishers forming the normal Division One in 2022-23. The Saturday afternoon (2pm start) and Sunday morning (11am star) rounds will be played at Milton Keynes, and can be followed live online. Apart from the temporarily changed format, the most obvious novelty is that there will probably be a new champion following Guildford’s record run of 83 unbeaten matches spread over eight years. The pandemic halted that sequence, and Guildford’s managers and sponsors, Roger Emerson and Nigel Povah, decided that it was time to end it. Their first team will now be Guildford Young Guns, led by the veteran GM Mark Hebden but consisting mainly of rising talents, who will do well to reach the top three. Chess.com Manx Liberty are the new favourites. The team from the Isle of Man, where chess already has private sponsors, will have support and publicity from the chess.com website and will be led by one of the game’s legends, “Fire on Board” Alexey Shirov, supported by GMs from Hungary, Romania and Poland. The title for Manx is far from a done deal, not least because its international team could be more vulnerable to travel and visa issues than its rivals. The most likely challengers are Wood Green, who dominated the league a decade ago before the Guildford era, and whose squad is headed by the Australian GM Justin Tan, the former world semi-finalist Jon Speelman, and England’s rising star Ravi Haria. Chessable White Rose has the European team silver medallist Gawain Jones on top board, while Cheddleton fields a solid phalanx of masters led by the 2021 British champion Nick Pert. The names look impressive, but it is disappointing that only Jones among England’s six 2600-rated grandmasters is taking part, as performing in the same arena as a country’s top GMs provides an inspiration for new talents. Total team numbers are only slightly down on 2019-20, 83 against 98, while Division Three already began the new season last weekend at Milton Keynes, Leamington and Doncaster. The league has strong anti-virus precautions, but two players in Division Three Central at Leamington tested positive on the Monday, so that is a concern. Looking for a chance to play over-the-board in central London? The London Chess Classic, including open-to-all blitz tournaments, returns on 3-12 December at a new venue close to Oxford Circus. 3791: 1 b4! Qb6/c7 (the black queen must guard against 2 Rd8+ Bf8 3 Qxf8 mate) 2 Qa8+ Bf8 3 Rf1! wins with the double attack on the Bf8.Motivated by Bikini Kill to pursue a musical career in the 1990s, bass player Devin Hoff has spent the past decade inspired by another radical artist, the folk singer and songwriter Anne Briggs. In the 60s and 70s, Briggs revived English, Scottish and Traveller songs and wrote her own lovely, twisted compositions before retiring to rural Scotland. Hoff is a long-term experimentalist and collaborator who has worked with Yoko Ono, Cibo Matto and Sharon Van Etten – the last of whom is one of several stellar guests on this unusual set of reimaginings of Briggs’s work. Julia Holter and drummer Jim White appear too, but Hoff’s bass should command the most attention. It sets the scene majestically on opening track She Moved Through the Fair: layers of long, low, scraped notes creating shuddering, rumbling textures, suggesting a door to the underworld opening up (and perhaps the arrival of “the dead love” in Briggs’s version of the ballad). It’s similarly commanding on The Lowlands and Maa Bonny Lad (on which the saxophonist Howard Wiley provides fractious but fascinating accompaniment) but best on The Snow It Melts the Soonest/My Bonny Boy: simple and beautiful. Accompanied by oud player Alejandro Farha, Hoff unfurls the tunes in expansive new ways. The guest vocalists offer more mixed results. Van Etten’s gorgeous voice weirdly doesn’t work on Go Your Way, appearing like over-refined window-dressing, and Emmett Kelly’s casual delivery on Black Waterside feels glib. Holter’s unearthly choirgirl vocals work better on Let No Man Steal Your Thyme (although they teeter on the edges of a Nuggets-style psych-folk anthology pastiche). Shannon Lay’s take on Living By the Water fares best, her voice unaffected and lovely, channelling Briggs’s direct, indomitable spirit. Also out this month The Memory Band’s Colours (Hungry Hill) is their sixth exploratory romp through the outer edges of traditional music. The Sweet Primroses and Albion’s Daughter are reinvented through respectful prisms of 70s jazz, while Nightwalk and Equinox are exquisite folk-tinted instrumentals. Jacken Elswyth’s Banjo With the Sound of its Own Making (Bandcamp) foregrounds the talents of the instrument’s most exciting young practitioners and makers: you hear the sounds of her sawing and shaping the wood alongside fantastic, intricate fingerpicking. Freedom to Roam’s The Rhythms of Migration (self-released) is also full of exciting potential, documenting flautist Eliza Marshall’s beautiful project to document migration’s utopian possibilities through music. Her impressive house band include harpist Catrin Finch and composer Kuljit Bhamra.From Sex and the City to pop-punk to low-slung jeans and tiny bags, the early-00s revival has been wide-ranging and frantic. It feels easier to list the turn-of-the-millennium culture that hasn’t been post-ironically reappropriated by Gen Z – and Irish crooners Westlife are among the last ones standing (or rather, perched uncomfortably on a tall stool). Not that the foursome, who specialised in soppy, R&amp;B-dusted pop, have been idly waiting to be rediscovered. After their astonishing 00s success (17 consecutive top-five singles, including 14 No 1s), the group split up in 2012, and re-formed in 2018. Their chart-topping comeback album, Spectrum, drew on the songwriting nous of young(ish) talents Ed Sheeran and James Bay. Wild Dreams reunites the band with Sheeran for the melodically pleasant but lyrically lacklustre My Hero, while Tom Grennan assists on the perfectly functional Starlight. These more traditional ballads are the album’s highlights: simple, unforced and a showcase for some strong vocal performances. The rest is less pretty. There is much desperate divorced-dad energy here, courtesy of the kind of fiddly, Bieber-esque production that saturated mid-10s charts, as well as some slightly icky lyrics. Alone Together turns a pandemic slogan into a cringey chat-up line; the title track suggests a woman “crawl into my bed” before a chorus that strongly recalls DJ Khaled’s Wild Thoughts. It’s hard to escape the feeling that Wild Dreams belongs in the past – and not, unfortunately, the band’s now-zeitgeisty Y2K heyday. Their cheesy early hits may be ripe for revival, but Westlife 2.0 are the wrong kind of uncool.I was going to advise anyone of a nervous disposition to take a fistful of diazepam before they settle down to watch ‘Twas the Fight Before Christmas (Apple TV+). But I suspect the best advice is not to watch it at all. It’s virtually the festive season. There will be enough anxiety and rage soon enough. No need to invite it early by watching the true story of Jeremy Morris and his unblinking determination to bring “Christmas cheer” to a quiet corner of North Idaho. This film by director Becky Read, about the slow and steady unfolding of the average citizen’s worst nightmare, starts innocuously enough. Christmas-loving lawyer Morris joyfully recounts to the camera what a success he and his wife Kristy enjoyed one year with a spontaneous yuletide event at their home – lights! All over the house! Candy for the kids! Hot chocolate for all! More lights! So the next year, they made it bigger. (I suspect a large portion of you already know where this is going. Again, my advice is medicate or bail. It gets so much worse than you think.) It became an eight-day event, with thousands of people, a choir, a camel, queues of cars, and a shining sense of purpose born in Morris, a devout Christian. “This,” he realised, “is my ministry.” The city, however, reckoned a camel-based eight-day event needed permits, so the Morrises decided to move to the tranquil neighbourhood of Hayden, just outside its limits. Kristy looked forward to a life full of happy relationships with the kind of neighbours she never had growing up. Jeremy and his fellow lawyers, meanwhile, were scrutinising the Home Owner Association (HOA) rulebook to make sure there was nothing that could scupper his plans to turn the neighbourhood into Christmas Glastonbury every year. They reckoned not, so in moved the Morrises – and out moved any hope of peace or tranquillity for the residents of Hayden for the next six years and counting. Despite the residents’ objections – locals did in fact feel it violated many of the conditions designed to protect the neighbourhood – Morris ploughed on. There were attempts by the HOA to pacify, conciliate or compromise. His daily, aggressive calls to Jennifer Scott, the president of the HOA at the time, pushed her close to nervous collapse and she stepped down. Eventually they sent him a certified letter. Morris’s face lights up as he recalls it – because it contained a line about not wanting to upset local people not of the Christian faith. That, he reckoned, made it a clear case of religious discrimination. You can practically see his first amendment glands juicing. The next few years became a welter of escalating tensions and lawsuits. The people of Hayden talk about the events with helpless horror; Morris describes them with glee and fervour, seeming to feed off every perceived slight at least as much as every success. It is an extraordinary portrait of a man who is convinced he cannot be wrong, who will always position himself – at least in his own mind – as the persecuted victim struggling to do right. There is no empathy, no walking a mile in another’s shoes, no conception of himself as a bully nor any entertainment of the concept that his rights might end where another person’s – or an entire neighbourhood’s – begin. Beautifully laid out by Read, it is the perfect story for our increasingly polarised times; an era where the victory goes to he who shouts loudest rather than to the best argument, or towards the outcome with the greatest happiness to the greatest number of people. So take the tablets. Maybe for ever.It is nice to know there are only two bicycling novelists who live in a Scottish castle, one being me and the other being Brooke Shields. (Before anyone gets too class-war-y, if you own a two-bedroom flat in any part of the south-east, it is almost certainly worth more than our crumbly old place in Fife.) As a novelist, I write Scotland-based romances, often set at Christmas, because I love them. And every year I hope that Netflix might just option one and make it. But what have they done instead? They have only gone and made a ridiculous film about my real life. In A Castle for Christmas, Shields plays Sophie Brown, a highly successful writer in New York with the most fabulous career and apartment. People care so much about her books that they have protests when she kills off a beloved character. Stop right there, I always think about these films. I only became a novelist because of Kathleen Turner’s amazing Manhattan life in Romancing the Stone, before she goes into that stupid jungle. Why would you leave? Regardless, Sophie heads to Scotland, to the village of Dunbar, purportedly in Aberdeenshire, which may come as some surprise to the residents of the extremely lovely large town of Dunbar in East Lothian – seriously guys, just change, like, one letter. Accent-wise, the taxi driver is from Fife, while Andi Osho appears to be channelling a likably posh Glaswegian as Maisie, the kindly innkeeper, who desperately wants a New York novelist to do her hair for … reasons. As Myles, the slightly-fuzzy-round-the-edges duke, Cary Elwes has a not entirely disastrous stab at west Highlander, so it is an enjoyable mix. Sophie visits the estate where her grandfather worked as a groundskeeper and decides, on an insanely expensive whim, to buy it. Myles cooks up a plan to take Sophie’s deposit and make her live with him for three months, making her life so miserable that she will leave – without her large deposit, which I think is a criminal offence. I believe it is not a spoiler to tell you that she does not leave, in fact, and neither does he. Apart from that, there is no jeopardy in this film at all: it is absolutely perfect for low-maintenance Christmas viewing. At one point, Tom, Myles’s manservant/lover/brother (it is never made clear in the script), suggests that if he doesn’t sell Sophie the castle (which clearly isn’t a castle, castle fans, but a manor house, although this is not a film you want to get into authenticity arguments with), it will be pulled down and replaced by “condos”. Obviously, they have never had a conversation with Historic Environment Scotland about changing one tiny windowsill in a protected building. Myles is theoretically impoverished, but he has never had to sell any of the paintings or antique furniture and manages to dig out about 100 grand’s worth of Christmas decorations, so nothing is ever too bad. They even have wifi and enjoy a Chinese takeaway, so they are way ahead of us. At one point, Sophie mentions that she has bats in her bedroom and nobody does what they normally do in Scotland: freeze and swear among themselves never to mention it again, in case your house is immediately confiscated as a bat sanctuary. The entire thing is utterly cursory. The 10th Duke of Dunbar doesn’t even have his own tartan; he wears Royal Stewart, which is the tartan for folk who don’t have one of their own. (There is, of course, a Dunbar tartan; it is lovely.) But does any of this matter? Not in the slightest. A Castle for Christmas is ideal for watching with a mince pie and “a whisky, large”, as the Duke drinks, apparently having no preference in whiskies. In fact, I am hoping, for selfish reasons, that it is a huge success. I tried recently to pitch a charming romance to Screen Scotland, when they had said they were keen to get away from Scottish films being all about heroin, poverty and child abuse. (They turned me down.) If this is a huge triumph, who knows what might be next? It is also lovely to see two great-looking actors who aren’t in the full flush of youth falling for one another. Shields has real charm, particularly in her scenes with Drew Barrymore, of which I could have done with loads more. It is great to see more and more films being made in Scotland, with our world-class scenery and rapidly improving facilities. Good Omens is being filmed here and, despite being about a gay angel and a demon falling in love in an apocalypse, is notably more realistic and down-to-earth than A Castle for Christmas. I would like to say it is great to see terrific Scottish actors such as … but they are mostly English or American, apart from the charming Eilidh Loan. But still, it is just nice to see glorious Dalmeny House done up for Christmas, a ceilidh and a kiss. And, frankly, any film that manages to get Shields to call someone a numpty, a dobber and a walloper can’t be all bad. • The Christmas Bookshop by Jenny Colgan (Sphere, £14.99) is out now. To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.While the journey to a low-carbon economy is well under way, the best route to get there remains up for debate. But, amid the slew of “pathways” and “roadmaps”, one broad consensus exists: “clean” technology will play a vital role. Nowhere is this truer than for transport. To cut vehicle emissions, an alternative to the combustion engine is required. While green hydrogen is developing at pace, much of the early progress is in the electric vehicle (EV) space. Despite an overall flatlining in new car purchases, recent monthly figures show a 50% leap in year-on-year sales for EVs. Yet, “clean” is a relative term. EVs do not have exhausts pumping out emissions, but the raw materials that go into them have just as much embedded carbon, if not more, as their combustion equivalents. As a recent Guardian investigation shows, the human rights and environmental costs of the green transport revolution are still not being fully considered in the race towards electric vehicles. The batteries that EVs use are a big part of this problem and can push the weight of the car up to nearly 3,000kg. They contain rare metals – many sourced from the poorest and most ecologically sensitive places on the planet. Yet, eco-innovations are afoot. Here, we look at five early stage efforts to improve the green credentials of EV batteries at different stages of their life. Mining: saving the aquifer Acquiring the raw metals for batteries has been linked to environmental and human rights impacts, such as child labour (cobalt) and river pollution (copper). Lithium, a rare metal on which EV batteries heavily depend, is extracted from land deposits or subterranean aquifers. In the case of the latter, vast quantities of salty groundwater are pumped to the surface and then evaporated in huge lake-sized pools. French metals company Eramet is experimenting with an alternative based on “nanofiltration”, which filters the water through natural mineral granules and returns it to the aquifer. The company has invested €200m (£145m) in the project, including the construction of a working prototype in Salta, Argentina. With 90% yield rates, almost double the industry average, less virgin lithium ends up “in the dustbin”, says Philippe Gundermann, executive vice-president for strategy and innovation at Eramet. The company have also recently announced the start of construction on a new lithium plant in Argentina which they claim will meet 15% of European lithium needs. Design: going modular Electronics have an obsolescence problem that EVs share. The shift to electric is projected to create 12m tonnes of battery waste between now and by 2030. Step forward Aceleron. The UK startup hope to do for battery packs what the Dutch firm Fairphone has done for smartphones; namely, go modular. The key components in an electric battery – the cathode, anode, separator, cooling system, fuses, assembly hardware, and so on – all have different lifespans. Most batteries are glued or welded together, making it a headache to access a broken component. Aceleron’s alternative, uses compression to reduce the need to bond components, making it easier to disassemble a battery pack for repairs, servicing, or repurposing. “If you can make a battery serviceable, it’s possible to extend its life by 10 years,” says co-founder Carlton Cummins. The Midlands-based company has deals to use its battery system in trucks and all-terrain vehicles. Reuse: energy storage At some stage, battery performance wanes. Storage capacity may no longer allow for a 250km round-trip, but that doesn’t render them useless. Connected Energy, a Newcastle-based firm, takes old EV batteries and combines them into stationary power storage units. “We use the batteries almost exactly as they are coming out of the vehicle,” says the firm’s chief executive Matthew Lumsden. Each battery in the unit is connected to a computer system that monitors temperature levels and energy availability, as well as managing charging and discharging rates. Connected Energy has a dozen second-life power units operating on industrial sites in the UK and Europe, with plans to double this in the coming months. Lumsden expects his solution to ramp up from 2025 when first-time EV drivers begin to update their cars and more batteries become available. Unpublished research by Lancaster University indicates that for every megawatt-hour provided by Connected Energy’s storage system, the equivalent of about 1,100 tonnes of carbon dioxide is saved. Recycling: low-energy smelting When performance levels get to the point where re-use opportunities begin to peter out then recycling becomes the most viable option. Most EVs run on lithium-ion batteries. Not only are these highly “volatile”, as in they’re liable to catch fire, but, despite the name, they contain comparatively little lithium. Belgium-based Umicore, a one-time smelting firm turned “urban miner”, has developed a cutting-edge recycling system that melts down the core components into a metal alloy (including copper, nickel, and cobalt) and a concentrate (containing lithium and other rare elements). The battery’s own energy, plus the organic parts of its materials, mean that “relatively little energy” is added to reach the temperatures required for smelting, says company spokesperson, Marjolein Scheers. Heat also comes from burning harmful gases produced in the process. Umicore’s site in the Hoboken district of Antwerp has the capacity to recycle the equivalent of 35,000 EV batteries a year, making it one of the largest in the world. “Low impact battery recycling will be essential to lower the overall carbon footprint of rechargeable battery materials and will provide recycled content to drive the shift towards electric mobility,” says Scheers. Transparency: battery passport What if electric car buyers entering a showroom could find out not only how far a single charge could take them or the time it takes to go from 0 km/h to 60 km/h, but also the details of the car battery’s journey before reaching the forecourt? That’s the goal of an ambitious project by the Global Battery Alliance (GBA). The private-public initiative, coordinated by the World Economic Forum, plans to launch the battery “passport” at the end of next year. The digital tool promises to track the management of social and environmental risks in an EV battery’s life, from possible human rights abuses in mineral extraction to energy use in its production. Anna Pienaar, executive director at GBA, says the voluntary passport will allow regulators to “track the environmental and human rights impact of EV batteries and customers can make more informed choices”. The project’s steering committee includes carmakers Audi and Renault, as well as the mining firm Glencore.The world as we know it might have ended in September 1983. It didn’t, thanks to the gut instinct of Lt Col Stanislav Petrov, who was the base commander of the Serpukhov-15 missile alert centre outside Moscow. When alerts flashed on to their computer screens warning that five US Minuteman nuclear-armed missiles had been launched at the Soviet Union, protocols dictated that Petrov should have instantly notified the Kremlin, so that General Secretary Yuri Andropov could authorise a massive retaliatory strike. Instead Petrov went through 30 levels of additional checks on the data. They confirmed that a single base had indeed launched its missiles. And yet still he hesitated before picking up the hotline to the Kremlin: “For two or three minutes, I didn’t analyse anything. I was left with my intuition. I had two arguments. First of all, why would the US launch a rocket attack from a single base? They’d fire from everywhere. Secondly, the computer is an idiot. There’s no telling what it might think is a launch.” Petrov’s scepticism was right: the system had misinterpreted glare from the sun for missile launches. He had averted nuclear apocalypse. According to Martin Sixsmith, “at crucial moments of potential conflagration, it has more than once been unpredictable, emotion-driven human reflexes that have saved the world”. Sixsmith’s ambitious study of the cold war explores the psychology of the era of mutually assured destruction, when military leaders and statesmen prepared for a global nuclear war in which tens of millions of people would die. Beginning at the end of the second world war, he probes the personalities of world leaders and diplomats, as well as the impact of the propaganda war – from disinformation to “psyops” – on ordinary people: “Lies and fake news became as powerful as the truth.” When Khrushchev and Vice-President Richard Nixon argued the merits of their respective systems at the American Exhibition in Moscow in 1959 (“one of the most extraordinary interactions of the cold war”), the Soviet leader angrily exclaimed: “You know absolutely nothing about communism, except for fear!” The truth was that neither side truly understood the other. The war of nerves – “the continuous testing of the other side’s resolve by non-violent means” – had created a gulf of incomprehension. And in an age of nuclear brinkmanship, a misunderstanding could mean the difference between life and death: “The inherent flaw of brinkmanship is to assume that each side agrees where the brink is.” Sixsmith first visited the Soviet Union on a trip organised by his school in 1969. He recalls how he and his classmates stayed at a Moscow hotel: “To our great delight, we were woken in the night by phone calls from sultry-voiced ladies proposing things more interesting than a history lesson.” He studied Russian at university and visited the country regularly: “Russia became a part of my life.” After a failed approach from MI6, Sixsmith joined the BBC. From 1980 to 1997, he worked in both Washington and Moscow as a correspondent: “In the USA I found fear, mistrust and hatred of the Soviet enemy … In the USSR I saw the same things in reverse, but with an added dimension of envy and sneaking admiration.” Ostensibly the cold war was a clash of ideologies and political systems, but in reality the battleground was the human mind: “The aim was control not just of territory, resources and power, but of loyalties, belief and the nature of reality.” Psychology was as much a weapon in the cold war as nuclear bombs, deployed by both sides against their own and their opponent’s citizens. As Sixsmith shows, literature, art, music and cinema all became pawns in this psychological battle fought by the secret services. After watching the Soviet version of James Bond, The Shield and the Sword, the 16-year-old Vladimir Putin went straight from the cinema to volunteer for the KGB. At more than 500 pages, this is a weighty book, and one in which Sixsmith’s voice is sometimes lost beneath the research (for which he credits his son, Daniel). Nevertheless, this is a study that repays detailed reading. As well as many illuminating anecdotes from his time as a journalist in Russia, a country about which he clearly cares deeply, his book is filled with fascinating insights into the psychology of one of the most dangerous periods in world history. Importantly, Sixsmith reminds us that we continue to live with the emotional trauma of the cold war, and today’s decision-makers are no better at examining their psychological assumptions than yesterday’s leaders. Nuclear-armed missiles are still pointed at our cities and, chillingly, our lives still depend “on the quirks, paranoias and anxieties of the men and women who lead us”. • The War of Nerves: Inside the Cold War Mind is published by Profile (£25). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com.Pick of the week The Power of the Dog Writer-director Jane Campion’s first feature-length film since 2009 is a sensuous, psychosexual western, adapted from Thomas Savage’s novel, about the unspoken, sometimes unacknowledged emotions that can sway people’s actions. Benedict Cumberbatch and Jesse Plemons play ranching brothers in 1920s Montana – charismatic alpha male Phil and taciturn, decent George. After George brings home new bride Rose (Kirsten Dunst) and her teenage son Peter (Kodi Smit-McPhee), Phil’s initial jealousy ebbs as he mentors the boy in the ways of the cowboy. An undercurrent of homoerotic tension – underused in the genre – persists in a deep, dark tale. Wednesday 1 December, Netflix *** Parasite This 2020 Oscar best picture winner was a surprise international breakout hit for South Korea director Bong Joon-ho, coming after his inventive but unprofitable sci-fi dramas Snowpiercer and Okja. In a subversive story of power and privilege, the down-at-heel Kim clan (led by the great Song Kang-ho as the father) stumble on to the idea of usurping the domestic staff of the wealthy Park family after the son becomes the English tutor to the Parks’ daughter. Many a delicious twist and turn follows in a thrilling satire with more than a hint of Losey’s The Servant. Saturday 27 November, 10pm, Channel 4 *** Apocalypse Now: The Final Cut One can only hope that this 2019 restoration is Francis Ford Coppola’s final tinker with his wildly ambitious, seminal Vietnam war drama. The “Goldilocks edit” – longer than the 1979 original, shorter than the 2001 Redux take – retains the encounter with the French colonials from Redux that adds historical breadth to the tragic story of America’s anti-communist endeavours and removes an unnecessary second Playboy Bunnies sequence. But in whatever form, it’s an overwhelming visual and aural journey into humanity’s worst impulses. Saturday 27 November, 12.15am, BBC One *** The Columnist A superb Katja Herbers (from TV’s Westworld and Evil) heads Ivo van Aart’s blackly comic horror about the perils of the comments section. Her sweet-hearted Dutch journalist, Femke Boot, becomes obsessed by abusive, anonymous online trolls, particularly after discovering her neighbour is one of them. This inspires Femke to take up a particularly brutal form of cancelling, while she falls for a horror author who is, conversely, a genuinely nice guy. The film follows through on its premise, possibly beyond reason, but it’s a fun, viperish, bloody ride. Saturday 27 November, 1.50am, Film4 *** 14 Peaks: Nothing Is Impossible The former Gurkha and SBS commando Nimsdai Purja’s attempt to climb every mountain in the world above 8,000m in just seven months is the inspiring subject of this documentary. The challenge (which he dubs “Project Possible”) is also driven by a desire to place climbers from Nepal in their rightful place in the firmament of the sport. Nimsdai smilingly leads his all-Nepali team into the high-altitude “death zone”, where the most extreme physical and mental challenges await. Monday 29 November, Netflix *** Nowhere Special Largely neglected during the ins and outs of lockdown earlier this year, Uberto Pasolini’s tragic drama is an exceptional achievement. James Norton plays gentle Northern Irish window cleaner John, single father to Daniel Lamont’s watchful young boy Michael. He is also terminally ill with cancer, and so sets out to find suitable parents to adopt his son after he dies. The weight of sadness in his search could have been too oppressive, but Pasolini’s sensitive directorial touch (the window symbolism is never overdone) and Norton’s nuanced performance make this a real treasure. Wednesday 1 December, 10.30am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere *** Godzilla vs Kong The fourth film in the recently minted “MonsterVerse” pits the two big beasts against each other for more tsunami-inducing, skyscraper-dismantling action. Alexander Skarsgård, Rebecca Hall and Bryan Tyree Henry join the returning Millie Bobby Brown as concerned bystanders, while Adam Wingard orchestrates the B-movie action. The real baddies are, of course, the Earth-despoiling humans, and the dino and ape are just there to make the military-industrial complex see sense … mostly by smashing things up. Friday 3 December, 10.15am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere • The caption on the Parasite photo in this article was amended on 27 November 2021. It shows Park So-dam and Choi Woo-shik, not “Gisaeng Chung and So-Dam Park” as an earlier version said.There is a moment all Forza Horizon 5 players will experience when they first venture off road into rural Mexico. They will bust through a wall, or reach the summit of a steep hillside, and then, spread out before them as far as the eye can see, will be fields of the most glorious orange flowers. These are Mexican marigolds, or cempasúchil, which are closely associated with the country’s Día de los Muertos festival. It is believed their vibrant colour and heady scent help to guide the spirits of the dead back to their graves and altars. “When you look at the flowers you can see the individual petals,” laughs the game’s art director Don Arceta. “We love doing farmland – it’s a real opportunity to show the native agriculture that makes each landscape unique. This is the first Horizon game in a while that doesn’t have canola growing everywhere. That was really nice.” Developer Playground Games refers to Horizon as a driving game, not a racing game, and with reason. Like the other titles in the series, this game is filled with cultural, geographic and botanical discoveries, should you care to look for them. The decision to set this game in Mexico came just after the completion of Forza Horizon 4 in 2018, which was set in an idealised UK, from the Highlands to the Cotswolds. The team knew the map would be much larger this time, and this placed new pressures on the selection process. “We needed a country with incredible natural diversity,” says creative director Mike Brown. “We discovered while researching that Mexico is almost the whole world in one country – it has canyons, beautiful coastlines, about four different types of desert, ancient beautiful cities, volcanoes and mountains, ski resorts. On top of that, Mexico has a culture that’s known and loved all over the world. Wherever you go, people recognise Mexican music and artwork, it has a rich history – it was a really exciting proposition.” The English studio was determined to create an authentic representation. An art team captured photography and film footage and mapped the skies, working alongside locals who knew each area. “We had to go different times of the year to get the different seasons,” says Arceta. “When we first went it was the dry season, so we did the living desert with all the cacti, but it wasn’t as lush as we had seen in all our reference photography so we had to go back and recapture it.” TV monitors in the studio continuously ran research footage from a shared server, so that the dev team could look up and see a new town or forest glade. The team also worked with the Mexican culture ministry to ensure historic monuments were correctly replicated. They employed political cartoonist Lalo Alcaraz as a cultural consultant and provided early code to the Latinx group at Xbox for their feedback. “We’re borrowing someone else’s culture, we’re showing their country to the world – and we went into that with as much humility as possible,” says Brown. “We asked questions every step of the way, and we sought people who could help us to tell stories in a way that feels authentic. There’s a thin line between celebrating a country and its culture, and appropriating or even misappropriating that culture. The goal was, when a Mexican player picks up the controller, we want them to feel proud, not like they’ve walked into a cheesy Mexican restaurant in London.” Playground also wanted to move away from US TV and movie representations of Mexico – mostly based on the northern tip of the country – as somewhere gritty, crime-ridden and dangerous – the Mexico of Breaking Bad and Sicario. Alcaraz, who previously worked with Pixar on the animated movie Coco, is also bored with the way US films colour-code Mexican scenes with a sickly yellow tinge – a convention so familiar that it’s become a meme. “We can watch Narcos if we want violence and stereotypes. When I go to the cinema and watch a movie that’s Latinx-themed and see something inauthentic or weird, I just clock out,” he says. “In the US, depictions of Mexico are not tailored to us, so it’s nice to work on a project which has us in mind. People who know Mexico feel like they’re driving around Mexico.” Alcaraz contributed to the scripting and narrative, helping the team to keep up with trends in local vernacular. “I added Spanish and spanglish phrases – I was bugging my nephew, who lives in Western Mexico, on Facebook, asking: ‘Dude, do you know another word for driver?’ Because I’d used the three I could think of. With Mexican Spanish, every other word feels like it’s slang, it’s hard to keep up.” The game tells stories about the local car culture in a few of its quests. In one sequence, you have to track down an old Volkswagen Beetle owned by a relative – a reference to the car’s iconic status in the country. “It was the hero car for 40 years and we wanted to reflect that in the game,” says Brown. “They were still making the original Beetle until 2003. We had this idea of having a Horizon story based on the versatility of the car, the different things you could do with it. I told Lalo and he pulls out this photo of him standing next to a cherry-red Beetle, his first car. Now there are bits of his own life story woven into that narrative.” One vital aspect of capturing an authentic Mexico was the lighting. “The skies you get over there are amazing,” says technical art director Gareth Harwood. “I think because there’s so much more humidity: you get a lot more of that red-orangey sky in the mornings and evenings.” But there were challenges, too. “The sun arc is totally different,” he says. “If you think about when you’re driving in the evening in the UK and you get those nice long shadows, there’s less of that in Mexico because the sun is so high. It can be very hard to light a game with a high sun because it’s very harsh.” Shadows became doubly important as a way of adding subtleties, so for the Xbox Series S/X and PC versions, the team employed a new system to simulate a realistic penumbra effect, so you get diffused rather than sharp black shadows when the source of the shade is further away. The visual quality of the landscapes is a key component of the Horizon experience, particularly for one demographic of the game’s audience. “There are people who never, ever race,” says Brown. “It’s a surprisingly large group – they will play for hundreds of hours, taking photos of their cars, trying out new cars, adding upgrades, exploring the world at different times, through different seasons – they don’t get bored or drop off, they just do what they want. “That is something that has really informed our design on this one. There are more things to discover, there are challenges that encourage you to find things … each week there’ll be discovery challenges or extra things we’ve added to the world for players who just like to cruise around and explore. The world changes so much there’s always something new to see. I think the digital holiday that Horizon provides is something that people respond to.” It’s lucky that Playground started development on the game in 2018. It meant the 150-strong team in Leamington Spa had a year to do its research, visit Mexico, tweak ideas and design concepts before the world changed. In the opening weeks of 2020, it became apparent that Covid was coming to the UK. “As the story started to break, I think most people were in a bit of denial,” recalls Brown. “Fortunately for us, some people on our team were not – and very, very quickly they began to prepare. They bought hundreds of laptops before it became impossible to buy laptops. They bought hundreds of web cameras. In one room, we had the whole IT team just setting up laptops, so that when lockdown started they handed everyone a home working set-up that was fully kitted out. The next day they could be at home on a laptop, remote desking to their office PC and able to do their jobs. “It was a rapid switch and there were changes to our workflows – some people’s jobs were harder to do. The larger Xbox group was really helpful … we were able to upload our dev build to Microsoft’s Insider Hub app and play it on retail Xboxes so people didn’t have to take the expensive dev kits home. That was an interesting and quite useful set up for the designers – sitting in your living room playing the game is very different from being at your desk with your PC and a dev kit. There’s a different feel to the game when you play it that way.” But it was tough going. “During development, networking is one of those areas that will go wrong a lot and it’s really useful to be able to see multiple screens,” says game designer Anna Poliakova. “You can tell if one player is seeing something completely different from the other three. At home, you’re having to describe it to each other, like: ‘What can you see? Hold on, what colour is my car on your screen?!’” Forza Horizon 5 had the biggest launch week in Xbox history earlier this month, with 10 million players. International travel is opening up again, but it’s probable that a lot of people are playing because they want to experience that feeling of a new country and new landscapes. Alcaraz likes to imagine that people will see Mexico differently as a result of playing Horizon. “Mexico has its challenges, but anything that’s positive will have a good effect,” he says. “Coco helped expand Mexican and Day of the Dead culture, recognising its beauty. Horizon 5 will do that for gamers. Mexico is ridiculously beautiful - and Mexicans are warm, family-oriented, helpful, which is reflected in the characters. I think it can only move the dial toward the positive.”In the run-up to Christmas in 1977, viewers of Granada TV were offered a glimpse inside a little-understood world. The documentary maker Tony Palmer had ventured inside the Wigan Casino, the centre of the northern soul scene, to shoot a 30-minute film called This England. Palmer didn’t know anything about the club, the scene or the music when he arrived in Wigan – but over the course of a couple of nights he captured famous footage of a northern soul all-nighter in full swing. There’s the crush at the front door as a lone doorman tries in vain to instil some sense of order; the gravity-defying spins and splits that lit up the dancefloor; the interviews with the fans who articulate their obsession with obscure soul records in thick Lancastrian accents. It’s all punctuated by thousand-yard stares from amphetamine-fuelled punters – you can almost smell the Brut aftershave and sweat. It might be strange to think now but in the mid-70s there was a moral panic about northern soul – the music scene where young people gathered at all-night parties, mostly in the north of England, to listen to African American soul records that had largely flopped on release a decade earlier. Much of the press coverage focused on drug consumption at all-nighters; the Observer, a month after This England was broadcast, went to Wigan Casino and reported that “police observations” found that a strangely precise 98% of dancers were on drugs. But Palmer’s film was something different. He wasn’t interested in finding a dark underbelly. Instead, he wanted to answer the central question: if Wigan Casino was an escape, what was it an escape from? And, as he painted the social backdrop for the phenomenon, he ended up highlighting something else about the scene. Throughout the documentary, Palmer’s camera lingers on the faces of several black teenagers. There’s Gideon Harding from Bolton in a bright yellow vest, spinning in slow motion as he moves balletically, almost frozen in time. A lad with an impeccable afro waits patiently at the bar. Two mixed-race girls smile and wave at the camera before they jump on to a coach. They are mostly “blink and you’ll miss them” moments, but they offer an alternative to the perceived wisdom that northern soul was an exclusively white movement. Rhonda Finlayson was one of the dozens of black teenagers who went to the Casino, and other venues, including the Torch in Stoke-on-Trent and the Catacombs in Wolverhampton. Born in Jamaica, she moved to Manchester with her family as a three-year-old and started going to all-nighters after attending the Twisted Wheel as a teenager. Finlayson was like several northern soul fans, a young immigrant to the UK who was searching for somewhere she belonged, and she found it at the all-nighters. “It was like being in another world,” she says of the dancefloor at Wigan Casino. Escapism and excitement drew Finlayson into the scene. She would regularly hitchhike to nights around the north, meeting up with friends from other cities and using dance moves she had borrowed from her older brother. There was something about the music’s energy and often raw, yet defiant, lyrics that worked as a balm for her as she tried to find her place in Britain. “I’ve got a song that I loved so much, Smokey Robinson and the Miracles – I Gotta Dance to Keep from Crying,” she says. “At that time I was very mixed up as a kid, and dancing was massive for me – it kept me sane.” Finlayson became well known on the northern soul scene after coming second at a dance contest at the Torch, and other black dancers were hugely influential on the scene. Steve Caesar, another recent arrival to Britain from the Caribbean, would go on to win the inaugural dance contest at Wigan Casino and write himself into northern soul lore. Born in Saint Kitts, Caesar had joined his family in Chapeltown, Leeds, as a 13-year-old and thrown himself into British youth culture, first as an ardent Leeds United fan, and then through northern soul. He remembers hearing black American music emanating from the radios of his neighbours in Saint Kitts on a Sunday as a child, and that interest in African American music would last a lifetime. “There was a camaraderie about the whole thing – people really believed in ‘keep the faith’,” says Caesar, referring to the scene’s slogan. “I remember going to Leeds Central [soul club] and seeing white kids wearing one black glove, which came from the Mexico 68 Olympics black power protest.” Ian Obeng arrived in the UK from Ghana as a child, after his family had been advised to leave the country in the wake of independence because of their ties to the British colonial administration. Like Caesar, Obeng was a football fan, following Manchester United. He had been drawn into the scene after seeing northern soul dancing at his local youth club in Sale. “It’d be a long weekend,” says Obeng. “You’d do the Friday ‘oldies’ at Wigan, get back home, shower and then off to an away game with United. Watch the game, come back, shower and get ready for the Saturday all-nighter and if there was a Ritz Sunday all-dayer in Manchester, you’d do that as well.” Obeng ran the Night Owl Soul Club in Stockport for 25 years.; He along with the record collector Tim Ashibende, who supplied many of the scene’s DJs, was part of the underground network that powered northern soul. Confrontations with racists on the way to events were common. Dean Anderson, a DJ from Newark, was at a service station in the 70s when a group of a dozen people confronted him, a mixed-race friend and their white associates. They told them they were going to kill them, after shouting Sieg heil in unison and telling the group they shouldn’t be seen together. “It was the worst moment of my life,” Anderson told the Guardian in 1997. “I went to the all-nighter and I was just numb.” Despite the dangers, Finlayson, Caesar and others would travel by themselves to all-nighters, even if that meant facing potential violence. Another veteran of the scene, Idell Kamili, says that her decision to attend northern soul nights turned heads in the close-knit black community of Northampton. “By the time I’d got into northern soul, the rasta scene was in full swing. I did go to a few nights but I just found it too constrictive, I wanted a bit more freedom, and I’d always preferred soul anyway,” she says. “You can imagine the names I got called, because it was a predominately white scene, but for me it was about the music. [The first time] I walked through the door, they were playing Do I Love You by Frank Wilson. Everybody was already clapping. Then I went up on to the balcony and that’s when they played Cecil Washington, I Don’t Like to Lose and it was like time just stopped. Even now when I hear it, the tingles go up and down my spine.” It is true that many black music fans were drawn to the most cutting-edge music of the era, as roots reggae, funk, soul and disco mutated and morphed into myriad genres and scenes during the 70s. White and black crowds tended not to mix. The subject of whether or not racist incidents happened at all-nighters such as Wigan Casino is a divisive issue. Racism outside a venue is one thing, but hostility in the inner sanctum (where black music was the reason for congregating) is impossible for some people to accept. Northern soul message boards are full of people dismissing the idea, but it did happen occasionally. One black northern soul fan, who asked to remain anonymous, said they suffered racist abuse while at an event with a white partner. “We discovered that there are people in the all-nighters with racist attitudes – remember that people had come from different places across the country,” they said. “It was a scene that drew its hardcore from working-class communities so there must have been incipient racism in the mix, but it was easily overwhelmed by the obsession with undiscovered genius,” adds Stuart Cosgrove, whose memoir Young Soul Rebels includes mentions of Caesar. (It is important to note that the vast majority of the black soul fans I spoke to said they never had any problems at all-nighters.) Cosgrove says what made northern soul different from other predominantly white and working-class youth movements was the obsessive interest in African American music and wider black culture. “I think that meant that young black Britons were given respect on the scene – Steve [Caesar] and Dean [Anderson] are legends and their blackness was respected,” he says. When the Wigan Casino shut in 1981, there was a final dance contest. Caesar had gone home with the first prize for the inaugural event and, fittingly, another black dancer, Vernon Pryce from Bradford, won the last competition. His athletic moves were captured by the Italian photographer Francesco Mellina, who, along with Palmer, produced images that have defined the scene. For Caesar, northern soul became a lifelong obsession. “It just spoke to me,” he says. “Once you had heard something like JJ Barnes: Please Let Me in, and that Detroit sound, there was no going back.”While Bob Higgins is almost two and a half years into a 24-year sentence for abusing schoolboy players, the men he preyed upon are left to untangle the roots he put down in their personal lives. A running theme among those interviewed is that he set himself up as a “father figure”, pulling the wool over parents’ eyes but also inveigling himself into the affections of children whose backgrounds were less stable. In many cases, psychological control was only the start. One section of the Barnardo’s report into the horrific sexual abuse Higgins committed at Southampton explains how he would punish some of the boys – by failing to select them, humiliating them or physically assaulting them – to press home the message that he owned their claim to a football career, paving the way to further abuse. “My relationship with Bob was that I could never do well enough,” one is quoted as saying. “Sometimes I was physically sick from training. He created the opportunity to abuse me, mentally first, physically next, then sexually over a three-and-a-half-year period.” Another states: “Basically, if I let him abuse me, he’d be happy with me.” Among a distressing series of testimonies about the mental impact of Higgins’ crimes, one element stands out in particular. The former youth coach emotionally manipulated some of the 26 men interviewed to such a damaging extent that, years later, they have deeply conflicted responses to his memory. Higgins used his privileged position, together with a track record of developing football talent that convinced players and parents he held the keys to potential stardom, to exert a mental hold that in some cases is yet to be relinquished. “I still have feelings towards Bob,” reads one statement. “I don’t know if I still love him – I don’t know if I’d hug him or hit him.” The disgraced coach would weave his way into the family lives of the affected players, sometimes seeking to manufacture rifts between youngsters and their parents. “I hate to say it, but I owe a lot to him,” another says. “He did what a father would do. I still feel sad that he’s in a cell, but he deserves it.” The turmoil is outlined in another testimony that explains the way Higgins, who would shower boys with gifts such as boots, kit and extra money on top of their expenses, bred dependency in those under his care. “The way he groomed people was the most strange thing,” it says. “He gave you things, he rewarded you. Even though he abused you, you were in awe of him. I was confused about a lot of things for many reasons.” A further section of the text reads: “I’ll never take it away from him, he made you feel very, very special.” Higgins left young people who should have been free to trust him with a horrifying burden that, in many cases, continues to affect them. The Barnardo’s report into his crimes, which concludes that Southampton institutionally failed to protect them and that people in other football authorities neglected to act, goes into detail about the tactics sexual abusers use to manipulate adolescents. Higgins’ attentions would, it says, have been “acutely and intensely affecting at the time” given the powerful feelings experienced as the brain develops. It explains that some of the boys “developed a sense of loyalty towards Higgins and developed a complex and compelling bond with him, which even as adults, they found hard to understand”. Although Higgins is not believed to have told his victims to keep quiet about his actions, which took place between 1971 and 1996, it is clear his status as a “star maker” held them in his thrall, as did the fear in some cases that they might be prevented from continuing in football if anyone else knew. His unspoken code of omertà has had a devastating wider impact on families. “I am consumed, night and day, by feelings of guilt and shame, sadness and revulsion,” reads a heartbreaking statement from a parent of one of the boys, who was unaware of the abuse at the time. “I feel a failure as a [parent] and I will forever be in a mental prison [for failing to protect my son].” Other long-term consequences of Higgins’ actions are equally difficult to digest. As well as those who have sought recourse to alcohol or been diagnosed with PTSD and depression, some of the men describe persistent difficulties in forming relationships, dealing with their sexuality or coping with flashbacks. Higgins stole dozens of childhoods and took adult lives with them, too. While Higgins worked with a number of boys who would become high-profile footballers, others relinquished the sport for good. “It turned me off being a professional football,” says one player quoted in the report. “I ended up quitting because of the way he affected me,” says another. “It brought back bad memories.” For some, that has continued for life. “I couldn’t have anything to do with football, couldn’t watch it, couldn’t even kick a ball in the garden with my young son,” a third explains. The publication of the Barnardo’s report is not guaranteed to bring closure, which is an intensely personal process that may mean different things for every individual involved, but it has offered a voice to those men who felt able to speak. It has also prompted questions that may never be satisfactorily answered. “Players stopped playing, but no one asked why,” reads one quote attributed to Southampton’s current head of safeguarding and governance. If anyone had, some of the innocent boys whose lives Higgins ruined might have been spared an incalculable number of years attempting to wrestle with his appalling legacy.In the mid-1980s, I was living in LA – working in the rock concert industry, fresh out of college. I’d find short-term jobs as a roadie, or work corporate sponsorship gigs, before being fired pretty quickly. It was around this time that airlines were launching their loyalty schemes, desperate to secure regular custom. Before, nobody cared which airline they travelled with – it was all about getting the cheapest fare. Frequent flyer programmes radically changed things. By introducing mileage schemes that rewarded travellers with flights and hotels, airlines hoped to build loyalty. I was paying all this little attention back then. But by the late 80s, work had dried up. One day I was standing in the unemployment line when I noticed an advert in USA Today: fly with United around Thanksgiving, it said, and see your reward miles tripled. Later that week, I read a note on a noticeboard in my apartment building: a local man was selling cheap plane tickets to the east coast for the holidays. That’s when I had my brainwave. In those days, rules were lax and IDs weren’t checked at airports before domestic flights, so I could have multiple people flying under my name. If I could find cheap fares, and people willing to help me, I could play the system. Of course I’d have to spend money to earn miles, but I could make it worth my while if I did so cleverly. I soon got to work, learning how each airline scheme worked. The goal wasn’t to spend spend spend, but to use my money wisely. That November, I had 20 people fly under my name. And yes, I spent six or seven thousand dollars, but in one weekend I clocked up 1m points: that was worth 14 business class tickets to anywhere I wanted. At that stage, I couldn’t make use of my points. I could fly somewhere, but didn’t have the cash to pay for the rest of a trip. When I realised how many miles I could accrue by playing the system, though, I knew I could set myself up financially for the future. Often I wouldn’t think up a scheme, but take other people’s tricks and grow them. Take the Thai baht run. In 2001, a guy came up with this novel idea. He realised you could fly between two Thai cities for $8 return. If you flew back and forth 100 times, you would be in the top tier of United’s programme. On Air Canada, I worked out the rewards for that same trip would be even greater. So I hired 20 local people to fly back and forth 100 times for me, also under my name. They were a mix of out-of-season rice farmers and masseuses. I set up their accounts and linked them to mine, managed their bookings, and of course paid them. At one stage, the authorities presumed I was running some sort of drug smuggling ring – until I showed them my spreadsheets brimming with complex mileage calculations. I’ve always been totally open with everyone about my plots, often booking thousands of tickets in one transaction. I’ve had run-ins with industry lawyers who have tried to intimidate me, to no avail. Over the course of 20 years, I racked up in excess of 40m miles. My wife was also, at times, less than pleased with me. For years I sat up late thinking up ideas, constantly scribbling down calculations. Occasionally, I’d get her involved. One night – pre-online reservations – we had to book 1,600 tickets over the phone, with a limit of three tickets per call. I’m sure it’s not what she bargained for when she married me. Back in the 90s, those miles would have easily earned me 500 international business class flights. Over time, however, airlines have taken back the advantage. Points have been devalued; rewards are no longer fixed at a certain price. You simply couldn’t make the calculations now. During my peak mileage earning period, climate change was not a front-burner issue, so it had no impact on my thinking. With what we know now, I’m not sure I’d want to try out some of the mass-buying schemes. Today, though, my wife and I can enjoy the fruits of our labour: I’ve still got miles in the mid seven figures. This year, we’ve been scuba diving in Egypt and to French Polynesia. My greatest fear is the miles outlasting me: why should my kids get to have my hard-earned fun? • As told to Michael Segalov Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comA string of missed opportunities allowed the predatory paedophile Bob Higgins to sexually abuse scores of schoolboy footballers while he worked as a coach at Southampton, a damning report by the children’s charity Barnardo’s has concluded. Higgins, regarded as a “god-like” star-maker by youngsters who dreamed of a career in football, was able to operate “seemingly undetected” at Southampton from the mid-1970s until the late 1980s and continued to work elsewhere in the sport until 2016. The report concluded: “It is an unavoidable fact that adults in Southampton Football Club during the time Higgins worked for them or on their behalf did not consider the welfare and wellbeing of the boys involved with the club as their prime consideration. “The impact of and damage caused by Higgins’ abuse of children in his care during the time he was employed by Southampton Football Club is incalculable. The damage to their physical and mental health as they grew up, their relationships, their families and even their ability to confidently parent has been devastating. “It is these individuals who, in our view have paid the price for what seems to be the inertia of board members who failed to ensure that young boys, in contact with Higgins, were as well protected as they should have been. “We do not believe there was any deliberation or malign intent by these individuals, it is our view they simply did not consider the wellbeing of boys as their responsibility and once Higgins had left their employ saw no reason to alert anyone about the allegations that had been made against him.” Higgins was jailed in 2019 for 24 years for sexually abusing 24 boys over a 25-year period from 1971 but the report said that more than 100 individuals had come forward to testify to Higgins’ abuse. The report’s authors spoke to 26 men who were abused or knew Higgins. They spoke of the hold he had over them. “He was like a god-like figure, untouchable,” said one. “Boys were vying for his attention.” A second said: “Bob Higgins was like a god sitting on a throne with boys draped around him.” “He could ruin our careers with a click of the fingers, and we would do anything at that age,” another said. They told how he groomed them with gifts and pledges. “He promised me he would be my father figure. He used to give me gifts, attention,” explained one. “I loved him. I wanted his approval. I wrote letters; I put love at the end,” testified another. The men described how Higgins could at first be tentative in his moves to see how boys responded: “accidental” touching, sexual banter, commenting on their bodies and genitals. “He’d pat you and say well done but was touching my testicles,” said one. Another added: “He’d tap you on the bum. You felt like it’s not right. He’d get you doing stretching exercises and would touch you up. None of the boys would talk about it.” Higgins also “groomed” parents, encouraging them to attend training sessions where soap water massages would openly take place, which the report said was “essentially a technique he used to allow him to abuse boys”. The former players gave a glimpse into the torment they had suffered since. One said he had turned to alcohol, another has been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder and depression. A third told of a recurring nightmare: “A figure pins me to the bed and … I cannot escape.” The report said it had found no evidence that Higgins was part of an organised paedophile ring but highlighted he knew coaches such as the serial abuser Barry Bennell and Kit Carson, the former Peterborough United, Norwich City and Cambridge United coach, who in January 2019 died in a car crash on the day his trial for sexual offences against 11 boys was due to start. “In our view, it is highly probable that these individuals would have had some awareness of each other’s proclivities,” the report said. The report said Higgins began to work for Southampton in 1975 – by which time concerns had been raised about him. He resigned in 1979 after a complaint but was made full-time youth development officer with the club in 1980. Throughout the 1980s there were rumours about him and he was nicknamed “Dodgy Bob”, the report says. In 1989, a staff member overheard boys on a minibus making allegations about Higgins’ sexual behaviour. This was raised with the board. The report says it was “particularly significant” that the board took four months before noting that this should be reported to police – and then did not check that any report had in fact been made. “This failure to report or act was a dramatic let-down for boys entrusted to the care of Higgins,” the report said. The report said that like many other football clubs, Southampton was, in the 1970s and 1980s, run by a board of local businessmen, solicitors, sponsors and landed gentry. None of them are still on the board. Higgins left Southampton in 1989. Police spoke with a number of boys who told them about being sexually abused by Higgins. Higgins was first brought to trial in early 1990 to face charges of indecent assault against six boys but was acquitted at the direction of the presiding judge in January 1992. Five of the boys who told police of the abuse they had suffered were never asked to give evidence at the trial. The report said Higgins was left at liberty to continue his abuse. The report also highlighted how boys often stayed with Higgins and his wife, Shirley, at their home in Southampton, where many were abused. It said: “There was no managerial oversight to ensure that accommodation provided to boys needing overnight stays was appropriate. Board members were neglectful not to have addressed the issue of boys’ accommodation arrangements when they were staying away from home.” Southampton issued a deep apology. In a statement the club said: “Bob Higgins held the dreams of so many young boys in his hands. He completely betrayed the trust of those boys and their families. We now know that Higgins had unfettered power at Southampton Football Club and that those in senior positions did nothing to make sure that there were suitable controls in place to prevent abuse from occurring. “No one in a position of power did anything to properly find out what was going on, to take action to make sure that the abuse was stopped and properly reported once it had been discovered or to offer support those who were targeted by Higgins. “Those holding power at the club should have known what was going on at a much earlier stage. We have seen evidence that even when senior figures did find out about the allegations of abuse at the time, they seemed to do nothing to act and still failed to properly report the abuse. These failings, shockingly, left Bob Higgins free to work in football until his arrest in 2016.” The club went on: “It is very clear that the club completely failed to protect so many young people from suffering abuse over a long period of time. It is clear that many people involved in senior positions at the club should have done so much more to support the children who had been abused and to prevent Higgins from being able to continue to offend, either at Southampton or anywhere else. There were simply so many missed opportunities to end the disgraceful, horrific abuse carried out.” The club said that others were to blame too. “A whole string of people at clubs, the Football Association, the English Football League and the police had the chance to properly investigate or report the rumoured behaviour of Higgins. Instead, they chose not to act and not to believe those who spoke up which meant that Higgins did not finally face justice until 2019.” Hampshire police defended their conduct, pointing out Higgins had been charged in the 1990s and saying an allegation of abuse from previous decades brought to them in 2013 had been thoroughly investigated but that on “the basis of all available evidence at that time no charges were able to be brought”. The FA said Clive Sheldon QC would review the report to decide whether an addendum is required to his 2018 report into sexual abuse in football. The EFL said it was “very sorry for the pain and distress that any and all survivors of abuse have suffered” and that it remained “committed to ensure football is a safe and welcoming environment so that history can never repeat itself”.The hack Run out of nail polish remover? Tired of getting brittle nails from traditional remover? Kitchen staples are a gentle alternative, say DIY beauty fans. The promise Lemon juice or cider vinegar can replace remover in your beauty repertoire. The test In the 1920s, when nail polish took off, oil-based removers were enough to get it off. But now that polish is so advanced, acetone (a strong industrial solvent) and ethyl acetate (used in varnishes and dry cleaning) are commonly used. I can see the appeal of an alternative: acetone drys the skin. Each recipe I find online begins with soaking my hands in warm water for 10 minutes to soften the polish. First up is plain old fresh lemon, which I juice into a small bowl. I soak a cotton pad in it and wrap it around my nail for five minutes; unsurprisingly, the polish remains. Next, I add an equal amount of apple cider vinegar to the remaining juice and do the cotton pad thing again, for 10 minutes this time. I’m left with vinegary fingers and wasted time. The verdict Traditional remover is drying, but it is also fast, and soaking nails in a lemon/vinegar acid bath even for 10 minutes could be more damaging. I’ll be sticking with the gentle Manucurist Green Polish Remover, £16, simply because it works.My earliest reading memory At six I became fascinated with the Lonely Doll books by Dare Wright that I found in the public library of my small town, Northfield, Minnesota. They used photographs, not drawings, as illustrations; they gave me an uncanny feeling of secrets lurking behind the words and images. It is a feeling I have never forgotten. My favourite book growing up I loved Ann Petry’s biography, Harriet Tubman: Conductor on the Underground Railroad. I found it in my school library in 1965, 10 years after it was first published. I was 10 years old and intensely aware of the civil rights movement, despite the fact that I lived in an all-white town and had seen black people only on forays to Minneapolis every Christmas. I was passionately attached to the story of this extraordinary, heroic woman. The book that changed me as a teenager When I was 14 or 15 I read Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex. Despite my lack of philosophical sophistication, I responded viscerally to the book. Rereading it later, I wonder exactly what I understood at the time. It is not an easy book. I suspect that, despite my struggles with the text, I gleaned its essential message – that women were treated as outsiders to history as the eternal feminine, had always been other to man, and that these injustices ran deep. I became a feminist. The writer who changed my mind I was in my early 30s when I first read the French philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty, whose book Phenomenology of Perception reordered my thinking about the mind/body problem. His work changed my “mind” by bringing it into my body. He skewers the mind-body substance dualism in the philosophy of Descartes and his heirs. The philosopher’s interest in the science of the moment and its flawed assumptions, as well as his use of neurological case studies to illustrate his thought, have remained highly influential for my own thinking. The book that made me want to be a writer David Copperfield by Charles Dickens. I was 13. It was the summer of 1968, and I was in Reykjavik, Iceland, where my father was studying the Icelandic sagas. Political upheaval was dimly present in my consciousness, but I lived on and in novels. The sun never set, and my disturbed circadian rhythms kept me awake. I read and read, one novel after another, but it was that book that set my nerves on fire. One night, moved to tears by a particular passage, which I no longer remember, I walked to the window and made a vow – if this is what books could do, then this is what I wanted to do. I began writing. Years later, I wrote my doctoral dissertation on Dickens. Although I sometimes tired of me and my insights while working on the thesis, I never lost a feeling of awe for the inimitable CD. The book or author I came back to I didn’t “get” Gertrude Stein as a teenager. I had to grow into an adult to feel the music, humour and rigour of her work. The book I reread I have read Emily Brontë’s Wuthering Heights five times now. I read it first at 13 during the same Icelandic summer, and it scared me witless. The older I get, the more profound and radical the book has become. I have come to view it as an insurrectionist text that razes our assumptions about borders between this and that, I and you, life and death and grinds them into dust. The book I could never read again I am ashamed about Gone With the Wind. I read it that same fateful Icelandic summer. I checked it out of Reykjavik public library, didn’t understand that the author was writing about the Ku Klux Klan, and I had to ask my mother what the word “rape” meant. This horrible, cheesy book advanced the disgusting “lost cause” narrative still dear to the American south and parts of the north. The book I discovered later in life I did not read Simone Weil’s Gravity and Grace until I was well into my 40s. I now think this was exactly the right moment for me because I was able to place the text in a broader context. At the same time, the lightning precision of Weil’s extraordinary mind would no doubt have bowled me over as a young person too. The book I am currently reading A wonderful recently published book, In Defence of the Human Being by Thomas Fuchs. Fuchs is a professor of philosophy and psychiatry at Heidelberg University and is a lucid, brilliant defender of a new form of humanism. My comfort read Fairy and folk tales – any kind from any country. • Mothers, Fathers, and Others: New Essays by Siri Hustvedt is published by Sceptre. She discusses the collection at Hay festival Winter Weekend online: hayfestival.org.NHS politics tends to focus on easily measured inputs: how many beds have been cut as a result of austerity, how many nurses’ and doctors’ posts are empty, the lack of ambulances, MRI scanners and hospital repairs. But the ultimate output measure is how many people die needlessly as a result of these things. An alarming number of excess deaths among people who were not suffering from Covid-19, analysed this week by the Financial Times, suggests the sheer magnitude of the current NHS crisis. The analysis finds that 2,047 more people died this year in the week ending 12 November than during the same period between 2015 and 2019, but only 1,197 of those people had Covid-19 on their death certificates. That’s just one week. This “raises the possibility that since the summer more people have been losing their lives as a result of the strains on the NHS or lack of early diagnosis of serious illness”. Cardiovascular disease and strokes are the most frequent causes of extra deaths, where every minute counts. Put that together with last week’s Royal College of Emergency Medicine’s report. Desperate in tone, this showed how fast the NHS crisis is accelerating: the number of people waiting more than 12 hours in A&amp;E rose by 40% just between September and October this year. Overcrowding and long waiting times cause serious harm; the report counted 4,519 excess deaths in England due to these waits in the last year. The Association of Ambulance Chief Executives recently published its own harrowing analysis of the actual harm done by delays. District nurses (whose number was cut by half in eight years), would not be surprised by a 30% rise in those dying at home, with nearly 6 million people waiting for hospital treatment. The overwhelming reason for this crisis is a lack of staff. Doctor and nurse training places were the first casualty of George Osborne’s 2010 budget. A workforce plan has been promised, but this week Jeremy Hunt’s amendment, which would require an independent assessment of future workforce needs, failed in the Commons. Yes, he was health secretary for six years of NHS austerity, but these days he packs a punch on staff shortages with his weekly blog on patient safety. He says a fraction of the £6bn a year squandered on locums would pay for enough training places to meet the shortfall. While ministers fire-fight today’s crises, planning for the future “is never top of the list”, he says. He should know. Take nurses, the deepest black hole in NHS staffing. (Yes, it was Hunt who scrapped nursing bursaries.) The government boasts that recent nursing figures show that “more than ever” have joined the register: another 24,000 in the past six months. Unfortunately, more nurses than ever have left the profession, too: at 14,000, the highest ever attrition rate. Almost all the new nurses are not trained in the UK; some 7,500 were hired after a huge campaign in India and the Philippines. Many may only be stopping off in the UK to qualify for higher pay in the US. Naturally, none chose to come here from post-Brexit Europe. The pandemic encouraged more UK student applications to become nurses, but the drop-out rate is at its highest, too, with 30%-50% leaving when they discover the working conditions, says Prof Alison Leary from South Bank University in London. “Too many students are being treated as just another pair of hands.” She says experienced nurses are leaving, replaced with “rookies” daunted by finding themselves alone with overwhelming responsibilities in understaffed wards. Everyone is forced to act up beyond their training, with cheaper health care assistants and nursing associates doing registered nurses’ work. An amendment to protect the word “nurse” to mean trained nurses was also voted down this week. The register is deceptive: half of registered nurses don’t work in the NHS, says Leary, but take easier jobs with agencies, charities, in the medical industry or teaching, leaving almost 40,000 NHS vacancies. But that “vacancy” number is a deception, too. “It represents posts that trusts can afford, not the number they actually need,” says Prof Anne Marie Rafferty, former president of the Royal College of Nursing. What’s needed to retain nurses, she says, is a strong professional career path upwards, recognising “both intellectual and emotional intelligence”. Health Education England, protesting at underfunded training, has just been swallowed into NHS England. The Royal College of Nursing – which has never gone on strike in England – sent out an indicative ballot on action in support of a 12.5% pay claim. Nurses have had a real-terms cut since 2011. With inflation currently heading for 5%, their 12.5% claim is modest. The real test is whether it will be enough to hire and retain future nurses. A strike is highly unlikely, but even a vote against working extra shifts would be crippling. So the health secretary, Sajid Javid, needs to pay up. Here’s the Treasury wickedness: any pay for NHS staff, as for all the public sector, causes more cuts – as it’s taken from existing budgets. On target for a promised 50,000 more nurses by the next election? Unlikely. Two things should alarm Tory MPs: the billowing cost of living and an NHS collapse caused by their decade of underfunding. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistThe chief medical adviser to the UK Health and Security Agency has warned that a newly identified Covid-19 variant in southern Africa is the “most worrying we’ve seen”, with transmission levels not recorded since the beginning of the pandemic. Dr Susan Hopkins said the R value, or effective reproduction number, of the B.1.1.529 variant in Gauteng in South Africa, where it was first found, was now 2. For an R of anything above 1, an epidemic will grow exponentially. She voiced her concerns as other countries, including Japan and Germany, joined England and Scotland in banning flights from six countries in the region, while Israel said it had identified its first case with the variant. Hopkins told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “What we’re seeing in South Africa is that they were at a very, very low point, with a very low amount of cases being detected a day, and in a shorter period than two weeks they have more than doubled their epidemiology picture. “They are saying that their transmission rates, the R value that they have in Gauteng around where this was first found, is now 2, which is really quite high and we’ve not seen levels of transmission like that since right back at the beginning of the pandemic, because of all of the mitigations and steps we’ve taken. So that would cause a major problem if you had that high transmission with this type of virus in a population where it may evade the immune responses that are already there.” She stressed that no cases had been identified in the UK yet and that one of the 30 mutations of the B.1.1.529 variant was very similar to one of the alpha mutations, meaning it could be detected easily with a large amount of existing PCR tests, but had not shown up yet. Hopkins said some of the mutations were likely to change the immune response, as had already been seen in South Africa, whose population, although not highly vaccinated, has high immunity from previous rounds of infection, but that only time would tell the extent. “We would like more details in laboratory studies and epidemiological studies. I know the South Africans have already started to give us that information, but it will take weeks rather than days to find the full information,” she said. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said the government was taking a “safety-first approach” to the new variant but it did not necessitate reintroducing enforcement of the use of face masks in public transport and shops. He told Sky News: “We want the economy to be able to flourish, we want people to be able to go about their business, see their friends and family. So we’re trying to operate as permissive an atmosphere as possible but, of course, we’re keeping a very close eye on this all the time. So far, in all the numbers, we haven’t seen any reason to do anything else.” South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, Botswana, Eswatini and Zimbabwe were placed on England’s travel red list on Thursday and flights are banned from Friday. South Africa’s foreign ministry said the decision to ban flights from South Africa “seems to have been rushed” The World Health Organization (WHO) appeared to concur. “At this point, implementing travel measures is being cautioned against,” the WHO spokesperson Christian Lindmeier told a UN briefing in Geneva on Friday. “The WHO recommends that countries continue to apply a risk-based and scientific approach when implementing travel measures.” Israel, which like England and Scotland announced a ban on Thursday, said it had identified the new variant in a traveller returning from Malawi. The prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Friday: “We are close to an emergency situation … we must act strongly and quickly.” France suspended all flights from southern Africa for 48 hours. Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, tweeted on Friday that it would also propose stopping travel from the southern Africa region.Flights from countries in the southern Africa region will be banned on Friday due to a new variant which was first spotted in Botswana and identified on Tuesday. Six countries which will be added to England’s red travel list at midday on Friday include South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, Botswana, Eswatini and Zimbabwe. We would like to hear from those who are travelling from the countries affected, or who have plans to travel to them. We are also interested in hearing from those who have arrived in the UK from any of the affected countries and have been contacted by test and trace. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A mother who ignored court orders to return her 17-month-old child to authorities claims concerns about Covid-19 were partially responsible for her actions. The Australian federal police and federal circuit and family court of Australia made a rare public appeal on Friday to find the boy, Hoang Vinh Le. The police and court said in a statement that Vinh was removed from the court-ordered care of his maternal grandmother in April by his parents Hoang Thanh Le and Lyn Kim Do. His parents told authorities that in mid-May they gave Vinh to a person they identified as ‘Kathy Nguyen’, who they met at a Sydney coffee shop, and had paid her $200 to care for the child. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The parents were arrested on 20 May, but Vinh was not located and has not been seen since. The parents have not provided details about who is caring for Vinh and where he is, and authorities have been unable to confirm whether ‘Kathy Nguyen’ exists. In an affidavit to the court filed in August – part of which was made public under a court order issued in a bid to assist in finding Vinh – Do said Vinh was in the care of a friend who was also his godmother. “I’m stuck in a predicament where I could not provide the much-needed care for my child and my worries for his welfare and safety grows with each passing day,” Do said in the affidavit. “He’s currently at a delicate age of one where he will need a lot of attention, love and care from his parents, which I could not provide due to fearing the authority would come to more [sic] doorstep and snatch my child from me. “I only want a safe, happy and clean environment for my son to grow up. That place is certainly not with my mother, hence I had to make this decision. With the number of Covid-19 cases increasing, my worries for my child increased.” Do has previously been jailed for contempt in relation to the case and was charged again earlier this month, according to a transcript of the hearing released by the court. Justice Shane Gill said Do was being charged because of her “flagrant challenge to the authority of the court”. Do reserved her position during the hearing. Police believe Vinh may have been in Cabramatta, Bankstown, Liverpool, West Wyalong, Temora and Wagga Wagga and they are concerned about his welfare. Vinh was last seen at a medical practice in the Canberra suburb of O’Connor on 9 April, when he was reportedly put into a silver Isuzu 4WD.The Tanzanian government has announced it will lift a controversial ban on teenage mothers continuing their education. Girls will have two years in which to return to school after giving birth, the ministry of education said. However, the move is not legally binding and girls will continue to be banned from class while pregnant. The ban, rooted in policy from the 1960s, was reaffirmed in 2017 by the late president John Magufuli, who stated that pregnant students would not be allowed to continue education because “we cannot allow this immoral behaviour to permeate our primary and secondary schools”. Tanzania’s Education Act permits expulsion when a student has “committed an offence against morality”. The policy change has been seen as an attempt by Samia Suluhu Hassan’s administration to distance itself from Magufuli. Hassan took office in March after Magufuli’s death. She is the country’s first female president. “Pregnant schoolgirls will be allowed to continue with formal education after delivery,” said education minister Joyce Ndalichako, in a speech on Wednesday. Leonard Akwilapo, permanent secretary at the ministry of education, said the policy change will be implemented with immediate effect. He said the two-year window to return to class is necessary “to help the girls to be able to follow the classroom instructions … because if they come after five years then maybe they will have to start afresh”. Girls will not be permitted to attend school while they are pregnant because “there are a lot of activities which may or may not be favourable for pregnant girls,” he said, adding that he also believes “the situation will not be favourable for the other pupils”. If a teenage mother does not re-enrol in school within two years, she can enrol at a paid-for education centre, which offers a condensed version of the curriculum. Last year, the World Bank came under fire for approving a $500m loan to the government to fund the centres, despite the country’s discriminatory education policies. Judy Gitau, regional coordinator for Africa at Equality Now, which filed a joint case at the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights against the government to overturn the policy, said: “The statement indicates goodwill and is a move in the right direction. However, it does not address the root of the problem, nor does it protect girls from discriminatory laws or the whims of political actors.” Tike Mwambipile, executive director of the Tanzania Women Lawyers Association, said: “We are excited with this announcement for now, so let us celebrate. Then after we have recovered from the excitement, we have to see how best to do more advocacy. “This is a step towards meaningful change – it will be meaningful once the laws reflect the same. Time will tell if this is posturing or not. But I think they mean business.” Human Rights Watch called on the president to immediately mandate all education officials and headteachers to accept girls who are pregnant, mothers or married, back to school. “Asking girls to wait until after they deliver only pushes them further from getting an education,” it said.Few can say the pandemic came at a good time, but the Australia midfielder Tameka Yallop is one of the exceptions. On 21 August 2020 Yallop and her wife, Kirsty, welcomed their daughter, Harley Rose, into the world and suddenly the virus that had halted the football and travel of the globetrotting player had an upside. “It was definitely weird,” says Yallop, who has competed in eight countries and joined West Ham in May. “Timing-wise I was quite lucky because that was when my daughter was due and she is our first baby so all the nerves and the not knowing what to do took up a lot of my time and it was actually time that I really appreciated spending with my family. So, for me, it was kind of lucky timing with the world going into lockdown because I was trapped in my own bubble anyway with a new little baby.” Yallop and Kirsty, a former New Zealand international, had time to prepare and went to stay with the latter’s parents, where Kirsty and Harley remain. “They’ve got a good bubble of support and are enjoying living in the moment and watching Harley grow,” she says. “I haven’t seen them in about six months so I’m kind of struggling on the other side of the world but I think Christmas will change that and I’ll get to see them.” Yallop has three brothers and three sisters and she and an older brother started playing for the same club when she was about five and he was six. She played in boys’ teams until she was 12, then joined her first girls’ team. Football wasn’t serious, it was fun, and one of many outdoor sports she enjoyed growing up on the Gold Coast. “That’s why I wanted to do it, for the enjoyment, not necessarily because I wanted to make a career out of football. I definitely didn’t think about that until a lot later down the track. “I grew up in an interesting time. Women’s football wasn’t a professional sport in Australia, that’s for sure, but there were some things that were starting to change and conversations that were becoming real. I know when I first joined the QAS, which was an academy of sport in Australia, I was playing with senior Matildas and they were at the highest level then in Australia and still had to work and study and payment for playing wasn’t really a thing.” That type of change didn’t begin until Yallop was in her early 20s, she says. Now, the 30-year-old has a CV spanning Australia, Canada, the US, Germany, Japan, Sweden, Norway and England – giving her a unique insight into the development of women’s football globally. “Especially in the last couple of years I’ve seen a massive improvement in standards across a lot of leagues all over the world and I think that professionalism is really really starting to become comparable to the men’s game as well,” she says. “I think a lot of that is due to exposure. Now you can watch any league around the world online and I think that has a major part to play in it.” Yallop and Kirsty met when they were teammates at the Norwegian side Klepp IL and it wasn’t until she began that relationship that she felt comfortable opening up about her sexuality to her family and publicly. “It was a long time of hiding that side of me and it was football that was the escape for me and somewhere where I felt like I didn’t have to worry. Now that’s changed a little bit. Yes, my family knows but there’s a lot of support there that’s outside of football as well. These days, it is definitely easier to be yourself and not have to worry about that.” With Rainbow Laces day approaching on 8 December and West Ham the only Premier League club to have both men’s and women’s first-team squads wearing rainbow armbands too, what is it like to lace up boots and step on to the pitch as a player very open about their sexuality and marriage? “It’s a pretty unusual feeling, to know that everyone’s doing it just because they support it and aren’t thinking: ‘Oh, every teammate is doing it so I’m gonna have to do it too.’ You don’t get the feeling that that’s driving it at all any more.” West Ham sit fifth with three wins – as many as they picked up across last season – and three draws from eight games. Last December the New Zealander Olli Harder was recruited as manager from Klepp IL to replace Matt Beard and after avoiding relegation the team are thriving. “Whether it’s influencing team culture or the way you play football he’s proven before that he can definitely do that and lift the level of the club,” says Yallop, who played under Harder in Norway. “It’s only the start of the season so we do have to focus on the endgame but I think if anyone is he’s definitely capable of getting us up there this season. If anything there’s a bit of disappointment that we haven’t had more wins already. And that’s purely just based on the type of football that we’re playing and the performances that we are putting out on the field.” Get to know the players in England’s top-flight better with our WSL player in focus series. Read all our interviews here.As late 90s and early 00s fashion makes a come back, young people are thrifting or turning to their parents’ wardrobe to find items that are now in style. We would like to hear about the best pieces you’ve borrowed from your your parents or other family members. Have you found a vintage Nike jumper in your dad’s chest of drawers? Or a vintage handbag no longer used by your aunt? We’d like to see photos too – so if you have one of someone wearing the item when it was new – and one of you wearing it now, do share them. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Eddie Howe will make an unexpected return to the technical area at Arsenal on Saturday after returning a negative Covid-19 test in time to take charge of Newcastle United in person for the first time. Newcastle’s manager has been isolating in his Tyneside hotel suite since testing positive during a routine club screening last Friday. He was forced to miss last Saturday’s 3-3 draw against Brentford at St James’ Park, delegating managerial duties to his assistant, Jason Tindall, and seemed set to be absent until Tuesday night’s home game with Norwich. UK government regulations require anyone recording a positive result to isolate for 10 days and 11 nights from the day of the test unless they can trace the onset of symptoms to an earlier date and then test negative at least 10 days later. The resultant paradox is that asymptomatic people often end up in quarantine for longer than their symptomatic counterparts. As Howe originally thought he was entirely asymptomatic there seemed no escape from isolation until Tuesday morning but club medical stuff are understood to have identified the mild sore throat and slightly hoarse voice he complained of early last week as the onset of symptoms. Howe apparently believed his throat had merely been irritated by persistent shouting at players during training. On Friday morning Tindall said Howe had displayed mild symptoms, complaining of fatigue between Sunday and Tuesday, but had recovered. He said Howe had “followed all the protocols” and been “very surprised” by last Friday’s positive result. “You want your leader, you want your manager there. We’ve missed seeing the manager out on the grass and we’re looking forward to having him back.” With Newcastle bottom and seeking their first win, Howe was said to be immensely relieved to be allowed to join his squad on their flight to London on Friday afternoon. Given Newcastle declared their manager asymptomatic after his positive test eyebrows may be raised in certain quarters but the Premier League has no objections to his appearance at Arsenal, explaining that each case is judged individually. Club doctors at Newcastle and Arsenal are happy for him to be at the game. Newcastle have tested their players and staff every day this week but all have come back negative. Tindall, who revealed Howe had taken a key role in planning training this week, telephoning him about six times a day, explained his own unusual experience after contracting Covid two months ago. “I had no symptoms to start with,” he said. “And it was only after about eight or nine days after testing positive that it hit me hard and I began to struggle.”Only two out of a group of 11 industry studies given to European regulators in support of the re-approval of the main ingredient in Roundup herbicide are scientifically “reliable”, according to a new analysis of corporate-backed studies on the chemical glyphosate. Glyphosate is the world’s most widely used herbicide and is not only the main ingredient in Roundup herbicide but also in hundreds of other products. It is extensively used by farmers in growing common food crops. In a report released on Friday, researchers from the Institute of Cancer Research at the Medical University of Vienna in Austria said their review of a set of safety studies submitted to EU regulators by Bayer AG and a coalition of other chemical companies showed that the vast majority do not meet current international standards for scientific validity. While two of the corporate studies were considered reliable, six were considered partly reliable and three were not reliable, according to the report. The “reliable” studies were from 2016 and 2020 and both were sponsored by Monsanto, the original patent holder on glyphosate and maker of Roundup. Those considered not reliable were done more than a decade ago: two were sponsored by the former DuPont Co and one by the plant biotechnology firm Verdia Inc. The corporate studies analyzed in the report concern the genotoxic properties of glyphosate. The companies maintain that glyphosate is not genotoxic, meaning it doesn’t cause DNA damage, which is a well-recognized factor in cancer development. But Siegfried Knasmueller, the lead author of the report, told the Guardian that not only are most of the studies lacking in quality, but that the industry research does not include new and “probably better tests for the detection of genotoxic carcinogens”. He said there is evidence in published research that glyphosate may cause DNA damage in human-derived liver cells. He said that while several industry studies were “correct from a methodological point of view at the time when they were conducted”, they are “not in agreement with the current strategy”. In July, Knasmueller authored a similar report looking at 53 glyphosate studies submitted to regulators. The new report alleging flaws with the corporate glyphosate studies comes at a critical time as the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) are evaluating whether or not to renew the license for glyphosate in the EU when current approval expires 15 December 2022. In August, authorities from France, Hungary, the Netherlands and Sweden weighed in on the renewal question with a draft report concluding that glyphosate is not carcinogenic. ECHA and EFSA allowed other “interested parties” to consult on the renewal question until 22 November. The Knasmueller analysis, which was requested by the SumOfUs non-profit advocacy group, was submitted as part of that consultation. An ECHA spokesperson declined to comment on the Knasmueller report. The agency said it would “develop its opinion” on the glyphosate classification by June. An EFSA spokesperson said the Knasmueller report would be considered alongside all other comments submitted as part of the consultation. Bayer, the lead registrant for the European renewal request, also did not offer a comment on the report. Two independent scientists asked about Knasmuller’s report said it is not surprising that studies done years ago may not meet current guidelines, but that would be true of independent studies as well as corporate studies. They also said such studies should not necessarily be ignored. For the last few years there has been a heated global debate about whether or not glyphosate herbicides such as Roundup should be restricted or banned because some scientific research shows that exposure to the weedkiller causes health problems. In 2015 the World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer pointed to several independent research studies in concluding that there was strong evidence of genotoxicity with the weedkiller, and glyphosate should be considered a probable human carcinogen. Bayer, which bought Roundup maker Monsanto in 2018, denies there is any valid evidence the herbicides cause cancer. But the company has agreed to pay about $14bn to settle US litigation brought by more than 100,000 Roundup users alleging exposure to the weedkiller caused them to develop non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Bayer has also agreed to stop selling glyphosate to US consumers by 2023. The report by Knasmueller and colleague Armen Nersesyan underscores growing concerns about a history of regulatory reliance on corporations to provide safety studies on the chemicals they are making and selling. A new system should be developed to eliminate corporate bias that could influence results, many scientists say. “The government shouldn’t rely on industry studies,” said Peter Infante, former senior epidemiologist and director of the US office of carcinogen identification and classification for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. “If the industry wants to do studies they should put the money into a pool and distribute it to independent scientists that don’t have conflicts of interest. That is the way it should be.”The whale is wounded. The sharks smell blood and start to circle. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is in the lead. The rest thrash about, still disoriented by Covid. That is, except for Michael Gove. Last September, in an unguarded moment, Boris Johnson handed Gove the opportunity of a lifetime: to chart a path out of the ideological chaos of lockdown towards a 21st-century Tory dawn, and, with it, a claim to the succession. Gove has been asked in effect to recast non-metropolitan Britain. He must revive local democracy and reverse the centralist planning regime of his predecessor, Robert Jenrick – the regime that so enraged Chesham’s Tories in the June byelection. Gove must sort out the intellectual vacuum that is Conservative housing policy, with its casual pledge of 300,000 new homes. He must also reveal what Johnson really meant by “levelling-up” the north. He has even been told to rescue the union with Scotland in his spare time. If he can pull all this off, Gove will be a hard man to beat. At the heart of Jenrick’s planning fiasco lay a confusion over housing. A true Tory would leave houses to the marketplace and concentrate on homelessness among poor people. The trouble began with Margaret Thatcher “weaponising” housing subsidy as a middle-class vote-winner, with property developers piling in as her party’s leading financial backers, pressing at every turn for planning decontrol. Jenrick was putty in their hands. This reached its nadir with this year’s algorithmic targets for new development. This defined housing “need” as demand represented by price. New estates were imposed on every town and village, wherever prices were rising fastest: a developer’s dream. First-time-buyer subsidies merely pushed up prices – overwhelmingly in London and the south-east. Buckinghamshire and Hertfordshire began to go the way of Middlesex. Johnson even found himself protesting over new estates in his own constituency. As of today, about 400,000 houses granted permissions remain unbuilt, their builders fearing too many houses might damage profits. Appearing last month before a Commons committee, Gove signalled a radical change of gear. He ordered a “complete rethink” of Jenrick’s planning reforms. He promised that communities would be re-empowered to “take back control” of their future development. He wanted to see brownfield sites developed and opposed carbon-guzzling “concrete and steel” materials. He was also sceptical of housing policy as being only about new-build. The supply of properties to the market is overwhelming existing buildings. Britain has some of the most inefficient and underoccupied houses in Europe, largely through longstanding undertaxing of living space. A luxury London flat may pay barely a tenth of the tax on one in New York City. This combined with high stamp duty is a tax against downsizing, and has led the Resolution Foundation to argue that fiscal policy should hold the key to housing policy. Half a million homes lie empty as “savings”. About 600,000 houses could be nudged back on to the market “without the need to lift a single brick”. London’s half-vacant luxury towers and Georgian terraces make a mockery of housing targets. Whether Gove has the clout to take on the Treasury’s aversion to fiscal reform remains to be seen but is a real test of his seriousness. Gove seems determined to reset the balance between Whitehall and local communities on the future of land use. His advisers are tending towards urban densification and renewal rather than clear-and-build. The champion of more traditionally planned towns, Nicholas Boys Smith of the thinktank Create Streets, has been appointed head of Gove’s new Office for Place. This is intended to promote a popular, perhaps more aesthetic, kind of planning, in contrast with Whitehall’s powerful and developer-led Homes UK agency. Meanwhile, Britain’s local government is in turmoil. Public services have been devastated by 11 years of austerity halving their budgets. The much-publicised cuts in care homes are the tip of an iceberg that includes police, youth services, older people and childcare, local transport, arts and museums. When confronted with this reality, “levelling up” by splurging on infrastructure is meaningless. The real threat to the north has long been the magnetism of the south, rather than a lack of public investment. I recently attended a meeting of business leaders in Manchester at which the overwhelming cry had nothing to do with infrastructure or HS2. It was: “Why can’t the south stop stealing our best young people?” A truly radical levelling-up agenda would ban new greenfield housing in the south, pleasing Tory voters and making house-buying there even more expensive. Southern flight should be discouraged by waiving student loans for all graduates who work in the north. Every penny of cultural and skills investment should go north for a decade. Move the Royal Opera to Manchester and the National Theatre to Leeds. Dump the House of Lords in York. Drive HS2 north from Birmingham, not south from it. Put London’s Crossrail into mothballs. The reality is that levelling up the north can only work with levelling down the south. The answer to northern decline lies in the re-empowerment of its cities, which long ago helped revive the fortunes of industrial Germany and France. A relentless hollowing out of local democracy has been the defining feature of the Cameron-May-Johnson years. Gove has been given a truly radical opportunity. But his motto should not be “take back control”; it should be “give back control”. Will he do it? Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistAbout 30 minutes into episode two of the Amazon Original series LuLaRich – the latest addition to a growing catalog of popular documentaries and exposes exploring the compellingly kooky, if ethically dubious, world of multi-level marketing – viewers are finally clued into the unsettling logic at the center of this most American of business models. In the world of MLMs, success has very little to do with selling products (in this case colorful leggings produced by a California-based company called LuLaRoe), and everything to do with selling a promise. One that, by design, must go mostly unkept. “There was always a huge push to recruit, recruit, recruit,” relates Courtney Harwood, one of a handful of affable former LuLaRoe retailers who provide the narrative heart of the series, referring to multi-level marketing’s characteristic focus on enlisting new members over simply selling product to a third party. “Buy, buy, buy. Recruit, recruit, recruit,” she adds “you will get there.” What makes LuLaRich, and other MLM-based content, so irresistible to viewers is that the ‘there’ Harwood references is too often an illusion, one typically peddled by a hypnotically charismatic founder whose rhetorical and aesthetic approach is a grim mix of the evangelist Billy Graham and 1970s consumer electronics maven Crazy Eddie. Watching the con at the center of the entire enterprise slowly unravel is good television as it turns out. In any case, what we learn along the way is usually some variation on a theme: The wealth and prestige promised to everyone who signs on with a multi-level marketing company will only ever be enjoyed by a tiny cadre of elites, whose continued success is nonetheless reliant on an army of enthusiastic underlings continuing to chase the dream. They’re the ones propping up the system, the ones generating the riches enjoyed by those at the top. “If you look at a multi-level marketing scheme you will see that over half of all the money goes to the top 1%,” MLM expert Robert Fitzpatrick interjects, like most of those interviewed looking directly into the camera. “Over 80% have nobody below them. They have to lose. So, the structure itself dooms the vast majority.” If any of this sounds familiar – a system set up to favor a tiny elite class, preternaturally upbeat crackpot leaders speaking in self-help cliches, exploitative labor practices … recruiting – you might be a college football fan. It’s worth saying out loud, for everyone’s benefit, that half the teams taking part in the NCAA’s Football Bowl Subdivision have no chance of winning the competition in which they are competing. This is not a bit of punditry mind you. When I say they have no chance I mean that, regardless of their on-field performance, they will likely not be able to gain access to the playoff that crowns a champion. It’s a matter of simple arithmetic, really. Only four teams of the 130 who compete at the FBS level will be selected to participate in the College Football Playoff, and decisions regarding who deserves those coveted spots are left to a 13-member panel that acts as sole arbiter. So unlike its basketball counterpart, where winning your conference tournament earns you an automatic bid and the selection committee argues over which of two or three mediocre teams deserve the last of 36 at-large spots, you’re parsing the relative strengths and weaknesses of programs that have won all, or all but one of, their games. It’s incredibly fine margins, and the result is that schools from what are known as ‘Power Five’ conferences – the SEC, the Big Ten, the ACC, the Big 12 and the Pac-12 – enjoy an overwhelming advantage, especially those with massive stores of cultural and economic capital like Alabama, Ohio State or Notre Dame. In my many years covering college football, this rather banal unspoken truth about its underlying competition structure never failed to amaze me. It is both astonishing and singular in American and world sports that teams would willingly take part in a competition whose very framework does its level best to deny them the opportunity to win it no matter what they do, and that includes ending their season undefeated. The list of schools that have finished with perfect records since the turn of the century but been frozen out of whatever half-baked playoff or championship finale was in ascendance at the time is long and may well be longer by the end of this season. Utah in 2004 and 2008, Boise State in 2006 and 2009, TCU in 2010 and Central Florida in 2017 all finished their seasons with perfect records but could get no closer to a shot at the national title than a trip to a more lucrative, but ultimately meaningless, bowl game. The competitive equivalent of a condescending pat on the head. They were celebrated by fans and media alike to be sure, but because they hailed from outside the aforementioned Power Five, gaining a seat at the high table of college football was the longest of longshots. As is the case with LuLaRoe and other MLM schemes, it’s this titillating proximity to success that ultimately reveals the swindle. The most prominent of this season’s aspiring outsiders come from the American Athletic Conference in the form of the University of Cincinnati. Soon enough the Bearcats will enter the Big 12, a Power Five perch from which an undefeated record would come closer to guaranteeing them a spot in the playoff. But for now, they remain members of college football’s proletariat, meant to serve as little more than grist for the mill. If fans had forgotten this, they received a rude reminder on 2 November when the first College Football Playoff Rankings were released and Cincinnati found themselves in sixth position, on the outside looking in at the four-team playoff. This despite an 8-0 record, a number two ranking in both the AP and the Coaches Poll and a road win over then undefeated Notre Dame. Three weeks on, however, things are looking up. With a little help from (ironically) the University of Utah, the Bearcats have cracked the top four and find themselves on the cusp of becoming the first non-Power Five school to make the playoff, but their position is hardly secure. They could lose one of their remaining two games of course, but regardless, the odds are always stacked against those from outside college football’s aristocracy. Given the opportunity, there seems little doubt the committee would break Bearcat hearts. Whatever happens, it should be obvious that the problem here isn’t effort. Besides succeeding on the field, Cincinnati have enthusiastically engaged in the college athletics arms race as well, spending eye-watering amounts on stadium renovations and coaches’ salaries. All as the athletic department required, according to one report, $250 million in subsidies from university coffers over the last decade plus. This to take part in a competition that guarantees them nothing, even if they win all their games. As Fitzpatrick might put it, they are part of the vast majority who are “doomed to fail.” Like a LuLaRoe retailer who buys box after box of leggings on a promise that they too might end up on stage with the founder, showered in glitter and celebrating their financial independence, FBS schools from outside of the Power Five are being scammed. You could be excused for thinking that the Bearcats imminent ascension to the Big 12, or even a fluky appearance in this season’s playoff, would prove college football’s egalitarian bona fides, but you would be wrong (just ask 11-0 Texas-San Antonio who are a distant 22nd in the latest CFP rankings). One outsider crashing the party in the 23 years since the Bowl Championship Series was introduced – and with it some pretense of a coherent competition structure – is hardly proof of anything. Except that occasionally, or maybe necessarily, there must be the appearance of parity. As with so many facets of American life, the have-nots of the college football world are a feature, not a bug, of the system, acting as fodder and providing the illusion of a robust competition, one which will inevitably produce another Gatorade bath for Nick Saban. They offer up the bodies of their “student-athletes,” the resources of their university, the hopes and dreams of their alumni and fans for just the faintest sniff of the riches and prestige bestowed on their gridiron betters. If momentum means anything we may one day get an expanded playoff format, hopefully one accessible to all FBS programs. In fact, it may be even more of a foregone conclusion should Cincinnati finish undefeated and miss out. Either way, it can’t come soon enough for me. There are many problems with college football, and while we can’t fix them all in one fell swoop, we could start with the most fundamental. We could make the competition itself, well, an actual competition, instead of a pyramid scheme.Why will I love it? This is a supremely calming plant. Despite its common name – “moss balls” – it’s actually composed of velvety balls of filamentous algae. I love watching the furry globes bobbing gently in the water. Light or shade? They require low-to-medium indirect light, and protection from direct sun. Where should I put it? On a bright home office desk or a bedside table, two places you will appreciate its soothing nature. How do I keep it alive? Place in an open glass bowl or jar filled with water. Change the water every two weeks – tap water is fine. If the room temperature exceeds 25C in summer, move the container to the fridge or a cool spot near an air conditioner until temperatures fall. Did you know … The Japanese call this plant marimo and regard it as a national treasure: it has been a protected species there since 1920. The balls’ round shape is formed and maintained by gentle wave action that occasionally turns them. In addition, they have a mysterious ability to float by day and sink at night. They can grow up to 30cm in diameter, and with the right care they can live for decades, making them a plant pet for life.It is June 2018, and I am sitting at a table in a needlessly fancy restaurant in LA with a bunch of teenagers. Well, some of them must be over 21 as they are able to order alcohol, but most are sticking to Coke or sparkling water with their overpriced steaks. These are some of the up-and-coming stars of Twitch, the livestreaming platform that now broadcasts about 2bn hours per month from more than 9m channels, most of which involve people filming themselves and chatting while playing video games. Later, there will be a lavish party in a similarly extravagant club, where the streamers with the most views and subscribers will be treated like celebrities in the VIP area. And, well, they are celebrities. They have millions of followers. They are stopped in the street or at airports by people wanting a selfie and an autograph. Unlike pro gamers, whose job is to be good enough at video games to win tournaments, a streamer’s job is to be entertaining enough – while playing anything from first person shooters to racing games – to win fans. Back in 2018, streaming was already a huge deal; now, bolstered by the pandemic and an ever-growing audience that boosted Twitch’s viewership by 70% in 2020, it is even bigger. To draw a comparison that makes me feel about 4,000 years old, they are their generation’s rock stars. Unlike rock stars, however, streamers are not really known for hard partying. Talking to the people around that table, I was instead astonished – and, honestly, worried – by how hard they worked. The woman sitting next to me told me that she streams for eight to 10 hours every day, and when she wasn’t live she was curating her social media, responding to fans, scouting for brand partnerships or collaborations with other streamers; throughout our conversation she was visibly resisting the impulse to check her phone, where new stats and fan comments and potential opportunities were presumably stacking up. I asked what she does for fun and she seemed genuinely confused by the question. Playing video games for an audience for a living sounds like fun – and hell, there are many worse jobs out there – but it is also an ultra-competitive profession that attracts millions of aspiring kids with limitless energy and absolutely no concept of work-life balance. It involves extreme hours and intense pressure to be constantly available to the audience of viewers on whom they depend. And according to recently leaked Twitch data, the top 1% of streamers on its platform received more than half of the $889m (£660m) it paid out to creators last year; three quarters of the rest made $120 (£89) or less. Millions made nothing at all. I was not surprised, over the following years, to read story after story about these energetic young people – with what must have seemed like the best job in the world – burning out. When you are broadcasting yourself so much of the time, when your hobby becomes your job and your job becomes your hobby, and when your personality becomes your brand and your brand becomes your personality, what does life offline look like for you? Who are you when the camera is off? The fact is that, especially for up-and-coming streamers trying to make it in the crowded world of playing video games on the internet, the camera is almost never off. Sticking to a regular schedule is the best way to build an audience on Twitch, and those schedules regularly involve at least eight hours of continuous streaming, five days a week or more. “My sleep schedule shifted into the North American time zone because most of the people who were viewing my channel at the time were there,” says 36-year-old Cassie, a founder of the Black Twitch UK network, who has been streaming for five years under the name GeekyCassie. “I would do my day at work, nap a bit, and then stream for up to eight to 12 hours at night-time. I’d be absolutely beat, and then get up and do my work again … People burn out and then they don’t enjoy it any more.” At that time Cassie was living at home with her mum, whose cooking and care enabled these ridiculous hours. “There’s absolutely no way that I would do that now. I don’t really feel like we should be encouraging it,” she says. “I see [young streamers] do things like 24‑hour live gaming marathons, then have an hour’s sleep, and then later that day I’ll see photos of them skating outside on Insta. I’m like: ‘How are you doing this? What is going on!?’” “Burnout is an incredibly real thing in gaming,” says Imane Anys, AKA Pokimane, who has put in thousands of hours to become the most popular female streamer on Twitch, with 8.4 million subscribers. “A streamer sets their own work hours and it can be easy to fall into the trap of streaming eight to 12 hours a day, seven days a week. It’s frightening because people grind crazy long hours, and see results – hence why so many do it. I’ve veered away from doing extreme hours of livestreaming in an effort to upkeep my mental health and I’ve found that it aids in the longevity of my career.” Now she streams in shorter bursts, but even so, she only “usually” takes a day off a week to spend with friends or relaxing. The reasons for these ultra-demanding hours are simple: the more you broadcast, the greater your chances of being featured on Twitch’s homepage, the more followers you accrue, and the more money you might eventually make. The chances of achieving the kind of success seen by the world’s most popular gamers, who earn millions a year from sponsorship deals, fan subscriptions and merchandise, are vanishingly small – think of how many keen footballers ever go pro, let alone play at a Premier League club – but tens of thousands of creators make at least a livable wage. It is no wonder, then, that many streamers end up obsessed with the numbers and graphs and invisible algorithms that determine their fate. The flavour of fame that comes with playing video games on the internet is a particularly intense one, too. Viewers on both Twitch and YouTube form close, and entirely one-sided, relationships with their favourite stars. As in the influencer world, stalking is a big problem. Some, such as the US streamer Ellohime, have had fans turn up at their doors in the middle of the night. These parasocial relationships can grow unhealthy on both sides, as viewers start to feel entitled to access the people on the other side of the camera, and creators feel obliged to give them more of their time. When Ninja – who is by most standards the world’s most successful video game streamer, with an estimated $10m in yearly earnings and 17 million followers – took two days off to attend a tournament in 2018, he lost 40,000 subscribers. And despite the fact that he could absolutely do without those subs, he was furious about it. “While creators face the same challenges as the rest of the digital generation, stress and burnout occurs more often in this community because of the pressure of expectation from their audiences,” says Kruti Kanojia, the CEO of Healthy Gamer, an organisation that provides mental health services for the digital generation, including specific wellbeing coaching for streamers. “They started streaming because of a love of gaming and the community that comes with it, but the hyper-competitive nature of content creation can make creators feel like they can never take a day off … Everything from burnout to stress and impostor syndrome can make streamers consider quitting.” These brutal schedules are one reason Twitch is very much a young person’s game: it is surely impossible to stick to those hours if you are, say, a mother of three. Many of the most successful – most of whom are young men – have partners, parents or even paid staff helping to look after them. Earlier this year, Nokokopuffs, a pro player of battle royale game Apex Legends, attracted a potent mixture of derision and envy for proudly admitting that he pays a personal chef $1,000 a month to make him food. (He claims he’s still saving $400 on what he used to spend on food delivery.) But this career has now existed for long enough that some of its first stars have grown up. For example, 29-year-old Daniel Middleton – much better known as DanTDM, a name that most parents will probably recognise – rose to global fame playing Minecraft on YouTube in his early 20s, before Twitch came on the scene. He began recording gaming videos in sixth form, fitting it around school and later university; now he has a one-year-old son, and his working life has changed drastically. “When you’re building it up, that’s the most intense part,” he says. “I was doing two videos every single day; my channel was a priority and then normal life would have to try to fit in around it. If I had the offer to go out for the afternoon I just wouldn’t do it; I’d record, edit, upload, record, edit, upload, have my evening, then rinse and repeat literally every day for two years. When you’re growing, it really is a massive grind … It’s relentless, non-stop, no days off, no holidays. That’s actually pretty common in the people who have been really successful and have big platforms.” Dan has been fortunate enough to reach a point that few gaming influencers ever do: with a big subscriber base and a few other businesses that he’s launched off the back of it, he can pull back without his career disappearing. “I only work maybe three to four hours a day now in the morning, and then spend the rest of the day with family. Before, I would wake up, make videos and go to sleep. Even if I had any free time I’d be thinking about videos, how it’s going, what I’m making next, keeping an eye on trends and stuff; that doesn’t fill my brain space any more.” Like me, Dan worries a little about the current generation of teenage gamer stars, both on Twitch and YouTube. “It’s really intense now. The new generation of Minecraft YouTubers are way more popular but that comes with a lot more negativity,” he says. “They’re so much younger than I was when I started. When I had success I was 22, 23; these guys are 17, which is mad. I wouldn’t have been able to handle that kind of fame and success at that age. For the Justin Biebers or Disney Channel stars or Ariana Grandes, they have people helping them with that, but now there are kids getting that kind of attention just by themselves in their bedrooms. That’s wild.” Of course, almost anyone who attains immense success has spent years working extremely hard. Wannabe athletes spend their entire youth in practice and shuttling between tournaments. Successful musicians and artists spend years fixating on their passions before breaking through. In this way, Twitch and YouTube are no different from other passion careers: the people who become wildly successful are extremely rare, and often have an extraordinary work ethic. “Maybe I’d still be doing something similar as a job if I hadn’t done those years of ridiculous work, but not to this kind of scale,” says Dan. “I’m not saying that if you put in the work it’s definitely gonna happen, because that’s not the case. But I think you’ll find that in almost every job where someone’s super-successful, they’ve ground it out for at least a few years.” For Cassie, finding a way to make streaming work has meant reconceptualising what success means. “Being a Black woman, you end up working three times harder to get maybe half of what someone else has got. Success is being able to have an impact, to get paid for the work you’re doing. Success is not being at the Ninja level … These days, if I’m tired, you’re not gonna see me, because I am not gonna die on the internet for you!” she laughs. “I don’t necessarily like saying: ‘Go outside and touch some grass,’ but … definitely go outside! Actually seeing people and doing things away from streaming is so essential. I’m so much happier now.” Field of streams: five of the top Twitchers Ninja 17 million subscribers, 10,284 hours streamed A former professional Halo player, 30-year-old Richard Tyler Blevins rose to the top of the Twitch charts playing Fortnite and never dropped down again. He plays other games now, but remains Twitch’s most recognisable face. AuronPlay 10.7 million subscribers, 1,986 hours streamed Spanish-language streamers are among the most viewed on Twitch, and the 33-year-old former YouTuber Raúl Álvarez Genes made the transition from comedy vlogging to finding the laughs while playing games such as Grand Theft Auto V and Among Us. Shroud 9.8 million subscribers, 10,751 hours streamed Famous for his extraordinary skills in first-person shooters, the 27-year-old ex-pro-gamer Michael Grzesiek is mostly watched for his play rather than his chat. He doesn’t talk that much, but you’d better hope you never come up against him in Valorant. Pokimane 8.4 million subscribers, 4,885 hours streamed Imane Anys, 25, is the most successful female video game streamer on Twitch, which is still extremely maledominated. Starting out on the competitive arena-battle game League of Legends, she has won over a huge audience with her friendly, drama-free style. TommyInnit 6.7 million subscribers, 1,263 hours streamed Seventeen-year-old Thomas Simons is part of a new generation of Minecraft players: where once they made their fortune on YouTube, now they are dominating Twitch. He is what’s known as a chaotic streamer: loud, charming, unpredictable and boundlessly energetic.Far from what films and TV shows might tell us, truly magnificent sex has very little to do with daring feats of seduction or screaming orgasms. In fact, according to the latest research, erotic intimacy is more a state of mind than a physical act. In a recent study, Magnificent Sex, psychologist and sex therapist Dr Peggy J Kleinplatz and her colleagues at Ottawa University in Canada realised that, while whole library sections were dedicated to bad sex (and how to make it better), there was almost no literature dedicated to great sex. What did it feel like? Who was having it? And what made it so great? To answer some of these questions, the researchers recruited people from around the world across the age, gender and sexuality spectrum – who self-reported having had, at some point in their lives, truly mindblowing sex. Through a series of interviews, researchers began to build up a picture of what “the best sex ever” looks, feels and sounds like. “One of the first surprising findings,” write the study authors, “was the … uncanny similarity in descriptions. [This] helped us to become reasonably certain that everyone was talking about the same experience.” Despite the different ways each participant actually had sex, at the very peaks of the experience, everyone was feeling the same kinds of things: total absorption in the moment, deep connection with their partner, and openness and a willingness to take a few emotional risks. “For the magnificent lovers [in the study],” says sex educator Emily Nagoski, the author of Come As You Are: the Surprising New Science That Will Transform Your Sex Life, “sex became a way to know themselves and their partners more fully. It was a way to play and explore together – to become vulnerable with one another. To go on an adventure.” And for many, she points out, it led “to feeling more at peace with who they are and more satisfied in their lives generally. It’s really powerful stuff.” Taking this groundbreaking study as a starting point, we ask its authors and other experts how everyone can have better sex. Be completely present As anyone who’s tried to meditate might know, being completely undistracted by the endless pinging, buzzing, chattering ephemera of modern life is easier said than done (in fact, according to a study from researchers at the University of Virginia, one in 10 people admitted to checking their phone during sex). But there are ways that we can get better at being present. “What’s helped me to feel more present and embodied within my sexual experiences,” says sex educator Ruby Rare, “is training myself to feel more present and embodied throughout the day. So, taking a moment to note the texture of the ground that I’m walking on, the feel of the air on my skin, or the particular hue of the sky. Really trying to tap into the sensations in my body – sight, sound, smell, taste. If you take time to train that aptitude, it’s much easier to then bring it into the sexual environment with you.” * * * Broaden your definition of sex As Rare says: “If we can let go of our traditional notions of what does and doesn’t ‘count’ as sex we might discover something altogether more fulfilling. I like to grab parts of a partner’s body, to really worship the texture and feel of a leg or a stomach. That’s an erotic experience that sits outside traditional ‘scripts’ but it’s one I find deeply satisfying. If you let go of the idea that you’re ‘meant to’ kiss, then do foreplay, then have sex and an orgasm, you’re suddenly open to playing and exploring; to being more present with someone’s body and really seeing how you can interact with it in a way that might excite you even more.” Nagoski agrees. “The problem is, pop culture’s script for how good sex should go and what it should look like is incredibly narrow,” she says. “We are told that it is the product of spontaneous, out-of-the-blue horniness. There are lots of positions, perhaps some foreplay, definitely penetration, then orgasms – the end.” In actuality, “none of that is true”, she says. Sex could be anything: “Just kissing; having a long, erotically charged conversation; touching; bathing with a partner. As long as you’ve got consent, and no unwanted pain, you can roll around like puppies.” In her study, Kleinplatz has often seen this in action with her patients. As she explains: “The people having the greatest sexual fulfilment were people who had, for one reason or another, discarded the entire package of paint-by-numbers ideas about sexuality. Because these people had then gone on to create something that fit better for them.” Engage with your deepest desires Of course, just because anything can be sex, it doesn’t mean that everything will turn us on. Psychotherapist Ian Kerner, author of So Tell Me About the Last Time You Had Sex: Laying Bare and Learning to Repair Our Love Lives, believes the key to the best sex of our lives is to spend time engaging with our deepest erotic fantasies. He argues that each of us has one or more “core erotic themes” – sexual scenarios that “contain a lot of heat for us”. But, he says: “If you ask most people what their ultimate erotic fantasy or biggest turn-on is, they probably would struggle to tell you.” Becoming really aware of what these are will inevitably help us to have more satisfying sex, he says. “These are things that get us feeling the most turned on, the most fired up. The thing that, when you let your mind wander to it, will get you thinking, ‘Yeah, this is hot, I want more of this.’ – But a lot of people simply don’t know what their core erotic themes are.” To discover yours, Kerner suggests “a tasting menu” approach – taking some time on your own to sample sexual content from different creators, whether that’s magazines, erotic fiction, films such as director Erika Lust’s X, or podcasts such as Dipsea or Dirty Diana, the erotica fiction series produced by (and starring) Demi Moore. “We’re living through a golden age of sexual content,” says Kerner, “use it to your benefit.” Once you’ve read, watched or listened widely on your own, Kerner says, “think about which erotic themes are really drawing you in. Or which come up over and over again.” It’s likely that we’re drawn to certain power dynamics, so even if the content is all very different, it may still be possible to pick out one constant theme running through. From there, we can begin to communicate these to others and build sexual experiences which tap into these themes. * * * … but develop self-compassion Admittedly, most of us have fantasies which we would struggle to articulate for fear of being rejected. And yet, wondrous new depths of sexual fulfilment, self-awareness and connection may await if we do. Nagoski argues that the first step to opening up is to develop self-compassion. “You turn toward the parts of yourself that you are worried about, with kindness, accepting that while they may seem scary they are also true.” Inviting someone we trust into that truth, she says, can be an incredibly liberating experience. Now, be honest … Being radically honest about what lights you up in the bedroom can be uncomfortable, particularly if your desires sit outside “the norm”. But, Nagoski says: “If you never say it, you may never get to experience the satisfaction of doing it.” Rare recommends approaching such conversations with “a technique I’ve borrowed from the sex educator Allison Moon: first tell the person you want to talk to them about something, then explain it’s something you feel embarrassed or nervous about, and why. Perhaps others have reacted badly in the past and you’re worried this person will reject you, too. Then you can launch into what you have to say having already let them know what emotions are attached to the conversation for you.” * * * Play mind games As well as helping us create a clearer idea about what engages us on an erotic level, discovering our desires also helps us employ our intellect and imaginations. “I think that there’s a real dearth of mind-based arousal nowadays,” says Kerner. “We depend on the newness of a relationship or encounter to provide that kind of psychological stimuli.” Instead of just relying on certain physical acts to get us in the mood, sex can begin as a fantasy played out in the mind, over a whole day. “We often lose our ability to ‘make-believe’ as adults,” says Kerner. “So it’s about redeveloping that.” This could mean fantasising about yourself as the main character in a scenario, or just daydreaming at work about the kind of sex you plan to have that night. “It’s called psychogenic arousal – the arousal which is triggered by sexual thoughts rather than physical stimulation.” Communicate from the start “If you can develop open communication around sex from the beginning of a relationship, it’s incredibly helpful,” says Kerner. This means offering and being open to feedback, and being compassionate with a partner if they become embarrassed or defensive. For example, you might say: “I’d find it really hot if we did this or you touched me like this. “If you can visualise the sex you want to have,” he says, “you’re really halfway there. It will help you be clear with someone else about what you want.” * * * Schedule fun It might seem like an oxymoron – it is surely at its best when it’s spontaneous – but putting sex in the diary may well be the key to creating space for the hot and spontaneous to happen. “Sex requires intentionality,” says Kleinplatz. “It requires saying, ‘I’m willing to make being with you a priority in my life.’ If you’re doing it right, it will take effort – it shouldn’t feel like work, but certainly will take time and energy.”School leaders felt forced to act as “Covid police” during the pandemic, leading to toxic run-ins with parents and souring relations with their own staff, according to research. More than half of primary leaders and just under half of secondary leaders struggled to deal with small but vocal groups of parents, ranging from anti-vaxxers and Covid-sceptics to those who did not want their children to attend school because of fears about the virus. Tensions have continued to persist into the new school year, according to the survey of more than 1,500 school leaders in England. One secondary head said they regularly received a “whole barrage of vitriol”, while another said parents with extreme views thought “they’ve got the right to treat you like you’re a piece of dirt”, leading them to question if they should continue working as heads. Although heads reported that their broader relationships improved with parents over the pandemic as a result of increased communication, many disliked having to nag parents and teachers to wear masks and observe social distancing rules. Pat Thomson, one of the report’s authors and professor of education at the University of Nottingham, said: “During Covid you’re under a real pressure cooker situation where people are feeling stress and under pressure and really anxious. “If you’re a head you take a real pride in things being a smooth well-running machine. When you can’t sort it really quickly it bothers you. In some cases it was a no-win situation.” The heads interviewed felt that tensions rose due to the fact “the government was looking to blame and threaten the profession, rather than work collaboratively with school leaders”. Toby Greany, the report’s co-author and education chair at Nottingham, said the way changes in guidance were communicated by the government was also a problem. “Often heads were only finding out about things at the same time as parents, when they were announced on the news, but parents expected them to have all the answers.” Nearly a quarter of the heads surveyed said they felt like they were sinking during the pandemic, and two in five considered leaving the profession. Interviewees aged under 46 viewed the demands of the job as incompatible with starting a family. Claire, a headteacher in Essex, said she worked a minimum of 70 hours a week, arriving at her desk by 7am and continuing until 10pm, as well as working weekends and during the holidays. As a result, she has stepped back from her role as executive head looking after two schools. “We’ve all held on because we wanted to see our schools through. But I think work-life balance for school leaders was pretty poor before and the pandemic has just eroded anything there might have been. It’s just so relentless,” she said. In a survey by the Essex Primary Headteachers’ Association undertaken in November, 417 heads rated their work-life balance at 3.6 out of 10 and their happiness in their professional role at 3.8, citing Covid, staffing issues, Ofsted and parent complaints among the biggest stressors. Heads commented on how they had never struggled so much and that this has not improved as society has reopened. One said: “Autumn 2021 has been the hardest term in 17 years of headship and far worse than anything last year threw at us.” Another head felt “exhausted, overwhelmed and generally unwell” beginning the school year for the first time in their 30-year career. “I managed two weeks before, one morning, I woke up and just couldn’t do it anymore.” The Nottingham researchers predicted there would be an exodus of heads in the coming years unless the government offers more wellbeing support and professional coaching, as well as making them feel valued and easing workloads. “My best guess is that we probably will see a very large number of more experienced leaders in the system choosing to go earlier than we otherwise would have done as a result of the last two years. Two in five isn’t inappropriate to judge,” Greany said.At the Cop26 conference, high-profile British brands including Stella McCartney, Burberry and Mulberry presented their visions for an ethical, sustainable industry. Now, there is an increasing demand for all fashion companies to make legally binding commitments to address the impact their supply chains have on the environment. While hundreds of companies – including Gucci-owner Kering, H&amp;M and Inditex, which owns Zara – have signed up to the UN’s Fashion Industry Charter for Climate Action, which sets science-based targets in line with the Paris agreement, there is no obligation to take part, nor a legal mandate to hold brands to account. Leading industry figures say that if fashion brands are to have any chance of having a meaningful impact on the climate crisis, legislation is needed. As recently as 2019, the UK government rejected all suggestions – including a ban on incinerating or landfilling unsold stock that can be reused or recycled, and mandatory environmental targets for fashion retailers with a turnover above £36m – made in The Environmental Audit Committee’s report Fixing Fashion: Clothing Consumption and Sustainability. Well known for her ethical-fashion campaigning, McCartney, who staged her Future of Fashion exhibition at the conference, tells the Guardian that the lack of mandate is the reason “why brands have been getting away with murder and we are in the critical state we are in”. Incentives need to be introduced for the industry to clean up its act, she says. “The issue lies with the fact that we have no way of measuring our harm as a collective. If we were to have a uniform way … then brands would be forced to disclose their current [practices] and make informed changes to their supply chain.” The fashion industry is currently the third largest manufacturer in the world, with clothing and footwear estimated to be responsible for 8% of global greenhouse gas emissions. At the conference this month, a trade policy request submitted by the Textile Exchange highlighted that global fibre production has nearly doubled this century alone, reports Forbes, going from 58m tonnes in 2000 to 109m tonnes in 2020. Despite the UNFCCC Fashion Charter for Climate Action also proposing new commitments (including achieving net-zero emissions by 2050 and the sourcing of environmentally friendly raw materials by 2030) at the Glasgow event, Liv Simpliciano, policy and research manager at the Fashion Revolution campaigning organisation, says things need to speed up and more pressing questions need to be addressed. “While there has been positive progress, it is still far too slow,” she says. “What was glaringly missing from the conversation was the question of growth – both in terms of financial growth and production volumes. With an average growth of 3-4% a year, the fashion industry must decouple financial growth from emissions reduction. There is [also] an enormous lack of visibility further down the value chain. This is where human rights and environmental abuse thrives, and where we need more stringent reduction commitments most.” To aid this, Simpliciano says brands need to stop relying on second-hand data to estimate emissions and collect their own to get the hard facts. They should be forced to disclose their findings, and incentivised by governments to track data across the supply chain to reduce their overall impact. Fashion Revolution’s research shows that “just 17% of brands disclose their annual carbon footprint at raw material”. Dr Antoinette Fionda-Douglas from the collective Generation of Waste says businesses are still clinging to such “extractive and exploitative business model[s] for as long as they can to make as much profit as they can, refusing to accept that transformative and systemic change is required if fashion is ever to be truly sustainable”. Yet Simpliciano points out it makes good business sense to produce better clothes in smaller quantities. “According to the OR Foundation, brands overproduce their SKUs by 20-30%. Some annually accrue billions of items that go unsold due to failures in demand forecasting, so there is a business case for producing less, producing smarter and producing better.” Further addressing the issue of degrowth, she says policy, industry and cultural change need to happen simultaneously. “We cannot exactly tell fashion brands to produce less, but we can encourage them to slow down, and we know that one way to do that is through consumer demand, or legislation and financial incentives.” She cites increased taxes for the culprits as one solution. “Overall, what we should be talking about more in the industry is ‘post-growth’,” she adds. “This means moving beyond just producing less, and reaching a point where the idea of success is not linked with the endless pursuit of growth and monetary reward [but] where we can really start to value people over growth and profit.” In order to highlight the need for brands to take responsibility, Generation of Waste staged a huge installation in the high-profile blue zone of the conference. It showed that while post-consumer waste accounts for 92 million tonnes of textile waste generated globally per year, 57 million tonnes of textile waste is generated pre-consumer. This is through a mixture of design, production and distribution (with the latter responsible for filling the equivalent volume of London’s O2 Centre 19 times annually). “Too often, solutions proposed by governments and industry place blame and responsibility for waste on to individual consumers or citizens,” says Fionda-Douglas. “It’s easier for big brands to push the responsibility while they go about ‘business as usual’.” Focusing on net zero alone won’t create the change that’s needed, she argues: “As fashion is so interconnected with other sectors such as agriculture and transportation. Any new legislation needs to be holistic so it can create positive ripple effects across the industry and affected communities.” To make tangible change quickly, Simpliciano says that brands should be focusing on raw materials, “given that half the total greenhouse gas emissions, as well as over 90% of biodiversity loss and water stress, occur due to the extraction and transformation of resources”. Caroline Rush, CEO of the British Fashion Council (BFC) which staged its Great Fashion for Climate Action showcase at Cop26, tells the Guardian: “We need to slow down the pace of the industry as a whole and invest in innovation to fast-track the move to a circular economy.” Rush says that “brands and governments can develop new techniques, onshore manufacturing and reskill workers, extending the life of garments and fibres by reintroducing old materials into the fashion economy, and bringing an end to the linear lifecycle currently associated with the industry.” During the two-week Cop26 event, Burberry released an update on how it intends to address its materials at source. Working with the Sustainable Fibre Alliance, its new biodiversity strategy promises, among other things, to ensure that all of its key materials – such as leather, cotton and wool – are 100% traceable by 2025. “[These are] used most widely across our collections and contribute to our greatest impacts,” Pam Batty, vice-president of corporate responsibility, says. The brand is also “developing our approach to sourcing our materials from regenerative agriculture systems, which will work with farmers to adopt low-carbon practices for these key materials”. In order for all brands to make sustainable practices scalable, investment is needed, says Fionda-Douglas. “There are incredible fashion organisations around the world who genuinely care about their contribution to a sustainable future for fashion, but there is not enough resource or investment for these solutions to scale their impact in a sustainable way.” Ultimately, says Simpliciano, “we need to see willingness from our legislators to take bold and unpopular action now”.In a clearing in the Amsterdamse Bos, a forest on the outskirts of the Dutch capital, is a “tree hub” where hundreds of saplings, among them hazelnut, sweet cherry, field maple, beech, chestnut and ash, are organised by type. The idea behind it is simple: every day unwanted tree saplings were being cleared and thrown away when those young trees could be carefully collected and transplanted to where they are wanted. Volunteers have already collected thousands of saplings cleared from woodland paths and those unlikely to survive in the forest shade. On Saturday, on donate a seedling day, people will be encouraged to take unwanted saplings or cuttings from their own gardens and give them to 200 tree hub locations across the Netherlands. This winter, Meer Bomen Nu (More Trees Now) aims to give away 1m young trees to farmers, councils and landowners. The small Dutch foundation hopes this circular practice will become commonplace across northern Europe. “The Netherlands wants to plant 37,000 hectares [91,400 acres], which is about 100m trees,” says Hanneke van Ormondt, the campaign manager of Meer Bomen Nu and a member of the Urgenda climate activism organisation. “I don’t know how short we are in getting nurseries in place, but we don’t need them; we just need more circular forest management. Everywhere along the path, left and right, is always cleared of shrubs and trees. Replant it! My dream is that every council will open a tree hub where foresters can bring their stuff, and people who want a free tree can come.” A pledge to plant significantly more trees by 2030 is a key part of the Netherlands’ climate change agreements, which Dutch courts have ordered the government to uphold. Across Europe, the EU has promised to plant 3bn trees by 2030, to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 44%, and there are strategies to protect, boost and extend damaged forests, despite the challenges of land availability. But while state forests typically use certified plants, there are also plenty of small landholders, farmers and the odd council looking to plant trees but on a tight budget. This is where Meer Bomen Nu believes volunteer organisations can spring up. “We need more trees for climate change and biodiversity laws,” says Van Ormondt. “Every tree [takes up] CO2, cools us down, gets the soil healthier, gives out oxygen, provides a home for fauna, birds and insects, cools the cities down … and makes us happier.” The Dutch foundation began partly by coincidence, after Urgenda won court cases against the Dutch government to force it to honour its climate pledges. “One of the ministries said to me that Urgenda has plans to plant trees but the tree nurseries can’t deliver them,” recalls Van Ormondt. “I like a challenge, so in March last year, I went to visit Franke van der Laan from Stichting MeerGroen. In the summer, he grows vegetables; in the winter he turns the vegetable patch into a tree hub filled with saplings from the 160 hectares where he does forest management. He started with 10 trees, which he gave away at the end of the season, then 100, then 500.” By the time Van Ormondt visited the tree hub, Van der Laan had 50,000 saplings, and through the progressive farming foundation Caring Farmers, they found 20 volunteers and had planted all of the young trees within three weeks. Meer Bomen Nu was set up by summer 2020 and an unlikely donation from a fruit nursery that August of 150,000 pear trees garnered national attention. “We caused traffic all over the Netherlands, with people driving from Limburg to Breukelen!” she says. “After that, we had a phone call with someone saying they had 80,000 guelder-roses in pots. By then, everybody knew us, and a million trees were pre-ordered on the website. Last winter, when we started, it was one big, logistic nightmare, and we had a very strict lockdown. But we did give away 250,000 seedlings and shoots. “We did a survey and 80% survived, which is as good as regular forest planting. That’s when we decided this had potential and we would try for a million this winter, and to get other countries interested.” Manou van der Noort, a volunteer coordinator at Amsterdamse Bos, says she always finds it a shame when paths are cleared of unwanted shrubs and saplings to be composted. “I think [Meer Bomen Nu] brings more awareness of what we need to do with trees and how every tree counts,” she says. “There’s also a lower threshold for farmers or councils to plant a new forest or hedgerow: it’s free, which is a pretty low threshold, and it’s easy to organise.” There is also enthusiasm from within the EU. On 11 December the European Commission’s executive vice-president, Frans Timmermans, will replant the first Belgian sapling with Meer Bomen Nu for a couple near Brussels with some land and a desire for 300 trees and shrubs. Timmermans told the Guardian: “By taking shrubs and young trees from locations where they are unwanted and replanting them in new areas, the Meer Bomen Nu campaign has found a creative, sustainable and circular way to get more trees planted. The Meer Bomen Nu campaign is now moving from the Netherlands to Belgium, and I think it is an approach that can inspire many more in Europe. I’m very happy to help spread the word and am looking forward to plant the first tree of the Belgian campaign next month.” The forestry lobby group Fern, however, says that smaller actions don’t mitigate the need for large-scale government action, not least in finding land for forests. “Community tree-planting, especially in urban areas, can bring huge environmental and social benefits,” says Kelsey Perlman, a forest and climate campaigner. “But these initiatives must not distract us from the bigger issue, which is the precarious state of Europe’s forests, and the industrial logging which is driving it. Prevailing forestry practices have created a biodiversity crisis in many of the EU’s protected forests, as repeated studies show.” Still, Van Ormondt believes trees on city and private land can only help. “We harvest only with the permission of the site manager, because they know what species they want to keep in an area and what is abundant,” she says. “If you do it right, there isn’t a downside. But don’t just go pulling out trees here and there when you walk the dog!”Two great British cello concertos, one extremely well known, the other inexplicably neglected, and both composed in response to the horrors of the first world war are featured here. For Elgar, his 1919 concerto proved to be his last significant work, while Frank Bridge’s “concerto elegiaco”, Oration, completed in 1930, was one of a series of pieces composed in the last two decades of his life – which also included his piano sonata, last two string quartets and the orchestral rhapsody Enter Spring – in which he went far beyond the Edwardian cosiness of his early works into an expressive world clearly linked to European modernism, and to the music of Alban Berg especially. If Elgar’s concerto looks back wistfully to a late-Romantic world that war had destroyed, Oration looks forward, though without offering much hope that things are likely to get better. Bridge conceived it as a protest against the futility of war, a funeral address given by the solo cello with an acerbic orchestral commentary. The six sections of the impassioned single movement, 30 minutes long, still fulfil all the functions of a traditional concerto, including a substantial cadenza, and the music’s absolute refusal to find any glory in the carnage of war perhaps influenced Bridge’s pupil Benjamin Britten when he came to compose his Sinfonia da Requiem in 1939, just three years after the delayed premiere of Oration. The performance by Gabriel Schwabe and the ORF Vienna Radio Symphony Orchestra under Christopher Ward is hugely impressive, full of finely realised detail, and lacking in bombast. And there is something refreshingly straightforward, too, about Schwabe’s approach to the Elgar cello concerto, a refusal to overstate its grandiose sense of tragedy, emphasising instead the tautness and economy of its construction, reinforced by the crisp alertness of the ORF orchestra. Some may prefer the heart-on-sleeve approach of more celebrated recordings, but Schwabe makes his own quietly eloquent case for Elgar’s work, just as he is a superb advocate for Bridge’s. This week’s other pick Two of the greatest string-orchestra works of the 20th century are brought together on Metamorphosis Notturno, the second disc for Naïve from Appassionato, the 40-piece string group directed by Mathieu Herzog. Chronologically, Schoenberg’s Verklärte Nacht and Richard Strauss’s Metamorphosen may be separated by almost half a century, but stylistically they are much more closely related, and while using such a large body of strings is not always to the benefit of either work, they go well enough together, separated here by Herzog’s own luscious arrangement of Respighi’s Il Tramonto, with the mezzo-soprano Adèle Charvet as the velvety soloist.With the climate crisis and sustainability at the forefront of people’s minds this year, many are likely to eschew material Christmas presents for experience gifts this year. Demand for experience-based gifts, which range from restaurant vouchers to massages and pottery classes, had been rising in recent years – before being stopped in its tracks by the coronavirus pandemic last December. We would like to hear from people who in recent years have moved away from exchanging material gifts in favour of experience presents. What has motivated you to do so? Has it been a positive change? Have you had any difficulties? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.There will probably never be a reboot of The Princess Bride, the classic 1980s film fantasy which was adapted by William Goldman from his own novel and directed by Rob Reiner. Certainly not if star Cary Elwes has his way. The dapper face of Westley the farmhand, AKA Dread Pirate Roberts, AKA The Man in Black, confirmed this week that he remains wholly opposed to a new version, the prospect of which has been mooted once or twice over the past decade. “If a film has landed in the hearts of the public, then, to me, it is not a good idea to try and revisit it,” he told the Hollywood Reporter. It’s a fair point. It is hard to imagine a remake of Reiner’s film ending up anything but a shallow retread. Unlike many of its contemporaries, the 1987 movie has not really aged: all its key components would look pretty much the same in 2021 as they did 34 years ago. There are no ambitious special effects and no giant beasties or fantasy landscapes that could be improved upon with modern technology. The closest thing to a non-human character is probably Billy Crystal’s goblin-like Miracle Max. It would be hard to find a living actor as out-of-this-world as the inimitable Andre the Giant to play Fezzik, and completely pointless to CGI a replacement. And yet there are a handful of 1980s fantasies that would benefit from a modern update. The naysayers out there may demur, but while the decade produced some fabulously magical movies, it also gave us its fair share of clangers – not to mention films that just didn’t have the budget or technical knowhow to succeed in their ambitions. Henry Cavill is already lined up to chop off some heads in a forthcoming Highlander reboot, while Netflix’s recent small-screen prequel to Jim Henson’s The Dark Crystal was a heartbreakingly short-lived puppet-led gem. Warwick Davis is due to return as Willow in a Disney+ sequel to the cult 1988 fantasy of the same name. So which other titles from the vaults should Hollywood be casting an eye over? How about Wolfgang Petersen’s The Neverending Story, from 1984? It’s a fantasy fable with an enduring charm, despite its rudimentary special effects. The Nothing is one of the most terrifying dark forces in film history, because it represents no less than the disintegration of imagination itself. Two weaker sequels were released in 1990 and 1994, and Kathleen Kennedy (now head of Lucasfilm) tried to bring a remake to the big screen in 2009, but the project has since languished in development hell. Would you want to meet heroic Atreyu and Bastian once again? Conan the Barbarian, from 1982, is an untouchable totem of big-screen high fantasy, second perhaps only to Peter Jackson’s Lord of the Rings trilogy. A reboot foundered in 2011, despite featuring Game of Thrones’ Jason Momoa as the musclebound Cimmerian, because Hollywood gave it to the untried German film-maker Marcus Nispel to direct (perhaps unaware that original director John Milius remained alive, if somewhat eccentric.) Arnold Schwarzenegger has long mooted a return to the role in the near legendary “King Conan”, perhaps Hollywood’s most famous unmade movie of the last decade. It would certainly be a joy to see Schwarzenegger back in the role that first made him famous (No, Hercules in New York doesn’t count). Last but not least on this shortlist is Dragonslayer, from 1981. Matthew Robbins’ moody fantasy features one of the greatest dragons of all time in the shape of Vermithrax Pejorative, which was constructed from a series of models using an updated take on traditional stop motion that helped to limit the technique’s usual jerky look. It is hard to imagine a new version using modern CGI methods would not make for a more lifelike rendition. Moreover, the movie is far from perfect: for some reason there seem to be a bunch of Americans hanging out in this dark, grim realisation of post-Roman, pre-Christian Britain, which does rather ruin the otherwise realistic tone. The film remains a cult classic, referenced by many but seen by few, which means there would be room for creative diversification in a reboot. There is something gorgeously, gothically romantic about this brooding vision of an ancient world, sitting on the precipice of history, in which magic is slowly waning away to nothing. Which other 80s fantasy can you imagine working well with modern special effects and an updated cast? Or would you, like Elwes, prefer to see Hollywood keep its ugly mitts off your youthful memories? • This article was amended on 26 November 2021 to correct the spelling of Wolfgang Petersen’s name, the release dates of The Neverending Story and Willow, and the type of animation technique used in Dragonslayer.In the wake of an inquiry’s conclusion that Martin Bashir used “deceitful behaviour” to secure his infamous Panorama interview with Diana, Prince of Wales, The Crown’s portrayal of the disgraced journalist is likely to be one of the most scrutinised episodes in the forthcoming series of the hit Netflix show. So it is perhaps no surprise that when casting the role of Bashir, the producers of the royal drama turned to Prasanna Puwanarajah, who appeared as the journalist eight years ago opposite Naomi Watts when she played the late Princess of Wales in the film Diana. However, his portrayal this time will be rather different from when Puwanarajah first played Bashir and the latter was still lauded for landing a huge BBC scoop. It later emerged that the journalist commissioned fake bank statements in order to secure his notorious 1995 interview with the royal. Nevertheless, the decision to cast the former University of Oxford-educated NHS doctor and writer, whose credits include Line of Duty, Doctor Foster and Patrick Melrose, is a signal that the team behind The Crown are keen to cover the episode as accurately as possible. Last year, on the 25th anniversary of the interview, Channel 4 and ITV aired documentaries which explored allegations that Bashir ordered the forged documents to show to Diana’s brother, Earl Spencer, to help gain his trust and access to his sister for Panorama. After the exclusive aired, concerns were raised and the BBC held an investigation, but a whistleblower was sidelined while Bashir went on to a lucrative career. In response to the documentaries’ revelations, in November 2020 the BBC director general, Tim Davie, commissioned a report from the former supreme court judge John Dyson. Lord Dyson revealed in May that in 1995 the BBC “covered up in its press logs” what it knew about Bashir’s behaviour and conducted a “woefully ineffective” internal investigation into the issue, despite the then head of BBC News, Tony Hall, being aware Bashir had told “serious and unexplained lies”. It is understood The Crown will dramatise the background leading up to the Panorama episode, parts of the interview and its aftermath. Spencer is also due to be portrayed, although it is not yet known who will play him. The award-winning Puwanarajah is in demand as an actor and has just finished filming a lead part in the hit Netflix series Call My Agent. He is also a director and writer: he wrote a film starring Timothy Spall for the 2012 London Olympics opening ceremony, as well as the National Theatre play Nightwatchman, and has co-written a novel called Sleeper with the Line of Duty writer Jed Mercurio. The Crown’s producer, Left Bank Pictures, and the writer Peter Morgan are no strangers to the controversy that comes with dramatising the royal family, particularly as the show has progressed to the modern day. But the recent revelations about Bashir turn up the spotlight on the series. With the aftermath of the Panorama episode still being felt today it would have been difficult for The Crown not to cover it. However, sources say Morgan wrote the scenes covering the interview after Dyson’s report and is keen to ensure it is factually accurate and handled sensitively. Although a letter from Diana in 1995 said she had no regrets concerning the interview, after Dyson’s report the Duke of Cambridge and the Duke of Sussex said the Panorama broadcast was part of a “culture of exploitation and unethical practices that ultimately took her life”. They said it fuelled her “fear, paranoia and isolation” and Prince William said it “should never be aired again” as it “effectively established a false narrative”. “This settled narrative now needs to be addressed by the BBC and anyone else who has written or intends to write about these events.”A man suspected of assisting the alleged kidnap of a six-year-old boy who survived a cable car crash in Italy has been arrested in Cyprus. Gabriel Abutbul Alon, an Israeli national, is accused of driving the car in which Eitan Biran was taken across the Italian border to the Swiss city of Lugano and arranging the private plane that flew him from there to Tel Aviv. He was arrested in Limassol after being traced through his mobile phone’s location tracker, on charges of “kidnapping, abduction and sequestration abroad of a minor”. Italian police issued an international arrest warrant for Alon, a former soldier, and Eitan’s grandfather, Shmuel Peleg, after the child was taken from his home close to the northern Italian city of Pavia on 11 September. Biran lost his parents, who were Israeli nationals living in Italy, his two-year-old brother and maternal great-grandparents in the aerial tramway crash in northern Italy in May. He became embroiled in a bitter custody battle between relatives in Italy and Israel after an Italian court granted temporary custody to his paternal aunt, Aya Biran-Nirko, in Pavia soon after the tragedy. Biran, who suffered injuries to his head and legs in the crash, went to live with his aunt after being discharged from hospital in June and had been due to start school two days after the alleged kidnap. A judge in Tel Aviv last month ruled that the child must be returned to Italy and ordered Peleg to pay about €18,000 in expenses and legal costs. The ruling was later halted while his relatives in Israel decided whether or not to appeal against the decision. Eitan was born in Israel but had been living in Italy since he was one month old. His paternal relatives claimed he had been taken away against their wishes and immediately filed a petition for his return to Italy. Peleg argued he had acted in the boy’s best interests.‘Monogamy is complicated,” says Michael, one half of a gay couple who, on this night, have brought home a man half their age for a threesome. Fun-hungry Michael (Alan Turkington) is quick to strip down to his boxers and strut his gym body around the living room. Phil (Edd Muruako) is his black partner with a “dad bod” and dance moves to match. Together they are the picture of middle-aged domesticity, trying to jazz up their 16-year relationship. But it is Quasim (Jonny Khan), their 20-year-old pick-up, who seems to be in control until the power shifts and the men enter into murky territory with revelations about Quasim’s past. At under an hour and a half long, Tom Wright’s script – prickingly funny and darkly exciting – is a focused study of gay family life choices, of intersectional identities, of othering within the gay community and class and race bigotries. The figure of the unwanted refugee – so topical right now – casts a shadow across the play and is spliced disturbingly with fantasy and guilt. Under the lively direction of Rikki Beadle-Blair (Wright’s longtime collaborator), bourgeois, nuclear family life is mercilessly satirised. In its initial social awkwardness, the play slightly resembles a middle class, gay version of Abigail’s Party. But there is the very serious question of how gay couples choose to live and love beneath the satire. Michael and Phil have an adopted son and their relationship seems to be as comfortable as the large sofa that dominates Natalie Johnson’s set. But Michael sneers at the life in which he now feels trapped: “I signed up for a kid, not heteronormative suburbia.” The older men feel sexual frisson at the prospect of having a threesome with their “road man” – Quasim is from a lower class background and has a tinge of a Middle-Eastern accent. But as the plot turns its screws, they are made to confront their bigotries. They enter into sexual role play that becomes dangerous, with moments in which we are uncertain if they are still acting out fantasies or revealing shocking truths. The performers make a strong actorly trio and each bare vulnerabilities in roles that require sharp changes of tone. Some scenes might feel a little awkward around the edges or speak their messages, but that doesn’t get in the way of this thoroughly original play that simultaneously entertains, provokes and unsettles. • At Omnibus theatre, London, until 12 December.Tim Booth shuffles on in an outsize wool hat and Afghan coat and without speaking a word, starts singing: “We’re all going to die.” It’s a typically perverse opening from a band who have long ploughed their own furrow, and darkly but amusingly tees up one of their most absorbingly wilful shows. If having Happy Mondays as a support act suggested a night of Madchester nostalgia, James’s first 75 minutes takes in just three copper-bottomed smashes – She’s a Star, Born of Frustration and a rapturously received Come Home. Instead, an adventurous setlist careers through six songs from recent Top 3 album All the Colours of You to surprise Hymn from a Village, a Factory Records single from 1985. Clearly not content to become a heritage act, Booth seems on a mission to prove that James still say something. The songs’ themes range from the pandemic and the transitory preciousness of life to George Floyd’s murder and the state of the US, with lyrics that are wonderfully observed (Curse Curse’s acrobatic leap from the couple having sex next door to, well, God) or simply powerful (Miss America’s “live the dream, as long as you’re white”). After a brief trip to 1990 for Gold Mother, Booth chuckles that during the baggy explosion James were “writing songs about childbirth”. It works because newer songs such as climate change anthem Beautiful Beaches more than live with the old and Booth is such a livewire, charismatic performer. In full flow – hyperactively shake-dancing, beatifically grinning, at one point using a megaphone to shamanically shout to the spirits – the 61-year-old seems to transcend global worries to reach a highly engaging enlightened contentment. The singer’s smile widens at the arena-sized wave of clapping that greets 2001’s sublime Getting Away With It (All Messed Up) and the band finally unleash whoppers Sound, Laid and the perennial Sit Down, during which the band sit down and seated audience members stand up. The hits bring crowd euphoria, but James are still on a quest for humanity’s deeper truths. • James play Utilita Arena, Birmingham (26 November) and Motorpoint Arena, Cardiff (28 November). Then touring.Monday During the half-time break at the Spurs v Leeds game yesterday, I was chatting to my friend Matthew, with whom I have been going to the football for longer than either of us cares to remember. It had been a particularly bleak first half. Tottenham were supposed to be reinvigorated under their new manager, Antonio Conte, but there appeared to be no difference to how they had played under both José Mourinho and Nuno Espírito Santo. The team still lacked any creative ideas – the default mode of every player was to pass the ball sideways – and Leeds, a side just above the relegation zone, were in complete control. What’s more, Spurs had not managed a single shot on goal, let alone one on target. So I told Matthew what had been on my mind. That I wasn’t sure how much longer I could face putting myself through such unremitting suffering, something that I had previously effortlessly taken in my stride. Indeed I had always worn Spurs’ capacity to let their fans down as something of a badge of honour. I had expected Matthew to tell me to get a grip and stop moaning. If I expected to win a major trophy I should support another team. Instead, he told me that his father – a longtime season-ticket holder back in the day – had also reached the same point at roughly the same age as me and had stopped going to games. Which got me wondering if there was a quantity theory of disappointment in football and that I had reached my limit. I’ve a while to find out. Spurs came out for the second half looking like a different team and went to dominate the game and win quite comfortably. We left the ground making plans to meet up for the Brentford game next week. Maybe I’m just incurably shallow. Tuesday Just over halfway through his speech to the CBI’s annual conference – after the strange car noises and comparing himself to Moses – Boris Johnson made a gag about fintech, medtech and nanotech all sounding like something out of 15th-century Mexico. It didn’t get a laugh. Then it hadn’t when he had made exactly the same joke during his speech to Cop26 a few weeks earlier. But not getting a laugh doesn’t seem to worry Boris. If I made a gag that had died on its feet, I would assume the material wasn’t up to scratch and make sure I never used it again. Boris merely assumes his audience is too thick to get the punchline and carries on telling the same joke. He was at it again later on in the day. After losing his place for an excruciating 20 seconds, he went on a long ramble about Peppa Pig, which he clearly expected everyone to find amusing. They didn’t. But Johnson was completely undeterred and went on to tell the same Peppa Pig story twice more on the same day. First in a speech to the Centre for Policy Studies and then at a Tory fundraiser. Either Boris has sociopathic levels of self-belief or he just can’t judge an audience. Or maybe the crowd at the Tory fundraiser humoured him with a laugh. They certainly humoured him with their cash. One punter paid £35,000 for an hour playing cricket with Rishi Sunak, another coughed up £22,000 to do karaoke with Liz Truss. Dinner with Michael Gove went for £25,000 while a “Get Brexit Done” poster made a cool £30,000. Halfway through the black-tie event, ministers had to nip off to the Commons to vote for a government amendment to ensure that the least well-off parted with the greatest percentage of their capital to pay for their care. On reflection, that might have been the sickest joke of the day. Wednesday Recovering from depression is a weirdly disorientating process for me as it’s always at least a month or so after the event that I realise I am actually feeling a little better. Take my sleeping patterns. I’m still having vivid anxiety dreams every night – I long to get time off from my psyche – but it’s taken me several weeks at least to notice that I am no longer completely debilitated by them in the morning and can start the day more or less normally. It’s almost as if I can’t allow myself to trust the process of recovery in case things return to their bleakest. The same applies to going out. At my lowest point, I either couldn’t leave the house or, if I could, then it was an endurance test, but it’s only recently I’ve registered that I have been enjoying being more sociable. Only last night I was at the Nightwatchman (a cricket magazine to which I have contributed) quiz – the first for nearly two years due to the pandemic – and felt quite emotional to be among friends I hadn’t seen for such a long time. A month ago, I would have been sat there, assuming I had gone, wondering how soon I could leave. Our team didn’t win, but we never do. Our lack of knowledge about the Faroe Islands, Henry VI, astronomical units and Sunil Gavaskar let us down, but we didn’t disgrace ourselves. The one downside was that I missed the Bake Off final and was unable to avoid the dozens of spoilers on Twitter and online that Giuseppe had won when I got home. I won’t be watching on catchup, mind. Because the real winner was definitely Jürgen. We’re still waiting for a stewards’ inquiry into how he got knocked out in the semi-final. Thursday It will probably come as no surprise to you that I haven’t heard the new Adele album. But then I haven’t heard of any of her previous albums either. My loss, possibly, but there’s only so much time to listen to music and I prefer to spend it with Leonard Cohen, Joni Mitchell and Bruce Springsteen. As well as opera and classical music, of course. It’s an age thing, I guess. So I can’t say for certain whether her new record is immeasurably improved by Adele insisting that Spotify hide the shuffle function and play the album in the order in which it was listed or if she is being a little precious. My guess is the latter. It goes without saying artists curate their music and take a lot of trouble over which track should follow another, but surely listeners should also be free to make their own judgments? Just as authors can’t choose how people read their books. I, and most other people I know, frequently read nonfiction books out of chapter sequence and one of my sisters likes to read the end of novels before going back to start at the beginning, so singers and composers can’t dictate how people consume their music. Occasionally it’s simply a matter of time. Listening to an entire opera requires you to have at least two and a half hours spare, something I rarely seem to have, so I’m more than happy to listen to selected highlights. There’s no self-deception going on. I know I’m not treating myself to the composer’s full artistic vision, but I am settling for what I want at the time. Which seems to me fair enough. Friday For the first time in 12 years, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence has developed new guidelines for treating and managing depression in adults. Those identified with less severe depression will be offered psychotherapy, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), meditation and exercise as first-line treatment alternatives to being prescribed antidepressants. This sounds eminently reasonable and long overdue. Over the years I’ve tried them all and have found them all helpful, even with episodes of severe depression. Especially exercise and psychotherapy, which have been lifelines to me for decades, along with my medication. My concern about the new Nice guidelines is the logistics. NHS mental health services are already patchy at best, which is the main reason why so many doctors prescribe drugs as the treatment of first resort. When you’re depressed you don’t want to have to wait months for CBT or psychotherapy, you need help much sooner than that. So if the therapy services are already overstretched then God knows what they will be like if there are suddenly an extra 2 million people on the waiting lists. Nor does it seem likely that the government will make more cash available to fund more therapy. The recent 1.5% increase on national insurance contributions is already earmarked to be spent on other NHS services and another tax rise would be politically unacceptable. So, for all Nice’s good intentions, my bet is that doctors will still be handing out the pills. Digested week, digested: Peppa Pig World • A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyDaniel Kretinsky has agreed an option for a full takeover of West Ham as part of his purchase of a 27% stake in the club. The Czech billionaire became West Ham’s second-largest shareholder last month and documents submitted to Companies House this week show an option is in place for him to acquire the shares owned by David Sullivan and David Gold for a set price. The papers reveal that there was a put and call agreement between Sullivan, 1890 holdings a.s, the holding company used by Kretinsky to buy his shares, and EP Investment Sarl, Kretinsky’s investment company. It will give Sullivan, West Ham’s biggest shareholder, the right to sell his shares to Kretinsky at a set price. Kretinsky will have the option to buy Sullivan’s shares. The price is set in writing and cannot change if Sullivan or Kretinsky take up their option. The figure will not rise if West Ham qualify for the Champions League this season and the documents also show that other shareholders can be included in the deal under the same terms. The option exists only for a certain amount of time, but West Ham have not said when it expires. Any sale by Sullivan before March 2023 would incur a cost to him and Gold under the terms of the agreement by which West Ham moved to the London Stadium in 2016. Sullivan and Gold will have to pay financial penalties to the taxpayer if the club is sold for more than £300m. Kretinsky’s investment, which was between £180m and £200m, is understood to have valued West Ham at £700m. Club insiders have previously played down suggestions that Kretinsky’s arrival will eventually lead to Sullivan and Gold leaving West Ham. The duo have owned the club since January 2010 and, although they have endured some rocky spells, they have seen West Ham make rapid progress since appointing David Moyes as their manager in December 2019. The club are fourth in the Premier League, reached the last 16 of the Europa League on Thursday and are in the last eight of the Carabao Cup. Kretinsky, known as the “Czech Sphinx” because of his inscrutable business style, has said that he does not intend to force through quick change. The 46-year-old told the Evening Standard this week that he wanted to help West Ham continue to build carefully on and off the pitch.After a historic series win against New Zealand in Christchurch in September the latest challenge for England on the way to their Commonwealth title defence next summer is three Tests against Jamaica on home soil, beginning on Sunday at London’s Copper Box Arena. If expectations were already high for the Roses after defeating the world champions in their back yard two months ago, the first time England have won a series in New Zealand, then the squad named by the head coach, Jess Thirlby, has only raised them even more. With Jo Harten, Stacey Francis-Bayman, Natalie Haythornthwaite and Helen Housby all home from Australia’s Super Netball League and in the fold, the England team that will take to the court will be their strongest since they won bronze at the 2019 World Cup in Liverpool. It may also explain the confident talk in the England camp and why they are targeting nothing less than a clean sweep. “We want to get 3-0 on home soil,” says Sonia Mkoloma, England’s assistant coach and a former international. The challenge, as ever with England’s netball regime, is ensuring that those who compete in the Australian league mesh with the players from the UK’s Vitality Netball Superleague. The primary focus of Thirlby’s tenure so far has been maximising the upward pressure exerted by those coming through on the more established players. Mkoloma knows that when it comes to getting that balance right, the buck stops with them. “Everybody’s position is being challenged,” Mkoloma says. “As coaching staff, it’s exciting and it’s a bit of pressure on us because you’ve got to make sure you’re selecting the right players to do the right job at the right time. For many years England didn’t have a lot of depth. So, the fact that we have now players who are homegrown … and we’ve got the players that are sitting in one of the top leagues returning, I think it just adds extra excitement for us as coaches.” The inclusion of the 19-year-old Funmi Fadoju in the 16-strong squad is a perfect example of that quest for balance and of the confidence England have in their local players. “When there’s talent, there’s talent,” Mkoloma says of Fadoju. “For her, it’s just a great opportunity to keep getting better and better.” But when belief is elevated scrutiny quickly follows, and the big sticking point for England pivots around their mid-court. Haythornthwaite remains the only specialist wing attack named in the team. Laura Malcolm and Sophie Drakeford-Lewis, the two others who offer the position, can play there but wing attack is certainly not their first-choice role. Concerns then abound that there is an obvious weakness in the Roses lineup. Throw in to the mix that the thrust of Jamaica’s might can be found in both bookends – Jhaniele Fowler, the world’s greatest shooter in one circle, and Shamera Sterling, the world’s best keeper, in the other – and it becomes clear the battle for ownership of the mid-court will be critical. It’s little wonder Mkoloma identifies it as an area of “excitement”. Critics might identify a glaring imbalance in having eight wing defenders and three wing attackers, but Mkoloma sees opportunity. What better way is there to challenge your depth than where you know the battle is going to be greatest? “For me, it’s going to be exciting to see how we match up against their mid-court,” says the former technical director of the New South Wales Swifts. “We do have a lot of mid-court players, which allows us to have a lot of options and that gives us the opportunity to test players. It’s about what our mid-court can do against the Jamaican mid-court.” Chuck them in to the deep end in the portion of the court where the game will probably be won and lost, and the cream will surely rise. Is it genius? Time will tell. It’s an experiment that will reveal how prepared England are for what lies ahead. Jamaica’s team are now more well-rounded than those England have faced before. Their ranks boast reinforcements that only further support their star players. The defending end, though missing Jodi-Ann Ward, will have other tried-and-tested Super Netball players Latanya Wilson and Kadie-Ann Dehaney, the latter having won the premiership in Australia with Melbourne Vixens in 2020. The “test” in this Test series needs no underlining. The last time the two met, in January 2020, Jamaica won 70-66. After London the series moves to Nottingham for the final two matches on 4 and 5 December. “They’re a massive threat,” Mkoloma concedes, and with the Commonwealth title defence looming next year, the netball world will be watching to see how the Roses fare against their oldest rivals.If you have already streamed any of The Beatles: Get Back, Peter Jackson’s mammoth documentary on the Fab Four’s Let It Be sessions, you will have probably marvelled at how alive it all looks: helped by Jackson and his team’s restorative whizzery, John, Paul, George and Ringo seem right there, noodling, improvising, gently ribbing each other (George seems to bear the brunt of it). Discount the odd contemporaneous reference to Enoch Powell or Zsa Zsa Gabor, not to mention some extremely late-60s fashions, and it often feels like you’re watching it live. Of course, the fact that Jackson had to use those restorative techniques – the same he used on his first world war doc They Shall Not Grow Old – to bring the Beatles rushing to the present is a pretty striking illustration of how long ago those sessions were. Today, nearly as much time has passed since the release of Let It Be, as had passed between the end of the first world war and the album’s arrival. Microprocessors, space stations, video recorders (let alone DVDs, USB sticks or the concept of streaming an entire eight-hour miniseries on the Beatles), Mark Wahlberg: none of these things were around when the Beatles were. And yet, after all this time the Beatles still seem to have a vice-like grip over popular culture, a cultural footprint comparable to something like Marvel. (Fittingly, when I logged on to Disney+ to watch Get Back last night, it had dislodged Marvel’s new series Hawkeye from the big banner position at the top of the page.) Just in terms of pure sales they still dominate. In the first half of the year in the US – half a century on from Ed Sullivan, screaming fans, the olds just not getting it – they sold more albums than anyone else; the only group that came close over that period were BTS, a group who are regularly compared to the Beatles in terms of their planet-straddling massiveness. In fact, the Fabs are still the go-to comparison for any aspiring giga-stars. When the trap duo Rae Sremmurd were looking for a hyperbolic moniker for themselves a few years back they opted for Black Beatles – and had an absolutely monster viral hit in the process. McCartney, meanwhile, still gets invited to collaborate with the biggest musicians on the planet that aren’t him, whether that’s duetting with Rihanna or whistling for Kanye (whistling might seem a little beneath Macca, but it’s arguably better than chewing celery). Bands and artists still pay homage through cover versions, woozy interpolations, or just wholesale rip-offs. And it’s not just those inside the industry paying homage. Head to just about any football ground across the country and you’re likely to hear the chorus of Hey Jude belted out. Head to London’s Covent Garden, or maybe Liverpool Lime Street station, and you’ll probably hear a busker butchering Blackbird. Is this continued relevance something to be celebrated? Or, as film-maker Adam Curtis argues, might it be evidence of a “frozen culture … It is extraordinary that we now still listen to music from bands in the 1950s and 1960s, like the Beatles. It is the equivalent of people in the 1960s still dancing to music from the 1890s.” Certainly, I have some sympathy for that view, particularly when hearing Yesterday – a song whose meaning and poignancy has been stripped bare by relentless overplaying – for the 54,378th time. But at the same time, there always seems to be some new avenue to explore with the Beatles, some new way of updating or reexamining their work: see Frank Ocean’s reinterpretation of Here There and Everywhere on his Blonde track … White Ferrari, which knits the song into drowsy, daring future R&amp;B. The world of the Beatles is essentially limitless. No wonder they outlived the VHS. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Boris Johnson’s proposal for a bridge or tunnel linking Scotland to Northern Ireland has been rejected by a feasibility study as vastly expensive – £335bn for the bridge or £209bn for the tunnel – and fraught with potential difficulties. Released alongside a wider so-called union connectivity review, which called for investment in road, rail and domestic aviation to better connect the four UK nations, the fixed link report found either a bridge or tunnel would be at the very edge of what could be achieved with current technology. The tunnel would have to be so long and deep that it could only accommodate trains for safety reasons. It would take at least 30 years for either of the links to open. A particular problem, which was raised by engineers when Johnson proposed the link in 2019, is Beaufort’s Dyke. The seabed trench is up to 300 metres deep and more than two miles wide at its broadest point, and is also filled with million tonnes of munitions dumped in the 1970s. A tunnel would have to be constructed at depths of about 400 metres below water level, exerting significant pressures and requiring a 25-mile climb in either direction given a maximum rail gradient of one in 100. By comparison the Channel tunnel is just over 23 miles long, with a maximum depth of 75 metres. Beaufort’s Dyke would also prove “a challenge” for the bridge because the construction would have to pass over the trench, with a span of at least 2.5 miles and foundations set back from the edge, said the study, which was led by a small team of civil engineering experts. No suspension bridge with a span that long has yet been built, the report said, although there have been some design concepts with similar lengths. In an introduction to the feasibility report, Sir Peter Hendy, the chair of Network Rail, who led the connectivity review, said the study had concluded both projects were possible. “A bridge crossing, however, would be the longest span bridge built to date,” he wrote. “A tunnel would be the longest undersea tunnel ever built given the limited gradients on which trains can operate, the route it would need to take and the depths it would need to reach.” Building a rail link would also create “some complexity” because the track gauge in Northern Ireland is the same as in the Republic but different to that in the rest of the UK. Hendy, who headed Transport for London when Johnson was mayor of the city, nonetheless said it had been “excellent question to ask”. He wrote: “For many decades, politicians and engineers have debated this proposal, but have done so without the evidence to show whether it was possible and, if so, what it would take to do it. This is the first comprehensive, conclusive study on the subject since the idea was first mooted over 150 years ago.” Johnson has a mixed record on proposals for ambitious bridges. As mayor of London he spent at least £37m of public money on a planned garden bridge over the Thames despite worries over funding, the project’s purpose and the lack of planning consents on one side of the river. Among ideas in the wider connectivity review were investment in the west coast railway line north of Crewe to give better links to Scotland, something which goes beyond the £96bn rail plan announced last week, and an upgrade to the A75 road, which runs from the M6 near Gretna Green to the Scottish ferry port of Stranraer.Despite scrapping its traffic light system for international travel earlier this year, England has reimposed a “red list” for the countries deemed to be the highest coronavirus risk. The list dictates different rules for testing and quarantining travellers. A country may be placed on it based on factors, although including the prevalence of variants of concern, the percentage of the population that has been vaccinated and infection rates. South Africa and five other southern African countries are currently on the red list, after concerns were raised over the new B.1.1.529 variant. Other countries with high infection rates have relatively free travel permitted. The chart below shows each country’s latest data for their case rate and vaccination rate. Whether a country is on the red list, as well as the vaccination status of the traveller, will dictate whether and where they need to quarantine: Red list countries: travellers need a negative pre-departure Covid test, and will need to stay in hotel quarantine and complete a passenger locator form. Non-red countries and with approved UK vaccine: travellers need to show proof of vaccination and take a day-two test (which may be a lateral flow test). Non-red countries and without approved UK vaccine: travellers need a negative pre-departure Covid test, and will need to take day-two and day-eight PCR tests and self-isolate for 10 days (with option to test to release after five days). Data notes Vaccination rate data is sourced from Our World in Data and shows the latest available data for total vaccinations for every 100 people in a particular country. Countries that have not recorded a vaccination rate to date have not been included. Cases data is the latest available from Johns Hopkins University, and shows the average number of new daily cases across the last two weeks. Each country’s dot is sized by the number of visitors it received from the UK in 2019, as sourced from the ONS. Case and vaccine rates data is the latest available. It does not reflect the data at the point at which a country was placed in its travel category. The Republic of Ireland is not included as its inclusion in the common travel area means that it is exempt from the travel lists.Had you taken a random sample of 200 British people 20 years ago, hardly any of them would have heard of charcuterie. Today, the air-dried landscape is very different. The UK charcuterie scene is one of craft food’s cooler cottage industries and, in an age of overstretched kitchens, the meat board is a popular menu item with caterers. Quick to assemble, impressive when diligently sourced, and suited to the grazing habits of modern restaurant goers, its rise is a win-win for diners and chefs. If we are going to eat meat post-Cop26, there are worse ways than in a format that encourages the infrequent savouring of small amounts of animal products and, certainly at the top end, careful husbandry of rare-breed animals and nose-to-tail use of every morsel in salamis and patés. Yes, there is terrible faux-artisan charcuterie out there. But you do not have to look far for the good stuff. Such charcuterie deserves to be thoughtfully served, which is where How to Eat – the series exploring how best to enjoy Britain’s favourite foods – comes in. To avoid meat-board mishaps, coppa catastrophes and sloppy salami, read on. Cheese Not the place How to Eat expected to start. But there are many people who seem to believe a charcuterie board should always include cheese. This is wrong. Not because a charcuterie board is, by definition, a collection of cured and cooked meats, but because adding cheese offers too much of a good thing. While combining red meat and cheese is hardly unusual, it is not automatic. It is an unusually rich agglomeration of protein and fats, which, in their mouth-coating fullness, threaten to cancel one another. In order to take real lingering satisfaction in their resonant flavours, charcuterie and cheese are best enjoyed individually, not in such jumbled chaos. What next? Smoked salmon on the side? Shopping Charcuterie is a realm in which, if you do your research, spending a bit more can yield exponential benefits. Conversely, cut costs and (a few bargains notwithstanding) you will often end up with an unedifying collection of arid air-dried hams, spongiform salami and gristly chorizo. Cheap charcuterie is a false economy. Keep it as a rare treat or, for less money, eat something more exciting instead. The meat mix A variety of three or four meats differentiated by texture and flavour is optimum. For example, you might serve an air-dried ham or two (if contrasting silky jamón ibérico with drier lomo, for instance); a funky, fermented salami (be it traditionally flavoured with fennel or modern seasonings such as cider, lovage or seaweed); and a chorizo, either curado (eating) chorizo or cooked. You can further increase the combinations by deploying similar items but rendered in unusual meats: lamb, mutton, duck or venison. But this should not be a free-for-all. For instance, British cooked hams are a limp addition in such boisterously flavoursome company; HTE has yet to meet a bresaola that doesn’t bore it to death; and never-ending, jaw-taxing biltong has no place here. Similarly, ’nduja is a strange inclusion. Its chilli-spiked flavour is a domineering bully and it necessitates the addition of bread or toast. Talking of which … Soft charcuterie A phrase that conjures wobbly offal and a whiff of putrefaction, rather than the patés and rillettes intended. Such items should be treated as an optional extra, potentially welcome but inessential. They must offer a genuine point-of-difference on the board rather than a way of cheaply beefing it up. Bread (sticks) Unless your meat board includes soft charcuterie, bread has no functional role. Charcuterie is best enjoyed on its own, naked (the charcuterie, not you). You do not ordinarily eat it on or in bread. But, where a board is being eaten as a de facto main course, bread is often added as a bulking agent, eaten at intervals to fill you up. And why not? Good bread and butter is life. The alternatives, bread sticks or crackers, are poor subs for a good sourdough and take on a Calvinist edge when, all too frequently, they are served without butter. There is an argument a dry cracker is an effective palate cleanser between mouthfuls of meat but, frankly, if you are eating your charcuterie with such steely self-discipline you probably need to relax a bit. Additions It is possible to enjoy charcuterie with zero accompaniments. Good cured meats are their own worlds of flavour. You may add items that offer suitable, peripheral entertainment (a complementary note of acidity, a reviving vegetal freshness), but such additions – eaten between mouthfuls of charcuterie, not with – are very much the meat board’s support acts. They should be kept to a judicious minimum. Instead (particularly in the US), the charcuterie board is frequently a crazed extravaganza, a colourful miniaturised buffet of all the foods whose aesthetic abundance is supposed to blind us to the stupidity of serving slices of orange with smoked speck. You cannot simply empty your fridge on to a meat board and hope it works. For instance, regardless of how many recipes exist for roast figs and Parma ham, HTE is implacably opposed to mixing – in a cavalier, more-is-more lust for all the flavours all the time – sweet and savoury components. It is a potentially catastrophic crossing of the streams that will lead to ugly jarring on the palate. Sweet and savoury items can combine in sublime ways, but, like open-heart surgery, that is an elite activity for highly skilled, dedicated professionals. Not amateurs. Unwelcome rogue elements Chutneys, mustards, piccalilli This is not a ploughman’s. You are not eating English ham that needs such boosting. Honey An abomination in most circumstances, definitely here. Fresh fruit From the obvious (grapes, apple, figs) to the ridiculous (strawberries, orange, pineapple). Dried fruit The presence of this reveals a failure of nerve in whoever has composed the board. It is deemed to add glamour but it is less impressive than it first appears. Dried fruit has no raisin (sorry) to be there. Tomatoes Invariably, in Britain, bullet-hard, unpleasantly astringent cherry tomatoes. You may instead opt for that lairy Hawaiian-shirted loudmouth, the sundried tomato, but HTE would prefer you didn’t. Green salad You can see the logic. On a board full of meat ribboned with fat, won’t a tangle of watercress and rocket offer a cleansing interregnum of vivid green vitality? No. Against the richness of the meat, it is too wild and mineral an over-correction. Sliced avocado Increasingly everywhere, unfortunately. Padron peppers Why are they on there? Because you’ve served bellota and manchego, too? This is not a Spanish theme park, mi amigo. Justifiable additions Celeriac remoulade Refreshing, potentially carrying a little heat, but its creaminess dovetails with the fatty meats. Salted almonds The sodium overlap links the nuts and meat, while offering textural variation and, in the nuts’ earthiness, a certain punctuation. Fat green olives Either brined or garlic-mined for a pleasant spikiness or in oil for glossy cohesion. Gherkins, cornichons or, in the same pickled ballpark, silverskin onions Roasted piquillo peppers For their smoky, brined, charcuterie-adjacent flavours. Caper berries Like the work of Leigh “Celebrity Juice” Francis, hugely irritating (all those seeds) but kind of magic, too. Temperature There is a frigid lifelessness to recently refrigerated charcuterie. It must be served at room temperature, beaded with fat-sweat and ready to yield its secrets. The board in meat board Psychologically, there is something dissonant about seeing cured meat served on a cold, hard, clinically white ceramic plate. Instead, a wooden board offers a fitting, attractively rustic platform for fanned, folded, curled and unfurled meat and (thanks to its lower thermal conductivity when touched) an illusory warmth. Plus, the wood yields satisfyingly if you have to cut anything, with less clattering noise than on a plate (a consideration that also rules out slate). Note: there is no need to buy over-engineered boards with portion partitions, drilled-out hollows or cutlery holders, nor any need to use ramekins to contain olives, nuts etc. It just creates more cleaning and, when sharing, you want as little obstructive clutter on the board as possible. Simply put items that might roll around in the middle of a chopping board, hemmed in with meat and bread. Equipment-wise, keep it simple: fingers, a knife to share, forks and toothpicks per person, are all you need. Sharing You know the drill. You cannot hog one meat because you do not like the others. Items must be strictly divided. Any swaps must be fairly negotiated (eg one slice of ham = four pieces of chorizo). Do not leave it until the last mouthful to “try” an item you have previously disregarded, which others around the table love. Finally, if you have Covid reservations about eating at close proximity to others, it is definitely best to choose something else. So, meat boards, how do you eat yours?In a prehistoric bog where iguanodons once roamed and the early Britons first smelted ore into iron, what looks like a tiny orange candle peeps through the mire. It sends my companion into a paroxysm of joy. “That’s good! That’s new!” The candle belongs to a luminous fungus, Mitrula paludosa, otherwise known as bog beacon that is thinly scattered in the swampy habitat of the Sussex Weald. The exclamation – accompanied by an expletive – belongs to Dave Bangs, who, at 70, is perhaps Britain’s most enduring guerrilla botanist. The find is one of many illicit discoveries documented by Bangs. For nearly six decades he has scoured the Sussex countryside for hidden ecological treasures, unearthing the neglected and endangered flora behind its fences. His field surveys have culminated in three books, a video and, in July, the basis of one of the largest mass trespasses in the UK in recent years. I meet Bangs off the train at Balcombe for what he promises will be “a real cook’s tour” of a countryside few are permitted to see. Tall, sprightly with strong features, Bangs has something of the iguanodon about him. His shredded Barbour jacket is clearly accustomed to a life spent in dispute with barbed wire and bramble. “We’ll have to move fast,” he says. “The sites are all off-piste so we might be challenged – but it’s unlikely.” Heavily annotated Ordnance Survey maps are dug out from an old satchel. Land ownership in England is notoriously inscrutable, but even a cursory look makes the reality clear: on almost every side we are surrounded by wooded estates that we are forbidden to enter. Together they form the Worth Forest, which in Bangs’s view ought to bear the same relationship to Crawley as Epping Forest does to London: an open expanse of forest, available to all. But whereas the latter was saved from enclosure in the 19th century by mass protests, Worth is divided into a series of large estates. “They’re fiercely private, all of them, and completely moronic about nature conservation. I’m sure they’d deny that furiously. But they fucking are.” In contrast to some conservationists, who believe the best way to protect nature is to keep people out of it, Bangs argues that access is crucial to protecting such landscapes. “Because no one knows it, no one loves it, and if no one loves it no one is going to fight for it,” he says. He believes most environmental damage occurs in the 92% of the country the public is forbidden to enter – deepening an alienation from nature that makes it harder to save what remains, or even understand what is being lost. We set off up a lane towards one of the estates looking for a place to hop over the fence. Bangs drops his voice to a conspiratorial whisper. “I’ll just take my hat off … I wear it an awful lot and it’s such an identifier.” He has been investigating the area for more than 30 years, since learning of two ancient woodlands that were clear-felled by estate owners in the preceding decades. He has no doubt the situation will only get worse. “In fact, on some estates it already has,” he says. North of where we stand, a new Center Parcs development is being planned that will cover hundreds of acres of the Sussex woodland. Several charities, including the Woodland Trust, countryside charity CPRE Sussex and the RSPB this week warned that if the project went ahead it would “tear the heart out of Oldhouse Warren’s irreplaceable ancient woodland … resulting in irreversible loss of habitat for wildlife”. We spot a covered area behind a bush and mount the fence. Bangs is well prepared. He extracts a piece of tarpaulin from his bag and folds it neatly over the barbed wire, overcoming the barrier with an elegant two-step. The wood we enter is a tangle of overgrown rhododendrons left unchecked by the landowners and steadily choking the understory of plants growing beneath the tree canopy. First, we discover the bog beacon by a trickling gill. Then, on the ridge above, one of the giant ancient trees Bangs had pointed out on the map. “Good, she’s all right,” says Bangs, as though speaking of an old friend. The trunk, a fusion of several trees planted in a cluster, spans the width of a small car. It is surrounded by piles of rusting rubbish. Bangs has witnessed worse. In the adjacent wood, already devastated by a conifer plantation, he discovered that several miles of heathy rides – relict slivers of ancient open forest habitat – had been covered over with chalk-and-rubble tracks, stuffed with bits of smashed sink and toilet ceramic. The alkaline chalk covers the acidic soil, eliminating wildflowers such as bog pimpernel, ivy-leaved bellflower, pale sedge and marsh violet. It was the discovery of these, and other threats to his native downland, which motivated Bangs to co-found Landscapes of Freedom. This July they organised, in collaboration with the Right to Roam campaign, a trespass of more than 300 people to Pangdean Bottom, a beautiful coomb, or valley, a few miles from the edge of Brighton. Owned by Brighton and Hove city council but let to a tenant farmer who uses it for grazing and pheasant shooting, the ancient down pasture has suffered, argue campaigners, with woodland and scrub needed by pheasants superseding once botanically complex, flowery turf. Botany for Bangs is not simply an exercise in collection, preservation or delight, but a way to transform our understanding of the landscape. Seen through his eyes, a stitchwort (Stellaria graminea) in a field of bland pasture hints at the survival of a richer, wilder landscape lurking underneath. Shining hookeria, a delicate moss, reveals the ghost of an ancient gill. This knowledge, he believes, gives trespassers a moral authority – as nature’s guardians, whistleblowers and advocates – counteracting the tendency to treat them as invaders of the land, or as a danger to it. “Because I know this countryside so well, I can talk with authority about it to anyone. If a landowner comes and challenges me, it’s very often the case that I know a lot more than they do about their site,” he says. “You can be as mad as you like, but they can’t deny you that authority.” We end the day traversing two other estates. The grounds belong to a country manor that has been turned into a wedding venue, where a sprawl of steel fences mar what was once part of the old Balcombe Down, “a sort of playground for local people, you know? A magic wood. Now it’s just like a zoo.” Then, across a railway bridge dotted with sweet briar – “it has the most fantastic fragrance” – a new estate of mysterious woodland. Chest-high wood ant nests dot the forest floor. The discovery of lily of the valley elicits more expletive-laden yelps from Bangs. It is “vanishingly rare” in Sussex, he says. We stop in the slanting light to take in the Wealden landscape in all its particularity; bog and gill, woodland and heath. “You’re more or less looking at what the ancient peoples would have looked at. I love it … And no one knows about it. No one comes here. Absolutely no one. And yet you’re only about five miles from bloody Crawley.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresExhibition of the week Life Between Islands Alberta Whittle, Sonia Boyce and Hurvin Anderson are among the stars of what promises to be a definitive survey of Caribbean British art since the 1950s. • Tate Britain, London, from 1 December to 3 April Also showing Alvin Baltrop Truly arresting photographs of gay life around the ruinous Hudson River piers in 1970s and 80s New York, taken by a voyeur of genius who never got his due in his lifetime. • Modern Art Bury Street, London, until 22 January Salvador Dalí to Jenny Saville A showcase of recent acquisitions by Scotland’s modern art museum, which also includes pieces by Alberta Whittle, Dorothea Tanning and Bridget Riley. • Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art (Modern One), Edinburgh, from 27 November Journeys A look at how contemporary art helps the healing process at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, with Brian Eno among the aesthetic surgeons. • Saatchi Gallery, London, until 13 January Sirens Margate artists Sophie von Hellermann and Anne Ryan collaborate on a new installation that looks out on the winter sea. • Turner Contemporary, Margate, until Spring 2023 Image of the week Mayfair Tennis Ball Exchange, Stephen Friedman gallery, London David Shrigley’s new show Mayfair Tennis Ball Exchange is an evolving work of psychedelic op art involving 12,166 tennis balls – new at first but intended to be exchanged for used balls, one by one, over the course of the exhibition, by members of the public. • Read his interview all about it here What we learned Fashion photographer Helmut Newton had a lasting influence on visual art While fashion photographer Fabrice Monteiro’s best shot summons a spirit from a rubbish dump Lubaina Himid has spoken to the Guardian about her early life … and explained the meaning of some of her paintings … which are on show at Tate Modern in London Kehinde Wiley spoke to the Observer ahead of his show at the National Gallery Andy Warhol’s and Jean-Michel Basquiat’s friendship is being dramatised for the London stage … and they aren’t the only artists whose stories make good drama Jarman award-winning video artist Jasmina Cibic is concerned for Europe An ambitious exhibition at Nottingham Contemporary envisions a strange future NFT is the “word of the year” Tech advances could help the Parthenon marbles return to Greece Indigenous Australian photographers are exhibiting in New South Wales Photographer Steve McCurry focuses on the children of the world … while Natalie Grono focuses on her own daughters … and Pia Bramley sketches the truth about new motherhood René Magritte was a bit of a mystery, Albrecht Dürer liked to travel and Belkis Ayón was a giant of Cuban art A priceless ancient Roman mosaic spent 50 years as a coffee table Tim Sumner wants to tell a social history of Britain through paper bags Masterpiece of the week Paul Cézanne: Still Life with Apples (1877-78) These are some of the greatest apples ever painted. Cézanne does not aim for a crisp photographic realism as, say, Caravaggio does in his paintings of fruit, but instead paints the process of trying to see, feel and share these apples. You sense the physicality of every brushstroke as if it were a deep thumb gouge in a lump of clay. You follow his relentless scrutiny of the apples’ solid substance, their marvellous unique existence - their applehood, or appleness. His colours don’t float outside the apple but penetrate its being. Cézanne looks past the skin of life and sees its core. • Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comDeveloper Frogwares has been making games about the world’s most famous detective for a long time now, but Sherlock Holmes: Chapter One is the most personal. A 21-year-old Sherlock has returned to the fictional island of Cordona, where he spent his childhood, kicking off a chain of events that leads him to uncover a missing element of his past: how his mother died. Cordona draws inspiration from real-world places that have changed hands many times, and different districts of the island display a melange of cultures. I once heard the athaan, or call to prayer, from a nearby mosque. Shortly after the prologue, the whole island opens up, and you can fast-travel around it in seconds as you dig into Sherlock’s cases. These setpiece mysteries are varied in both tone and theme, and the solutions are almost always elegant. I won’t easily forget the case of the murderous elephant, or the siren serial killer. Crime scenes are where both the game and the protagonist himself are most at home. Evidence litters the scene; Sherlock surveys every piece, linking them to accounts given by suspects and witnesses, and pieces together what happened. You can manipulate the ghostly outlines of suspects’ positions and actions at particular junctures – a clever way to convey Sherlock’s thinking. Even after solving a case, the grand unveil always revealed some element that I’d overlooked. Accompanying Sherlock is his imaginary friend, Jon – a role later to be played by his chronicler Dr John Watson. Unlike Watson, though, Jon is annoying. He whines when I don’t get the right solution, or ask the wrong questions, offering only criticism and no hints, which was pointless and off-putting. Eventually I had to turn off the volume. Frustratingly, the game requires you to piece together crime scenes, evidence, archival research and mind-palace deductions perfectly, but it’s not always clear what its version of perfect entails, and it’s easy to get it slightly wrong. I really could have done without having to listen to Jon berate me before every subsequent attempt. Holmes has a detective-vision ability that highlights important objects with a small, white circle that looks like a crosshair, or a small yellow dot. As someone with a minor visual impairment I had to squint to make these tiny dots out – and then, at nighttime, fireflies appear, which are also small yellow dots. This is an inexplicably unfriendly visual design decision, made more annoying by the fact that detective vision needs a few seconds to recharge. The doors of Sherlock’s decrepit, abandoned family manor unlock for him as he remembers more, slowly piecing together what happened to his mother. You can populate this place with paintings, furniture and possessions, filling out its character and history, a decent metaphor for your progress through the story and the game. This is a lively world, with wonderful smaller mysteries and an overarching story that brings you closer to its famous main character and his personal history. While there are some technical issues, and the game understandably lacks the glossy polish of bigger-budget titles, this is nonetheless something that I’ve been wanting for a long time: a properly open-world interactive detective story. Sherlock Holmes: Chapter One is out now; £39.99As Laura Whitmore, the elegant, highly aspirational TV presenter, squirted cold mayo into an upturned, raw mushroom cap, I realised that my Comfort Eating podcast had reached new levels of unfettered honesty. “It’s fancy, like an hors d’oeuvre!” she said, popping the whole slimy, slightly soil-laden, fridge-cold shroom brimming with bottled Hellmann’s into her mouth, then chewing with a real sense of joy. Then it was my turn. I gingerly lifted the mushroom to my mouth and took a hesitant bite, causing mayo to rise over the sides of the cap: it tasted exactly as I’d imagined – no alchemy had taken place to make the sum bigger than its parts; well, not for me at least. But then, that’s the whole point of Comfort Eating, for which I’d previously tasted the private penchants of the likes of Stephen Fry, Russell Tovey and Rafe Spall. Our secret snacks are deeply personal, come steeped in nostalgia and often stem from times in our lives when money was shortest, time tightest or our hearts most broken. Scarlett Moffatt, the ex-Goggleboxer who now lives in luxury in the north-east, introduced me to beans on toast with a thick layer of scrunched-up Wotsit crumbs on top, “to make them cheesy”. Why not use, um, actual cheese? “Well, cheese is expensive,” she replied, quite seriously, while sitting in her beautiful marble kitchen and overlooking miles of bucolic splendour. Her life has moved on dramatically from her early years, but the food she eats to make herself feel cosy hasn’t budged a jot. In 2020, when we began working on a format for the podcast, the idea was to find a new way to talk to famous folk about their inner lives via what slides down their throats. Modern eating, I believe, divides into two distinct categories: the nutritious or name-droppy things that we’re proud to talk about, or to Instagram and generally broadcast, and the more revealing, non-pretty, downright weird things we never discuss in public. And it’s the latter that is Comfort Eating’s bread and butter, pardon the pun – that’s where the truth about people’s egos, vulnerabilities and priorities lies. Deborah Meaden’s idea of heaven, for example, is an entire packet of roasted vegan sausages spread thickly with Marmite. When she’s filming Dragons’ Den, she dines nightly with all the other dragons at The Ivy, but when she’s home alone, she doesn’t even bother with plates, eating straight out of the foil tray and spreading the Marmite like cupcake icing. Deborah’s husband does all the cooking at home, so when he’s away on business, she has often been known to put chocolate bars between two slices of bread. She is fearless, focused and fully self-reliant in every area of her life, until it comes to feeding herself, when she’s more like a teenager left home alone for the first time. Similarly, I now find it hard to watch Krishnan Guru-Murthy grill a politician without imagining him, childlike and twinkly-eyed, eating Ambrosia rice pudding straight from the tin after first stirring in a large spoon of raspberry jam (I’ve since done the same more than once for dinner). As for myself, quite apart from eating all the new snacks my guests have brought in (Russell Tovey got me back into very sweet cereal, so much so that I ordered in a box of American Froot Loops), each week I stocked up on the things I associate with comfort eating – Cadbury’s Mini Rolls, fondant fancies, Jammy Dodgers – and not one of them touched any of them. I was soon getting up in the middle of the night to eat them, and I’ve ended up with a raging sugar addiction. What else have I learned? Well, much of it isn’t about food at all. While I’d imagined that luring stars to my home was a nifty way to save time on travel, in reality I’m doing a lot of bleaching, hasty DIY and general flapping about with a can of Mr Sheen. In fact, it’s sent me full Hyacinth Bucket. How could Stephen Fry possibly cope without a clean guest hand towel and four-ply rhubarb-scented toilet paper? After all that, he didn’t even bother spending a penny, either. His snack featured John West Skippers, which he mashed up with a fork, sending my cats wild, although the main thing I took from that interview is that sugar is usually our first taste of drugs, and I’ll now never look at sherbet quite the same again. Russell T Davies, meanwhile, taught me that buttered rice with black pepper tastes better than any Michelin-starred entrée, and Siobhán McSweeney from Derry Girls showed me that losing everything in a fire is a way to start again – oh, and that Tayto cheese-and-onion crisps are the stuff of the gods, even if the combo in which she eats them is a distinctly acquired taste. What I’ve learned the most, however, is that if a celebrity reveals to me the snack they eat on a quiet night in, when they’re watching Netflix in a tracksuit and can’t be bothered to cook, they’ll end up telling me more about their childhood, their social class, their love life and their body confidence than they would in a dozen red-carpet interviews. Comfort Eating is a podcast about whether stars like ketchup, brown sauce or salad cream on their spaghetti hoops, but there’s much more on the menu than that. • Episode six of the second series of Grace’s Comfort Eating podcast is released on 30 November. Listen here or wherever you get your podcasts.Across 7 shiitake SHIIT&lt;(b)AK(e)&gt;E 9 murmur double rum (rev) 10 Utah connecticUT A Horror (hidden) 11,2,1 economical with the truth ON CLOTH WHITE MEAT I CUT H(e)R(b) (anag) 12 lumbar lumber (hom) 14 untoward (c)UN  ARD 15 hard up HARD + UP 20 assassin ASS(Charlie)/ASS(wally) + IN 22 Muscat SCAT after MU (Greek) 23 Dickensian NINE KIDS A(uthor) C(harles) (anag) 24,16 Stir-up Sunday SAYS I TURN PUD (anag) 25 Guinea/guinea double def [old coin] 26 skin-deep S  EEP Down 3 career CARE&lt;(ankl)E&gt;R 4 importer I’M/PORTER 5 brainwaves BRA/IN/WAVES 6 au pair pair of O’s (hom) 8 exodus X in DUE SO (anag) 13 barracking BAR  KING 18 realised IS after AL(l) in REED 19 undies cryptic def [un-dies] 21 ski run S  UN 22,17 Minnie Driver cryptic def [driver of a Mini] 24 Side double defMegan Stalter put a video online recently of a churchgoer from the US midwest distressed to be served by a Starbucks barista wearing Halloween cat ears. (“We’re not allowed to celebrate Jesus’s birthday, but we’re allowed to celebrate Satan’s parade?”) Played with a beautifully straight bat, it was of a piece with the scores of bitesized character sketches Stalter has uploaded throughout the Covid period. But not everyone got the memo. “I get hundreds of mean comments every day thinking it’s real,” Stalter says, on a video call from New York. “But I’m like: it’s a joke! It would take you only two minutes to look at my profile and know that I’m a comedian.” Not just any comedian, but one of the hottest in the US right now – and in Britain, where her maiden run, at London’s Soho theatre this month, has already sold out. Stalter, 31, is that rare thing, a comic who prospered under lockdown. Her online videos and live broadcasts went stratospheric. A YouTube special, Little Miss Ohio, brought her cringe-comedy portraits to a wider audience. Then she was cast in HBO’s Hacks, which later bagged multiple comedy awards at the 2021 Emmys. “I couldn’t have gotten luckier,” Stalter admits, giggly over Zoom in her signature bright blue eyeshadow. For all her success on television and online, it’s the stage where Stalter feels most in her element. “I’m never happier than when I’m on stage,” she says – before adding, hastily if not wholly convincingly: “I mean, besides being with the ones I love. “I would never go on stage sick now,” she says. “But before the pandemic, when people still did [that], I would never feel sick while I was on stage. I would never think of anything that would make me sad. On stage, you are fully Zen. It sounds cheesy, but that’s how I know this is what I’m meant to do.” In London, Stalter will be performing her standup show – not that it is standup in any conventional sense. “I play a character who is very confident and thinks she’s very talented, but her show is falling apart. It’s like a magic show with no tricks.” She was making waves in live comedy on the eve of the pandemic. “I’d just got a manager, I’d moved to New York, my shows started selling out. I thought: ‘Oh my God, my career is blowing up!’ But really it wasn’t.” That was still to come, when a global plague imprisoned Stalter in her apartment, cutting her off from her income and the thing she most loved doing. “People ask all the time,” she tells me, “what does it feel like to blow up online during Covid? And it’s really strange, because I was only doing it to feel alive and normal. I wasn’t like: ‘Oh my God, I need attention,’ or trying to make my videos go viral. I just had to be silly online because there was nowhere else to do it.” With characters such as the small business owner struggling to appear woke (“Hi, gay! Happy Pride month!”) or the “out-of-work actress talking about a possible sequel to a movie that came out nine years ago”, she cornered the market in brittle, delusional but oddly sympathetic nobodies, publicising themselves with a swagger while knowing, deep down, they have little to sell. These are sketches for the era of the curated online self, and Stalter has mined to the tragicomic heart of social media just as Ricky Gervais once did with reality TV (both cite the films of Christopher Guest as an influence). “I love the comics who seem like they’re improving,” Stalter says, “whose characters feel like real people.” Hers do, and throughout lockdown she used them to build a huge community of fans online – to whom she feels a debt of obligation today. “When I meet people at live shows now, it feels like I know them,” Stalter says. “The gigs feel so different to how they did before, because we were all online for a year and a half together, stuck in our homes! I know you have to have boundaries, but I never want to feel out of reach to the people that support me. Because that’s where you come from, right?” Stalter is refreshingly down to earth, perhaps in part because of being born and raised in Ohio, whose population of “weird church ladies and soccer moms” (her words) she draws on in her work. The daughter of a nurse and a tattoo artist, she “really, really wanted to perform” from an early age. “I remember when I was little in choir and I got given a solo, and I was like: I was meant to sing. I wasn’t great, but I always thought I was really special” – she laughs at the memory – “and that people needed to see me on stage.” It took a while for the world to agree. Opportunities to live the showbiz dream were scarce at home; Stalter soon moved to Chicago, at her mum’s urging. But if you can take the girl out of Ohio, you can’t take Ohio out of the girl. The comic voice Stalter began to develop came with a midwestern accent. Her characters, she has said, have “a level of sweetness while trying to do good [but don’t have] much money or fancy places to go to”. Today, she describes her midwest alter egos as “always apologetic, and very polite”. It’s also about their worldview. “Ohio is pretty Republican,” Stalter says. “And it’s interesting, growing up knowing and being related to those people whose beliefs are so different to my own.” She may attract the online ire of confused progressives, who mistake her churchy midwesterners for the real thing. But Ohioans themselves, the butt of her jokes, have never complained, Stalter says, because the videos are made with affection and with the understanding that “everyone really is trying to be good. I know a lot of people that do bad stuff and believe in very backwards things, who also literally think they are morally right. But I grew up loving these people. These were my best friends. And it’s impossible to play them in a mean way if I know that they’re not trying to be mean or bad.” Ohio is even more proud of Stalter now that she’s a TV star, as the dotty assistant Kayla to bigshot comedy agent Jimmy in the hit series Hacks. Series co-creator Paul W Downs knew Stalter from her live comedy, and before she auditioned for the show, “my friend sent me a screenshot of the script and it said: ‘Kayla – think Megan Stalter.’ So I was really afraid not to get the part. To be like: ‘Oh, this other actor does Megan better than Megan does’? I would, like, absolutely die!” She needn’t have worried: the part was hers, and she became the series’ breakout star. “I’m living the dream,” she says now. “I want to keep acting and doing live comedy for ever.” You wouldn’t bet against it. “I keep thinking: ‘This is it!’” says Stalter of her success. “And then more happens, and you’re like: ‘Oh no, this is it!’ And I think that’s because I’ve always loved every part. At every stage, I’ve always felt: this is the dream. This is all I’ve ever wanted to do.” Megan Stalter performs at Soho theatre, London, 30 November to 11 December.The Shadows of Men by Abir Mukherjee (Harvill Secker, £12.99) The fifth book in the Wyndham &amp; Banerjee series about officers of the Imperial Police Force begins in Calcutta in 1923, with the murder of a prominent Hindu scholar. Sergeant Banerjee’s proximity to the dead man puts him in the frame for murder, so it’s imperative that he and Captain Wyndham find the Muslim politician that they suspect to be the true culprit as quickly as possible. Sectarian tensions are already running high, thanks to gang violence and political discord, and there is every chance that the riots may turn into a bloodbath. The idea that somebody may be deliberately fomenting existing unrest adds to the growing discomfort both Wyndham and Banerjee feel about the colonial rule they have sworn to uphold. Action-packed, with some terrific set pieces, this is not only an atmospheric and well considered portrayal of a time and place but a masterclass in how to keep the reader turning the pages. Dolphin Junction by Mick Herron (John Murray, £16.99) Definitely one for the Christmas list, Dolphin Junction is both a perfect introduction to the creator of monstrous spymaster Jackson Lamb and a treat for Slough House aficionados. The 11 stories in this collection were originally written between 2006 and 2019, and – unusually for an anthology of this type – there’s no makeweight: each delivers a surprise, a shock, or a shiver, with plenty of Herron’s trademark smoke-and-mirror misdirection and sardonic humour. Highlights include the Roald Dahlesque Lost Luggage and the genuinely terrifying All the Livelong Day, as well as What We Do, one of four stories featuring the smart, unflappable private eye Zoë Boehm from the author’s Oxford series. An episode in Jackson Lamb’s past is explored in The Last Dead Letter, and there’s festive cheer in The Usual Santas, when eight Father Christmases attempt to unmask the imposter who has infiltrated their grottoes. Dog Park by Sofi Oksanen, translated by Owen F Witesman (Atlantic, £14.99) Prize-winning Finnish-Estonian writer Oksanen’s latest book is an intricate, textured slow-burner that paints a vivid picture of a post-Soviet state where gangsters rule and the exploitation of the female body is big business. Dog Park begins in 2016, with Olenka sitting on a bench in Helsinki, watching anonymously as her biological child – now with new parents – enjoys a walk with the family’s schnauzer. When an old acquaintance, Daria, sits down next to her, Olenka immediately assumes that the woman is there for the purpose of blackmail. In 2006, desperate to escape a life of poverty in her native Ukraine, Olenka agreed to sell her eggs to an infertile couple via an agency, who subsequently employed her to encourage others, including Daria, to do the same. It takes quite a while to find out what, exactly, has gone so wrong that Olenka fears for her life, but the pathos is fuel for real suspense. The Russian Doll by Marina Palmer (Hodder &amp; Stoughton, £16.99) Historical novelist Imogen Robertson, writing under her new nom de thriller, offers more post-Soviet gangsters. Here, they are Russian oligarchs based in London who lavish expensive gifts on members of the British establishment. When lowly administrative assistant Ruth Miller is offered the job of personal secretary by glossy beauty Elena Shilkov, she is transported to a world of bodyguards, designer clothes and superyachts, but soon learns that such luxury comes with a hefty price tag. Nothing is what it seems in this novel, which, like the matryoshka of the title, contains secrets within secrets – and Ruth, it turns out, has an agenda of her own. Fast-paced and clever, with a pleasing blend of political intrigue and romantic suspense as well as a whodunnit, this is perfect entertainment for a winter’s evening. The Quiet People by Paul Cleave (Orenda, £8.99) The latest novel from New Zealander Cleave is set in Christchurch, where married crime-writing duo Cameron and Lisa Murdoch live with their son Zach. When the seven-year-old disappears, boastful statements made by the pair about being able to commit the perfect crime come back to haunt them. There is also the fact that Zach – euphemistically described as “challenging” – had a public meltdown the day before he went missing, as did his dad, who, with his anger management issues and poor impulse control, is as much of a pain in the neck as his son. Public sympathy evaporates and soon the family are in the eye of a social media storm with protesters outside their house and a slew of one-star reviews on Amazon, as suspicion grows that Cameron and Lisa have cooked up a real-life plot to revive their flagging careers. A true page-turner, with an intriguing premise, a rollercoaster plot and a cast of believably flawed characters.A fictionalised account of a real-life miscarriage of justice, this Booker-shortlisted novel opens with the announcement of the death of George VI over the radio in a milk bar in Cardiff’s Tiger Bay, where Somali seaman Mahmood Mattan has stopped for coffee. It is 1952: Britain has a new queen, cracks have appeared in the empire and the bar’s patrons, among them Trinidadians, Somalis and Maltese sailors, are wondering which colony will achieve independence next. The book is narrated by the actor Hugh Quarshie, who skilfully navigates a multicultural cast of characters including shopkeeper Violet, living through the aftershocks of Jewish genocide; her sister Diana; Diana’s young daughter, Grace; Mahmood’s estranged wife, Laura; and assorted police and prison officials. After Violet is brutally murdered in her shop during a robbery, the finger is pointed at Mahmood, a gambler, petty thief and big-hearted father of three who lives in a boarding house for “coloureds” and is known among locals as “the ghost”. His story is based on the case of the 28-year-old of the same name who, after a three-day trial, was found guilty and was among the last men to be hanged in Wales. In 1998, his conviction was quashed. Drawing on Mohamed’s evocative prose, Quarshie captures the resilience of Mahmood as he attempts to clear his name, placing undue faith in a racist justice system and state that will do anything to preserve the status quo. • The Fortune Men is available from Penguin Audio, 10hr 32min. Further listening Cloud Cuckoo Land Anthony Doerr, 4th Estate, 14hr and 52min The Pulitzer prize-winner’s latest novel, which ranges from 15th-century Constantinople to a spaceship in a future era, is luminously narrated by Marin Ireland and Simon Jones. This Much Is True Miriam Margolyes, John Murray, 15hr 7 min Brilliant stories abound in this memoir, read by Margolyes herself, which is honest, poignant and wildly indiscreet.Patrick Vieira and Steven Gerrard locking horns in central midfield was a highlight of many a Premier League and cup encounter 15 to 20 years ago, not to mention a particularly gruelling group game at Euro 2004, but now there is the somewhat safer distance between the managers’ technical areas to separate them. Their aggressive personalities on the pitch are at odds with their calmer demeanours now but their desire to succeed has not diminished. Gerrard is four years Vieira’s junior but arguably has the edge in managerial experience – certainly in trophies. It is of course all about what their players can do for them now but there may be times on Saturday afternoon – or maybe the whole game – when those of a certain age wish Gerrard and Vieira were still doing battle on the pitch. Conrad Leach Saturday 3pm Venue Selhurst Park Last season Crystal Palace 3 Aston Villa 2 Referee Michael Salisbury This season n/a Odds H 5-4 A 27-11 D 27-11 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Butland, Kelly, Clyne, Tomkins, Riedewald, Banks, Hannam, Street, Rak-Sakyi, Mateta, Schlupp, Ayew, Olise, Eze Doubtful None Injured McArthur (hamstring, unknown), Ferguson (achilles, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y22 R0 Form DDDWWD Leading scorers Benteke, Gallagher, Zaha 4 ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Archer, El Ghazi, Traoré, Young, Hause, Bogarde, Douglas Luiz, Tuanzebe, Bailey, Chukwuemeka, Sanson Doubtful Douglas Luiz (hamstring) Injured Trezeguet (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y28 R1 Form LLLLLW Leading scorer Ings 3Never mind “How does it look?”; the questions fashion fans are asking this winter is “What does it do?” and “How warm is it?” as jackets and utility trousers used by those who scale mountains find favour with city dwellers. Extreme outdoor clothing, the sort fit for climbing Everest, is the prevailing streetwear trend this winter, and a sign that outdoors brands will continue to dominate our wardrobes, whatever the temperature. The development of“gorpcore”, coined to describe the convergence of outdoor labels and metropolitan folk, made Patagonia fleeces and North Face jackets a style staple. Storm-proof hoods, technologically advanced Gore-Tex and frostbrite-preventing underlayers are now mainstays of a trip to the pub of even the most gentle of walks around the park. Browns Fashion describes its collection of high-performance brands as one of its “strongest categories”. “Our customers have made fashion with function part of their everyday lives,” says the retailer’s activewear buyer, Joe Brunner. Matchesfashion.com notes the same interest, with sneakers from the former ski-boot brand Salomon and outerwear from Japanese Snow Peak among its bestsellers. Brands such as Icelandic 66North and the Switzerland-based Mammut, which made climbing ropes before expanding into clothing and is now favoured by the singer Frank Ocean, are most in demand. Arc’teryx, a Vancouver-based mountaineering brand, is central to this extreme moment for our wardrobes. With endorsement from rap stars such as Lil Yachty and A$AP Rocky, the Alpine specialist has been moonlighting as a fashion heavyweight. This month, as proof of Arc’teryx’s appeal, the brand launched a collaboration with the fashion house Jil Sander. The collection spans jackets, bibbed trousers and a one-piece intended for mountain sports. It will undoubtedly become a favourite with the street-style influencers attending fashion shows in chilly temperatures. With considerably higher prices than Arc’teryx’s main product line, the collection is intended to bridge the gap between “high-performance clothes and high aesthetic quality”. The fashion platform Lyst predicts that the Jil Sander collaboration is the tip of the iceberg for this trend, citing fashion with “future-minded technology” as its primary prediction of what to expect from the fashion world next year. “More than ever, people want their clothes to have a purpose and ask more of them because technology enables us to,” says the fashion writer David Hellqvist, the founder of Document Studios and a contributor to the New Order magazine and Orienteer Mapazine. There may be talk of a return to glamour, but our appetite for outdoors-inspired clothing suggests otherwise. “We have come to appreciate open spaces and beautiful scenery again on a different scale,” says Hellqvist, “to enjoy the simple things in life again. Luckily, there is clothing to buy that matches that ambition.”Global oil prices have plunged by over 10% in the biggest one-day drop since April last year after a new variant of Covid-19 raised fears in the market of renewed global travel restrictions that could derail the oil market’s recovery. The “the most worrying” new Covid-19 variant caused the price of Brent crude to tumble by $8.77, or 10.7%, to $73.45 a barrel on Friday afternoon after countries across Europe and Asia brought in immediate travel restrictions to guard against the spread of the B.1.1.529 variant identified in several African countries. The US oil price per barrel plunged by more than $9.12, or 11.6%, to $69.27 in one of the steepest declines since the shutdown of global economies and severe travel restrictions in April 2020 caused oil prices to turn negative for the first time across the US. The new variant has multiple mutations to its spike protein that it is feared could enable it to evade the immune response induced by existing vaccines. After its identification earlier this week, the UK government announced on Thursday night it was putting six southern African countries back on England’s travel red list, with British travellers returning from those locations from 4am on Sunday having to quarantine. Meanwhile, the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said the EU also aimed to halt air travel from the region. B.1.1.529 threatens to reverse the oil market’s gains in recent months as travel and economic activity had begun to recover from a series of coronavirus lockdowns around the world. The sudden drop in global oil prices also wiped value from the UK’s largest listed oil and gas companies. The oil giant Royal Dutch Shell had dropped by 5.5% by mid-morning on Friday, while BP tumbled 6.7%. Russ Mould, the investment director at AJ Bell, said: “The drop in the oil price is the market’s way of saying it is worried about a reduction in economic activity … Markets are clearly speculating that a rapid spread of a more brutal Covid strain could once again derail the global economy.” The oil price slump follows efforts from some of the world’s largest energy consumers to cool the market’s fast-rising prices earlier this month, over fears they could stoke a rise in inflation and an affordability crisis for households. A group of countries led by the US, and including the UK, agreed to release millions of barrels of oil from their strategic reserves to help ease supply concerns within the market after a surge in demand since economies began to reopen. The emergence of a new variant is also likely to cloud negotiations scheduled for 2 December between the Opec oil cartel and its allies, where the plan was to discuss whether to adjust the proposal to increase output by 400,000 barrels a day in January and beyond.For the past three weeks, the world has been asking #WhereIsPengShuai, after the Chinese tennis star alleged on social media she was sexually assaulted by a former senior government official. Peng’s allegations, published on Weibo in a post, were quickly censored. She was not seen for almost three weeks, prompting an international campaign calling for information on her whereabouts and wellbeing. The man at the centre of the allegations has also remained out of the public eye, prompting human rights groups and supporters to ask #WhereIsZhangGaoli? The now-retired official has not been seen in public since Peng’s claims, and has not offered a reply or responded to media inquiries. The Chinese government has not commented except for the ministry of foreign affairs condemning “malicious hyping”. Zhang’s name is not completely censored on social media like Peng’s, but there are no recent posts about him, suggesting potential deletions. No comments are allowed on any historical post about him. There is no sign of an investigation by police or any other authority into Peng’s claims. Zhang is a lauded figure in China and appears to have avoided controversy until now. A July profile by Duowei, an overseas Chinese language news site said to be closely connected to Beijing, said Zhang was seen by many as “serious, low-key and unsmiling” – the latter reportedly due to an injury – with a reputation for pushing his subordinates to work hard. Zhang, 75, was once one of China’s most powerful politicians, sitting on the seven-member politburo standing committee (PSC) – the most senior decision-making body in the Chinese Communist party (CCP) – from 2013 to 2018, and as vice-premier was second in line to Li Keqiang. Peng’s post alleged that three years ago, after Zhang had retired from the PSC, he invited her to his house to play tennis with him and his wife, after which he coerced her into sex while someone stood outside the door guarding it. The post claimed the two had been in a consensual extramarital affair for several years until Zhang was appointed to the PSC and stopped contacting Peng. “The absence of Zhang’s voice is a manifestation of the unaccounted power of the Communist party,” said Human Rights Watch’s senior China researcher, Yaqiu Wang. “Instead of publicly responding to an allegation that had garnered such intense international attention – like a leader in a democratic country has to do – Zhang and the CCP simply silenced [Peng].” Official silence is standard procedure when a party official faces such allegations from external sources. This case is particularly sensitive as China’s struggling #MeToo movement has never named a senior CCP official before. According to the profile, Zhang was born into a poor farming family in Fujian province and rose through the ranks of the party, including as party secretary for Shenzhen and Tianjin, where Peng alleges they first got together. As vice-premier Zhang was in charge of economic matters, and headed a steering group for the bid and preparations for the Beijing Winter Olympics. In the public-facing role, Zhang met the International Olympic Committee (IOC) president, Thomas Bach – one of the IOC officials who last week spoke to Peng via video link and supported Beijing’s claim she was fine. Many said the call did not prove Peng was free and not subject to duress, and rights groups accused the IOC of participating in a “publicity stunt” and “whitewashing” ahead of the February Games. Zhang retired from the PSC after the 18th National People’s Congress in 2018 under rules preventing leaders older than 68 being reappointed. There was no farewell announcement – his name was simply not among those listed on the PSC after the central committee’s first meeting the following year. His last public appearance was in July, sitting among official attenders at the centenary celebrations of the CCP. Alfred Wu, an associate professor at the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy in Singapore, said even if the party did take action, “they won’t announce it right away, but will wait for the storm to blow over first, so as to show strength”. China’s state council has been contacted for comment.Campaigners are hitting back at zoo proposals to cull adult male gorillas, arguing they should be returned to the wild instead. Overcrowding of critically endangered western lowland gorillas in zoos has led the influential European Association of Zoos and Aquaria (Eaza) to consider killing adult males of the species. Eaza is the body that regulates most of the zoos in Europe. Western lowland gorillas are the smallest of the four gorilla subspecies, standing at 4 to 6 feet (122cm to 183cm) when upright. In the wild they are critically endangered. The exact number of western lowland gorillas is not known because they inhabit some of the most dense and remote rainforests in Africa. Because of poaching and disease, the gorilla’s numbers have declined by more than 60% over the last 20 to 25 years. Leaked documents seen by the Guardian reveal that culling, castration and keeping adult single males in solitary confinement for a large portion of their lives are seen as potential solutions to an overpopulation of the species in zoos. The gorilla population in Eaza zoos consists of 463 individuals (212 males, 250 females and one of unknown sex) at 69 institutions. The gorilla action plan, released to stakeholders in zoos, admits that culling would be “the most appropriate tool if strictly talking from the biological point of view,” but that the decision could be unpopular with the public. The document reads: “The main downside of this option is that it is controversial in many countries and in some illegal, in specific circumstances. Any discussion on culling can quickly become an emotional one because it is easy to empathise with gorillas. This carries a high risk that an emotional response by the public and/or zoo staff and keepers, catalysed by social media, inflicts damage to zoos and aquariums.” Once male gorillas reach a certain age, zoos do not keep them in all-male groups, because of the risk of violence. Zoos are also loth to keep them in mixed groups, as there would be nowhere to house any resultant offspring. Other animals that are given non-breeding recommendations in European zoos because of overpopulation include white tigers, pumas and ocelots. Conservationist and rewilder Damian Aspinall, who runs wildlife parks in Kent, is working with Carrie Johnson to draw attention to the plight of animals in zoos. He believes these gorillas should be returned to the wild rather than culled. He said: “It’s a sad day for the zoological community when they are considering culling gorillas when there is a great opportunity to re wild gorillas like the Aspinall Foundation has done for 30 years, having rewilded over 70 gorillas.” Nevertheless, some scientists argue that it is too difficult to return gorillas to the wild in most cases, as there is not enough habitat to safely release them and avoid conflict with others of the species – and humans – and that they can carry diseases that may wipe out wild populations. Dr Ben Garrod, a primatologist and professor of evolutionary biology and science engagement at the University of East Anglia, said: “The last thing anyone serious about conservation and welfare wants is to discuss culls, but they can serve a function in some situations. Introducing any large mammal to the wild comes with so many considerations and difficulties, and great apes are an especially risky group. “Great apes, such as gorillas, are able to pick up many of the diseases our own species carries, and if they were introduced into wild gorilla populations, the effects would be devastating. Similarly, animals being introduced into the wild need a habitat away from humans, and away from other gorillas ideally, partly to reduce conflict and partly to reduce any possible infection or disease spread. “Realistically, there isn’t an abundance of such pristine suitable habitat out there – that’s part of the original problem.” He added: “I’d ask why any zoo is able to breed so many gorillas that a cull is even considered necessary. Do we cull the babies or old animals or excess males? These are social, sentient and cultured animals. We do not have the right to treat them as surplus stock in this way. To breed animals like this without a sustainable and ethical outcome is reckless to say the least, and needs to be addressed.” Gorilla expert and BBC presenter Ian Redmond said he was shocked by the suggestions. He said: “In my view, it is wrong on many levels to castrate or kill a healthy gorilla for human convenience. Not only is the western lowland gorilla a critically endangered species, protected by national and international law, all great apes are autonomous beings who deserve our respect. “Perhaps in the UN decade of ecosystem restoration, which starts this year, zoos could follow the lead of the Aspinall Foundation and step up to the task of reversing biodiversity loss and restoring ecosystem function by putting the gardeners of the forest back where they belong?” Virginia McKenna OBE, co-founder of Born Free Foundation, the international wild animal charity, called for an investigation into the zoo body and said: “Like me, I am sure millions of people will reject Eaza’s conservation and animal welfare claims, and join Born Free in calling for a full, independent investigation into the way Eaza zoos are run, their zoo-based captive breeding programmes, and the brutal and potentially terminal consequences for many of the animals involved.” A spokesperson for Eaza admitted that culling was part of their gorilla management plan, but that under suitable conditions, they might support rewilding of the primates. They said: “Given that wild habitats for lowland gorilla are increasingly scarce and mostly at full carrying capacity [ie they hold as many wild gorillas as the habitat can currently sustain], any responsible ex situ conservation programme must make contingency plans to keep the population as genetically and demographically diverse as possible, while maintaining good animal welfare. So far, no gorillas have been culled and we are currently not recommending the use of culling – this is unlikely to change over the short to medium term.” The group admitted that castration and housing single males alone were methods that were currently being used to control the population. The spokesperson said: “It is very common practice for veterinarians worldwide to carry out castrations on mammals precisely to ensure sustainable populations of animals and good social order between them. As the text shows, Eaza believes that housing single males is not an ideal solution, but again, as a responsible ex situ conservation body, we must consider all methods for maintaining a healthy population of gorillas, and due consideration has been given to this.” • This article was amended on 29 November 2021 to remove a gorilla-human IQ comparison.We are proud to announce the opening of the application process for our Software Engineering Fellowship. The Guardian Software Engineering Fellowship is an opportunity for developers who are at the beginning of their careers to join our Product &amp; Engineering department. The scheme is aimed at individuals looking for their first professional developer role. A grasp of programming is a prerequisite to be successful in your application, however we don’t pass judgement on how these skills were learnt. If you love coding, mobile apps and digital media then you can apply to the Fellowship irrespective of your background. Our 12-month scheme provides a platform for developing your skills as an engineer, gaining experience working on multiple teams and developing applications in the media industry. It provides a structured path to becoming a software engineer, with support from experienced engineers and other fellows. As a fellow you will be building software hands-on as part of a team. We expect fellows to learn and grow throughout the scheme, and provide the space for them to do so. With the support of other developers, you will gain skills to become a fully fledged software engineer. Over the 12 months you will be embedded in different teams to give you experience across the organisation, we expect you will spend six months in our mobile apps teams and another six months in different areas of the department. In the Fellowship you could be working on anything from shipping your code changes to the website or mobile apps, adding functionality to the publishing tools used by our journalists, or analysing big data. Fellows rotate around different teams, giving them a wide experience of different technologies and working environments. In the Product &amp; Engineering department we work on a variety of projects with the common goal of supporting the mission of the Guardian. We are very open about our engineering culture and recruitment process. You can learn more about the Guardian’s Product &amp; Engineering department and the work it does on our developers’ site and engineering blog. To give you insight into the scheme from a fellow’s perspective, one of our previous fellows Amina has written two Medium articles describing her first week on the Fellowship and also her overall experience of the scheme. Want more? Visit our blog for posts from previous fellows on their first impressions after joining the scheme, their experiences on the scheme and how their careers progressed at the Guardian after promotion to a software engineering role. We welcome applicants with diverse backgrounds, experiences and perspectives. To find out more please read our Diversity Statement. To get started with your application, follow this link. Closing date for applications: Friday December 31 2021. Good luck! FAQ Do you teach programming? We don’t teach our fellows how to code from scratch. You must have a grasp of programming to be successful in your application. There are many tutorials and self-learning resources available online. We advise you to attempt some programming challenges before submitting your application. Do you need commercial programming experience? No, in fact if you have commercial experience our other roles at Associate or Developer level would be more appropriate. If you apply with significant commercial experience you will be referred to those positions, if they are open. If I am successful in my application, when will I start work? We anticipate the start date to be Tuesday April 5 2022. How long does the scheme last and what happens when it ends? Fellows spend a year on the scheme. On completion they work with their manager to identify which team to join permanently. What teams will I join over the year? As a fellow you will be rotating three times throughout the year. The first placement is usually six months which gives you time to settle in. This year we expect successful candidates to spend six months throughout the year embedded within our mobile apps teams, with them spending time with both our iOS and Android teams. Is the Fellowship a permanent contract? Yes, fellows are permanent employees at Guardian News and Media. What steps are involved in the application process? Due to current coronavirus (COVID-19) restrictions we are running our recruitment process remotely. The first step in this process is to submit a CV and written answers to our questions within the application. If your application is successful you will be invited to a remote assessment half-day, during which they will undertake a pairing test with one of our engineers followed by a face-to-face video interview. To find out more about how we interview and conduct pairing tests please visit our Engineering blog. What are the important dates? Application closing date: Friday December 31 2021 Remote assessment begins: Monday February 21 2022 Expected start date: Tuesday April 5 2022 I’m not based in the UK, can I still apply? Yes, provided you already have the right to work in the UK at the time of application. Do you support full-time remote working? No, we currently don’t. With the current coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic situation almost everyone is currently working from home most of the time, however this is a temporary situation and we do not forecast people remote working full-time once people are able to commute and work safely from the office. However, we do offer flexible working to better balance the needs of the company and employees as their circumstances change over time, and in order to attract and retain a diverse team. No two situations are identical and can be discussed at an offer stage. How often will I be expected to be in the office, once they reopen? If you are a full time employee and wish to work at home, expect to be required to work in the office while you get up to speed, and then at least 60% time in the office after that in order to maintain a relationship with the wider team. What benefits do we offer? Flexible working Generous pension scheme; if you contribute 5% then the Guardian will contribute 8-12% (depending on your age) Mental and Physical Health insurance and dental scheme 26 days annual leave and the option to purchase an extra 5 days Up to 18 weeks of parental leave at full pay Multi-faith prayer room Cycle to work scheme and subsidised gym membership Paid volunteering days Annual season ticket loanThe Paris Saint-Germain sporting director, Leonardo, has insisted the club have not met with Zinédine Zidane and remain behind the manager, Mauricio Pochettino. It has been a tumultuous week for PSG and Pochettino, after Manchester United sacked Ole Gunnar Solskjær on Sunday. United have revived their long-standing interest in Pochettino and he has done little to discourage it, particularly when he was in Manchester for Wednesday night’s Champions League game at City, which his team lost 2-1. PSG’s position has been that Pochettino, who is under contract until June 2023, is going nowhere during the season, although it had been suggested the situation could change if Zidane, out of work since his resignation from Real Madrid in May, were willing to join them now. Leonardo has attempted to draw a line under the episode and restore stability at the club. It has been reported in France that PSG have held talks with Zidane. “We don’t want Pochettino to leave,” Leonardo said. “He has never asked to leave and no club has contacted us about him. We have a lot of respect for Zinédine Zidane, for what he did as a player and coach, but I can tell you very clearly that there is no contact and that no meeting with him has taken place. It’s ridiculous to imagine that a meeting with Zinédine Zidane could have taken place in a big hotel in Paris in front of the eyes of everyone.” United have moved to hire Ralf Rangnick as their interim manager until the end of the season and Pochettino would then be in the frame for the permanent job – which he would be interested in. Pochettino has misgivings about aspects of the PSG project, notably the coherence of a recruitment strategy that he believes centres more on signing glamour names than on constructing a squad to fit his vision. He knew the sky-high expectations he would face but that has not made them any easier to bear. Zidane has been reluctant to take a job midway through the season and his links to Marseille – the city of his birth – make any connection with PSG problematic.Aldi Specially Selected all-butter mince pies, £1.49 for six Overall 3/10. Unpleasant cold. Much better warm but wouldn’t choose to eat it. Appearance Neat; a lot of icing sugar on top. Pastry Almost dusty; thick, not short. Filling Acidic; contains brandy and cognac but not too boozy. Average. Cold Quite raw. Warm OK. Co-op Irresistible all-butter pastry luxury mince pies, £2 for six Overall 4/10. Really crumbly; good filling. Appearance Neat, thick and well filled. Pastry Pale in areas, and the pastry isn’t really short. Filling Has brandy and a bit of port. Fruity, pleasant. Cold Very average. A touch claggy. Warm An improvement, but not great. Morrisons The Best deep-filled mince pies, £2 for six Overall 4/10. Very standard. Appearance Golden on the edges, but fell apart easily. Pastry Thick, pale and not very short. Broke apart quickly. Filling Quite jammy and thick. Contains cider and brandy. Cold Slightly raw-tasting pastry. Warm The pastry browned more and it tasted OK. Tesco Finest all-butter pastry mince pies, £2 for six Overall 4/10. Pretty with a good amount of filling. Pastry slightly under-baked. Appearance Sturdy and neat. Pastry A bit thick. Filling Generous, very citrussy. Contains brandy and port. Cold Claggy. Warm Easier to eat. Asda extra-special luxury mince pies, £1.75 for six Overall 5/10. Good but standard. Appearance Generously filled, neat. Pastry Sturdy, neat, very thick; benefits from warming. Filling Quite jammy. Sweet and citrussy without being overpowered by the booze. Cold Pastry was very crumbly. Warm The pastry and filling work really well together. Enjoyed these. M&amp;S Food Collection mince pies, £2.50 for six Overall 6/10. Feel posh. Not as large as some of the others. Good, but I’m not sold on them cold. Great when warm. Appearance Neat and golden. Pastry The double star on top makes it a bit thick if you eat it all the way through. They hold up nicely and the pastry tastes buttery. Filling I really like the currants and fruit. The spicing and the hint of booze (brandy and cognac) are good. Cold A bit claggy. Warm Delicious. Waitrose No 1 brown-butter mince pies, £2.40 for six Overall 8/10. Decadent: there’s brown butter in the pastry, whole eggs and egg yolk along with amarena cherries, cognac and almonds. Appearance Big, golden, rustic. Pastry Lovely, but very crumbly; amazingly buttery when warm. Filling Very rich, good contrast of crunchy almond, and the cognac is subtle. Cold Super-messy. Warm Incredible, especially with jersey and double cream together. THE WINNER Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference mince pies with all-butter pastry, £1.50 for six Overall 9/10. Ticks all the boxes. Appearance Golden and gorgeous. Pastry Thin along the sides, wonderful colour. Filling Generous, warming, spiced well with a hint of brandy. Cold The pastry is nice and light. Holds its shape out of the tin so you can eat one on the move. Warm Brilliant, buttery. • Ravneet Gill is the author of Sugar, I Love You and The Pastry Chef’s GuideWith only six miles separating the teams’ home grounds, the draw for the first round proper threw up a local derby between Sporting Khalsa and Wolverhampton Wanderers Women. The teams had previously faced each other once before, back in September 2020 when both sides were in the Women’s National League Division One (Midlands). Wolves won that match 5-0 and were promoted to the third-tier Northern Premier Division where they are unbeaten so far this season. Sporting Khalsa, who beat sixth-tier Thrapston Town to reach the first round, will have to be on the top of their game to cause an upset. Sporting Khalsa emerged from humble roots as a Sunday League side to become established as one of the most progressive grass roots outfits in the West Midlands. Established in 1991, Sporting Khalsa began playing senior football in the local Walsall &amp; District Sunday leagues and, for two seasons between 1995 and 1997, the club played Saturday football at a semi-professional level. In 2005, Sporting Khalsa became the first Asian semi-professional football club in the country to take ownership of its own ground. Sporting Khalsa Women and Girls was established in 2015 following a merger with FC Reedswood. Sporting Khalsa captain Louisa Anderson in the home changing room (left) and Wolves shirts in the away dressing room. Wolves fans in the stands watch their team during the warm-up at the Guardian Warehousing Arena. Bella, Mya, Talula and Lala, members of the Sporting Khalsa under-eights team and team mascots for the match. “What has brought you here today?” We like supporting Sporting Khalsa. “Do you have any favourite players?” I like No 2, she’s putting all the pressure on. “Do you think Sporting Khalsa are going to win today?” Yes, they’ve got a chance.” After a minute’s silence for Remembrance Day, the match kicks off. With just six minutes on the clock, Wolves keeper Shan Turner is beaten by a fantastic diving header from Megan Cann to give the home side the lead. After going behind, Wolves step up a gear creating a number of chances but are kept at bay by the woodwork, quality keeping by Stacey Garnham and sterling work by the Sporting Khalsa defence. The visitors break through with two goals in first-half stoppage time from Tammi George (below left) and Amber Hughes (below right) to go into the break 2-1 up. They’re good girls, they play really, really well. Sometimes they play better than these (pointing at World Cup qualifier on TV). To be fair, I think they should be on telly – Nikki Evans &amp; Kaz Bennett, Wolves fans (below) Hughes continues to cause the Sporting Khalsa defence problems in the second half, scoring in the 56th minute and completing her hat-trick seven minutes later. With the home side having to chase the game, Hughes gets her fourth and George her second, with substitute Anna Price also on target as Wolves complete a convincing 7-1 victory and a place in the second round. They will host fellow third-tier side Nottingham Forest on Sunday. Goalkeeper Stacey Garnham is voted Sporting Khalsa’s player of the match by the manager, Kelly Williams. Wolves’ Kate Evans (right) and Tammy George pose for a photo with a young fan after the match.After Peng Shuai and Andrea Sestini Hlaváčková won the doubles final at the 2014 Beijing Open, they went to karaoke to celebrate. The fifth-seeded duo had just beaten India’s Sania Mirza and Zimbabwe’s Cara Black, who had never lost a match in the Asia-Pacific region. “She was at the beginning of her comeback and I was happy to be there to play with her,” Hlaváčková recalls, on the phone from Rome. Their victory called for a night out so they went to a big Beijing nightclub. “She was singing a lot of Chinese songs.” The tournament was their second together and Peng was ecstatic. The Chinese crowds had turned out in droves to watch their “superstar” player. For Hlaváčková it had been an eye-opening experience of the production scale of Chinese sport. “[Peng] always had someone helping her – a physio, a coach, a pairing partner. That to me was Chinese tennis: a lot of people helping, and everyone working hard. So hard.” Throughout much of it, Peng was also, allegedly, keeping a very big secret. On 2 November this year she finally decided to reveal it. In a Weibo post that was quickly deleted, Peng accused China’s former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of sexually assaulting her in his home, with his wife and at least one other person also in the house. In a lengthy and emotional post, Peng claimed the pair had sustained a long but intermittent relationship, which had paused while he served as one of China’s most powerful officials and refused to contact her. According to Peng, he reached out after his retirement, contacting her through a doctor at the Tianjin sports centre where she once trained, and invited her to play tennis with him and his wife. The doctor did not respond to a request for comment. Peng alleged he coerced her into sex, and later, with “complicated” feelings, they rekindled the affair. Then in late October this year the pair argued and Zhang failed to meet her for a talk, appearing to prompt her Weibo post. The details of the saga have been widely shared and reported outside China, but during the time she alleges she was in a relationship with Zhang, few – if any – others knew of it. “She was a very private person and there was not much we all knew about her, we just knew how good of a tennis player she was,” says Hlaváčková. “Nobody had any clue. She must have been really decisive to put it out there, because to put it out there in China is very difficult.” Born in Xiangtan, Hunan province, in 1986, Peng began playing at the age of eight with her uncle. She was sent to the state training centre in Tianjin at 12, where she would later meet Zhang when he was party secretary. By her late 20s she was a tennis celebrity, one who had pushed herself through the rigours of reaching an elite level among 1.4 billion people, battling injuries and multiple heart surgeries. She was lauded by state media with terms of endearment such as “golden flower” and “Chinese princess”. “We are all members of China’s glorious age of tennis,” she told state media earlier this year. “Leaving our different footprints in such a short lifetime is not representing the glory of one single Chinese player, but a decade of development for tennis in China, step by step.” But the fame and adoration was not enough to protect her when she made her allegations against Zhang. The case is the highest profile of any #MeToo case in China. Never before has a senior Communist party official, let alone one as high-ranking as Zhang, been accused by someone as part of the movement. China’s male-dominated government has made pledges and legal changes designed to address violence and harassment against women, but in practice cases have failed in court and women’s rights groups have been targeted in state crackdowns. Online groups have been closed, accounts censored or shut down, and figures such as the lawyer Huang Xueqin and activist Wang Jianbing disappeared. Peng’s post was live for about 30 minutes before it was taken down and all references to it and Peng were censored. Almost four weeks on it remains near impossible to comment or post online about the player. A prominent feminist activist inside China, who asked to remain anonymous, says it was the most powerful example of censorship against the #MeToo movement seen so far, making it almost – but not quite – impossible to discuss. “It prevented the topic from spreading after that night, but the censorship system couldn’t prevent people who already knew and believed in Peng Shuai from continuing to care about it,” she says. “I think after this incident, #MeToo may undergo more stringent review and questioning. But #MeToo will never stop, because this has never been a campaign planned by men.” For a while, there were fears Peng, who was not seen for about three weeks after her post, had disappeared like Huang and Wang. An international campaign built around her, led by the Women’s Tennis Association, calling for an investigation into her accusations and proof she was safe, well, and free. Eventually unable to ignore it, China’s state-run media issued ham-fisted “proof”, including videos and a purported email with language more closely resembling the forced confessions of dissidents than Peng’s emotional Weibo post. The clips, and a subsequent video call with the International Olympic Committee president, Thomas Bach, who said she was fine and did not address the allegations, only made observers more worried that she was under some form of state coercion. Natasha Kassam, a China expert with the Australian thinktank the Lowy Institute, says the censorship “makes it clear Peng is not able to speak for herself freely”. “It was very clear in the early days that the party state did not have a credible narrative with which to counter both Peng’s claims and then her disappearance,” says Kassam. Hlaváčková, who has retired from tennis, says she has been pleased with the advocacy of the WTA (which her partner also works for), and is following the industry’s broader debate over the balance of ethics and commerce with China. “I’m just happily confirmed that we are on the same page when it comes to women’s rights,” she says. “Until it’s really touching your sport, which right now it is, you do your business there and they do a great job of organising tournaments … But now it’s touching one of our players and we are very happy that business comes second.” The anonymous activist believes Peng is and will be physically safe, but that does not mean she is not in pain. “We don’t just want Peng Shuai to be safe, we also hope that she will no longer be suffering as much as she described.”France has reacted furiously to what officials variously called a “mediocre, unacceptable and wholly inappropriate” letter from Boris Johnson to Emmanuel Macron about the migrant Channel crossings. The French interior minister cancelled a planned top-level meeting with the home secretary, Priti Patel,, while government spokesperson Gabriel Attal said France was “sick and tired” of Britain’s “doubletalk and outsourcing of problems”. The fact that Johnson chose to make the letter public has infuriated Paris at least as much as its content. Macron, who officials said had not seen the letter before Johnson tweeted it, described it as “surprising”, adding: “One does not communicate from one leader to another, on questions such as these, by tweet and by letters that one then makes public.” Johnson’s letter set out five steps for “saving lives and tackling the traffickers”. Some are uncontroversial. Technology, such as sensors and radar, is to some extent already being deployed – some funded by British government money – with extensive use being made of drones fitted with night vision cameras and patrols issued with thermal imaging binoculars. Further cooperation on this, as well as on reciprocal maritime patrols and air surveillance, is clearly possible: British and French coastguards and sea rescue services already work in close cooperation in the Channel. Nor is intelligence-sharing on the people smugglers a particular issue – though UK-EU police cooperation has not been made easier by Brexit. Indeed, Patel and her French opposite number, Gérald Darmanin, pledged to “reinforce intelligence-sharing and police cooperation” after a video meeting last week. Other suggestions are not so straightforward. France has so far been unwilling to consider joint patrols, citing issues of sovereignty. French officials have asked how, if the situation were reversed, Britain might feel about having French soldiers patrolling its coastline. The underlying objection to this approach is that France does not believe that multiplying the number of officers patrolling the coast is a solution. Paris argues it currently has more than 600 police officers and gendarmes on the Channel beat, with patrols out 24 hours a day, increasingly at night, stopping 65% of crossings. When migrants and traffickers can hide among the dunes along more than 40 miles of coastline, emerge after a patrol has passed, and get a boat in the water in 10 minutes, officials who have worked in the area for years say it would need a police officer every 100 yards to stop them all. Instead, France has proposed setting up joint processing centres on French soil, where applications for asylum in Britain could be examined by British immigration officers. But it is Johnson’s final proposal, a bilateral returns agreement with France plus talks to establish a UK-EU returns agreement, that seems to have sparked the fiercest reaction. Since Britain left the EU, it is no longer able to use the bloc’s Dublin system for returning migrants to the first member state they entered. It has not so far negotiated any bilateral deals. Macron has repeatedly stated the French view that France is merely a transit country for the very small percentage – roughly 3% – of migrants who enter the EU with the UK as their preferred final destination, and that the only long-term solution is greater Europe-wide cooperation to tackle a European – indeed, global – issue. It is suggestions such Johnson’s last, which Paris views as grandstanding for political gain, that have so angered France. Coming on top of the fisheries dispute, the Aukus announcement and ongoing discussions over Northern Ireland, they have reinforced the impression in Paris that the British prime minister is above all playing to a domestic gallery. A senior French government official on Friday accused Britain of “duplicity”, saying London was playing a “double game” by cooperating energetically – and sometimes successfully – on specific technical issues, while at the same time “putting out exactly the opposite message for domestic consumption, for purely political ends”. For Paris, Johnson’s letter was evidently one provocation too many. “As soon as Boris Johnson has a problem,” said Attal, “he considers it is Europe’s responsibility to solve it. It doesn’t work like that – it works through cooperation.”When the coal-fired power plant just outside the tiny town of Nucla, Colorado, closed in 2019, it had the makings of a disaster. The plant, which opened in 1959, shut down three years ahead of schedule when it ran out of coal, leaving the town shocked and facing the loss of its largest employer. The facility provided nearly half the tax revenue to the region, said Deana Sheriff, executive director of the West End Economic Development Corp, which serves Nucla and the surrounding area between Telluride and Grand Junction in western Colorado. Left without vital funding for its fire department and school district, the town was terrified about its future. But despite the early plant closure, and an unemployment rate that more than doubled overnight, Nucla had done enough to prepare. The town has leaned on tourism, driven by outdoor activities, and the recent opening of dozens of small businesses to survive. “Initially we saw a lot of frustration and concern, mostly about selling homes and folks moving away,” Sheriff said. But the town has adapted fairly well, she said: “We’ve diversified our economy enough that we’re not going to die because one industry went away.” Increasingly outpaced by cheaper alternatives, including renewables, and under pressure from climate concerns, at least two dozen US coal power plants – many of them in small, rural communities – are expected to close or downsize in the next 10 years, as are most of the coalmines that supply them, according to the Environmental Protection Agency and experts. Most coal communities face the same challenges as Nucla: how to replace the jobs and tax dollars that have kept these towns afloat for decades? In some cases, such as in Nucla, local officials started planning early. In others, the closures appear to have taken leaders by surprise. The huge Navajo Generating Station in northern Arizona, within the Navajo Nation, also shut down in 2019. Local leaders complained that plant operators closed the facility decades ahead of schedule, although the region did have two years to prepare after the announcement. Little planning appears to have preceded the closure. “What does ‘prepare’ mean?” said the Coconino county supervisor Lena Fowler. Regional leaders didn’t see many options for replacing the money and jobs as the closure loomed, she said. The lack of preparation in Arizona – compounded by the subsequent pandemic that shut down tourism in the picturesque region near the Grand Canyon and a drought that has devastated the popular boating destination Lake Powell – has had dire consequences. Coconino county has lost $40m a year in property taxes since the plant, just outside the town of Page, closed, Fowler said. Families have been separated as one parent left for a job at another power plant, and there are concerns the Navajo Nation could cut essential services because of the tax losses. A second Navajo power plant, Four Corners, is due to close in the next decade, as is the Cholla plant just outside the Nation. A nearby coalmine on the Hopi reservation, which supplied the Navajo Generating Station, has also closed. The Navajo Nation president, Jonathan Nez, did not respond to an interview request. “The Nation didn’t do enough planning,” said Nicole Horseherder, a Navajo water rights activist who leads the Tó Nizhóní Ániup environmental non-profit. “They should have been planning for this the day the coal plant signed the leases. We can’t just be dependent on something we knew wasn’t going to last for ever.” Cultural and regional differences have a huge bearing on how communities prepare and recover from a coal plant closure. Secluded towns that have relied on coal for decades – including power plant jobs that pay an average of $90,000 or more – can be reluctant to talk about a coal-free future. And don’t even bring up solar or wind power in some places. “Renewables, for the workforce there, are the antichrist,” said Clint McRae, who owns the Rocker Six Cattle Company near the Colstrip coal power plant in Montana and is a member of the Northern Plains Resource Council, an advocacy group that fights for water quality protections. Some communities remain very loyal to coal and consider energy sources such as solar and wind as a threat to their way of life. “It’s a very difficult subject to talk about over there. It’s going to take time to absorb in the community,” McRae said. The Colstrip plant is scheduled to be retired in 2025, according to its operator’s latest estimates, and McRae and others worry about the pollution it will leave behind. Like other plants, Colstrip has been collecting coal ash – a toxic byproduct – in ponds. That pollution has seeped into the groundwater. Coal ash can often be the most dangerous legacy of a closed plant. In 2014, 39,000 tons of ash and 27m gallons of contaminated water from a plant owned by Duke Energy that had closed two years earlier spilled into North Carolina’s Dan River. Duke Energy has two other plants in North Carolina’s Person county that are expected to close within six years. Among those who have tried to get the community to transition its coal-based economy is state senator Mike Woodard, who admits it’s been a tough hill to climb in an area that has yet to accept the reality of coal’s future. “Person county is going to have to accept that there’s a new way of doing business there,” said Woodard, a Democrat who helped negotiate the state’s recently enacted clean energy law. Renewable energy, not coal, is the future, he added. “We’re all going to be in the rowboat together and it would be great if we were rowing in the same direction.” Some states have done better than others helping to row the boat. With a slew of coal closures coming to Colorado, the state has established an office to help communities plan for the transition. Led by director Wade Buchanan, the Office of Just Transition has tried to steer local officials and residents away from the coal v renewables argument and to think about the transition in more economic terms. Buchanan compares the transition to that faced by timber communities in the Pacific north-west, which successfully transformed their economy when lumber mills began to close. “I think we make a mistake thinking about this as uniquely coal-related or uniquely energy-related,” Buchanan said. “There is a cultural factor that makes it unique. But when you step back and think about how to transition away from this, there are other places that have relied on one industry or employer for a while.” Buchanan pointed to Nucla as an example of how to manage that transition effectively, with more than 100 diverse small businesses opening in the area since the plant closed, thanks in part to tax breaks and other financial incentives. States and outsiders need to let rural communities figure out their own transitions, he said. The Nucla area has leaned on its strengths to recover from the closure, Sheriff said. Residents are trying to open small bed and breakfasts rather than large hotels. Sheriff’s organization runs a grain mill for local businesses and is considering building a meat processing plant to make life easier for local ranchers. Other new businesses include catering companies, coffee shops, organic markets and ATV rentals. Residents have made it clear they like Nucla’s quiet atmosphere, Sheriff said, and they don’t want to replace the coal plant with huge distribution centers or call centers or offices. “We’re not asking Google to come in and create a new tech location here,” she said. “It’s finding the right mixture of businesses that want that rural lifestyle. We’re isolated and we like it that way.” The Nucla model isn’t always replicable in less picturesque areas. While western Colorado and the region near the Navajo Generating Station are obvious tourism destinations, it can be difficult for other communities to replace coal dollars with tourist dollars. Amanda Ormond, who formerly led the Arizona energy office and now is a director with the Western Grid Group, urged community leaders to think about their unique assets and then to research federal funding options to make the most of them and fill the gaps. Then there’s the question of what to do with the sites of shuttered plants. Utilities across the country have discussed replacing coal plants with gas-powered plants, which has been criticized by activists who urge an end to fossil fuel use, while other plants have become college athletic facilities, restaurants and cannabis growing sites, according to Bloomberg. Communities should look at non-energy possibilities for old power plants, relying on facilities already in place, Buchanan said. “There’s often railroad, water rights, transmission lines,” he said. “There’s a lot of energy infrastructure and that’s an asset to build on.”At the top of the stairs in his Los Angeles home, a portrait of Nicholas Hoult in military regalia hangs on the wall. “That’s very, very normal,” the actor deadpans, before breaking into a laugh. Gladly it isn’t some kind of big-headed shrine to himself, but rather a prop he took from the set of The Great, the gory and garish TV show in which he stars as the Russian emperor Peter III. His co-star Elle Fanning giggles as she admits pinching a sculpture of herself made of butter (“I receive a lifesize version in the show, but I just took the little one”). In fact, as they recall other decorations – a baby’s teddy bear said to be “made from a real bear”, and the mummified remains of Hoult’s onscreen mother, wheeled around in a glass case – the portrait and sculpture start to sound normal, even mundane, by comparison. Created by Tony McNamara – co-writer of the Oscar-winning film The Favourite – The Great isn’t your average period drama. A racy, raucous and not-at-all historically accurate comedy-drama shot through with feminist revisionism, it tweaks and embellishes the story of how Catherine the Great (Fanning) overthrew Hoult’s Peter to become Russia’s longest serving female leader. Hoult, 31, was cast after nailing the “flamboyant, cruel egotist in a wig” role of the Earl of Oxford in The Favourite. Meanwhile, Hollywood star Fanning is perfectly cast as Catherine, appearing much older than her 23 years, but always with an air of youthful mischief. Initially released on streaming service StarzPlay in the UK, its first season aired weekly on Channel 4 in early 2021. It hit audiences like a shot of vodka to the throat, with wild party scenes, grisly fights and a punchy script packed with waggish one-liners (“women are for seeding, not reading”). Having already received acclaim – and two Emmy nominations – in the US, it quickly became a word-of-mouth hit across the Atlantic. The plot also proved compelling. Season one saw the dazzlingly intelligent, progressive Catherine leave Germany for Russia, finding herself utterly repulsed by the casually violent yet pitifully dim Peter. Unperturbed, she tried to fulfil her duties, even keeping her cool when her new love served the head of a Swedish soldier on a silver platter for dinner. Soon – not long after Peter’s failed attempt to drown her – Catherine resolved to transform Russia by taking over as empress, forming a motley crew to stage a coup. There was just one more problem: she was pregnant. When Peter captured her lover, however, Catherine was further fuelled by rage, and the gunshot signal was fired. The second season picks up four months later, with the civil war at a standstill. As bored children kick a decapitated head around as entertainment, it’s clear that not much has changed. Peter eventually abdicates because … well, he’s very hungry. “I bait him out of hiding with roasted food,” explains Fanning. “It’s really easy – he’s a simple, simple man.” And just like that, Catherine has the power she so badly wanted: “Now what are you going to do with it? Are you even going to be a good leader? That’s something she’s grappling with – becoming a mother both to Russia and to her own child.” Convinced that this is a temporary state of affairs, and excited about becoming a father, Peter willingly becomes Catherine’s prisoner in his rooms, where she also uses him as her willing sexual servant. “[He] still believes himself to have wonderful plans in the works,” Hoult explains. “But also, he’s just falling more and more in love with Catherine each time he sees her strategicness, ruthlessness and ability to be his match.” As the series progresses, however, Catherine’s enlightened ideas – female education, freeing the serfs, ending civil bloodshed – prove too radical for the court, which very much misses the good old days of death and debauchery. The empress spends much of this season attempting to usurp her husband’s popularity and proving she can be a hoot. “Elle decided she needed Catherine to do something crazy that she’d regret in the morning, to show that her character had ‘lost herself’ at the party,” says Hoult. “She had this idea of serving macarons off her pregnant stomach while walking around in a bridge pose.” Taking pride in her party trick, Fanning says she pitched it four times to the director and writers. “I gave a show-and-tell to a lot of people. Everyone wanted to see it, and each time I’d go: ‘Oh god, I’ve gotta get down again.’” Elsewhere, the prosthetic pregnancy bump provides other absurdly enjoyable moments, including scenes where a frog is placed on Catherine’s belly to bring good luck (its eventual death is a sign the baby is about to be born). “He would come in and be very calm in the beginning,” says Fanning of the animal. A couple of months into filming, however, it was mating season for their amphibious co-star, who fitted right in at the highly sexed court: “I couldn’t look into his eyes – he was a horny little frog freaking me out and jumping around. He was far too excited.” Amid all the chaos and shifting power dynamics in Peter’s playground, Catherine receives a visit from her mother Joanna (Gillian Anderson). As the cast only receive two scripts at a time while filming, Fanning reveals there were lots of whispers about who would take the role – real court gossip. Then Anderson arrived on set, having just played Margaret Thatcher in The Crown. “You could tell that she has a similar sense of humour, watches the show and wants to be a part of it,” says Fanning. “She adds a new freshness and flavour to the series, and she brings out a side of Catherine that we hadn’t seen before.” As well as establishing herself as the stern matriarch who turns Catherine from a ballsy empress to an obedient child, Anderson embraces the fun of the series, taking on a very silly storyline that provides some of the biggest laughs. Not one to be outdone, Peter also boasts a celebrity dad – Jason Isaacs – in a short but standout scene that explains why he ended up the way he is. The arrival of both parents is significant, as Catherine and Peter spend the season preparing to welcome baby Paul (“That was the real name of their first born!” Fanning laughs. “We do play with history, but that time it was totally true. Paul – it’s too good that it can’t be made up.”) The imminent birth even brings out a new side of Peter, one that almost makes you warm to him. Referring to the aforementioned “real” teddy bear, Hoult explains that Peter is “not good at showing it, but he does really try and love Paul. It is an endearing thing, him wanting to be a dad.” Aside from this new paternal side, the only attribute of Peter’s that Hoult relates to is his love of food: “I love his foodie nature and how passionate he is about it. That’s his biggest weakness in some ways – it’s [why] the empire is handed over.” Fanning, on the other hand, reels off a list of Catherine’s qualities that she admires: “I’m protective of her feistiness and arrogance, which we see a little more of this season. I love that she’s very opinionated and unafraid; she talks a lot and puts her foot in her mouth.” But, despite this admiration and some purloined props, they are far from their characters; two people who feel they are entitled – destined, even – to rule a country. Much of the show’s joy is in watching the pair take vicious swipes at each other both verbally (“I look at you and I dry like sand,” Catherine tells Peter) and physically (combat with sharp knives is a normal pastime) to get what they want. The writing also runs counter to the patriarchal oppression of the time, with the story told through the female gaze (much like some of its counterparts, such as Outlander and The Crown). But The Great is unafraid to go even further, poking fun at its betters as Catherine adopts Peter’s dastardly traits while also causing him harm. Unlike her husband, Catherine isn’t a sadist – but she certainly isn’t perfect. Indeed, her shell hardening while Peter’s softens during the smallpox outbreak in season one is perhaps a reminder of the vital contrast between these leaders – and indicative of how they would handle, say, a pandemic. “Catherine would be developing a vaccine,” says Fanning. “She would be keeping everyone safe and taking it very seriously.” As for Peter, they’re both certain that he would continue as normal with orgies and parties: “He’s a super-spreader.” Season two of The Great airs in the UK on StarzPlay from 5 December and is available now on Hulu in the US and on Stan in AustraliaNaturally neither you nor I are the type to brandish ostentatious handbags that flaunt their brand provenance in a showy-offy manner. That wouldn’t do at all, would it? We wouldn’t dream of being so brash. Latching our tribal identity to the shops we spend money in? As if! Except… wait a minute. I’ve just looked down at the bag sitting under my desk in the office. Not my handbag, but my overspill tote bag. This morning it held my water bottle and a dress to drop at the dry cleaners; on the way home I’ll need it when I pick up bits for dinner. The name Ginger Pig is emblazoned in flamboyant script across its sturdy, oaty linen. The Ginger Pig is a posh butcher’s shop. In smaller letters, it proclaims “Butchers &amp; Farmers of Rare Breeds Reared on the North York Moors”, which sounds a lot fancier than the vegetable curry I am actually going to cook tonight. And if it wasn’t the Ginger Pig, it might be a Daunts Books bag. I’ve even got a Guardian one somewhere. There goes my smug theory. The tote bag is to the 21st century what the button badge on the lapel was to the 20th. It is a declaration of values for an age when principles come with merch. This is citizenship as consumerism. You either pay for a branded tote bag, or you are given it because you bought something else. A bookstore tote tells the world not only that you read books, but also that you have excellent taste in retail establishments. A museum bag is a memento of a cultural expedition – but more specifically, the time you spent in the gift shop. The cultural capital of a tote bag can be straightforward (the undyed-flax vibes of the Waitrose one trumps the garish orange of a Sainsbury’s one) but it can also be mind-bendingly niche. The Daunts Books bag is a classic, but make sure you get the right colourway: just like with Hunter wellies, olive green is the cognoscenti’s choice, so don’t be fobbed off with the grey. A hot new title from Sally Rooney or Hilary Mantel arrives in stores with its own tote, a limited-edition trophy for early adopters. As for my personal favourite of the niche tote bag flex: shoutout to the man I saw on the 73 bus with one bearing the legend “National Portrait Gallery Member”, with the last word in red to make sure no one confused his level of commitment to art with that of non-card-carrying plebs. Tote bags have become ubiquitous as handbags have got smaller and working days longer. Now that your diary, address book, travel tickets, loyalty cards and newspaper are stored on your phone, the bag that keeps your valuables close can be smaller and lighter, which is great, except there’s nowhere to put your gym leggings or packed lunch or the birthday cards you buy at lunchtime. Which is where the tote bag comes in. They have become an essential part of daily kit, now that a plastic shopping bag marks one out as reckless and irresponsible. Yet a 2018 study by the Ministry of Environment and Food of Denmark challenged our assumption that tote bags are an environment-friendly choice, concluding that a cotton tote, being water-intensive in production, would have to be used 20,000 times to offset its own impact. That’s every day for 54 years – a big ask, considering most of us have a drawer full of the things. But I suspect that their downgraded eco credentials will not be enough to kill off the tote bag. Because these bags are about identity, not just carrying stuff. Hang on. Did the It bag just get greenwashed?It’s no secret that the health and wellness sector is booming, with a current global valuation at $1.5tn. But for Paris Alexandra and Alicia Ferguson – co-owners of BK Yoga Club in Brooklyn, New York – providing a healing space for Bipoc bodies is more than just a savvy business venture. Their body-positive, inclusive yoga studio is an urban sanctuary where people of color can nurture their bodies without shame. It’s a calling that Alexandra and Ferguson take seriously, especially in light of the white-dominated world of North American yoga. “Our bodies might look different than the traditional European body shape,” says Ferguson. “We want to be in places where we see other Black and Brown bodies moving and breathing and coming together around the idea of creativity.” Ferguson and Alexandra first launched BK Yoga Club in 2019, only to have their original Dumbo location shuttered by Covid-19 last year. The duo got a fresh new start this summer – this time, in the historically Black neighborhood of Bedford-Stuyvesant. In addition to a brand-new studio, they’ve opened On Dekalb by BK Yoga Club, a studio space and coffee shop that sells tea and homewares by Black and brown makers and hosts a book club spotlighting Black authors. A reverence for the shared experiences of their Black and brown clientele is at the core of Ferguson and Alexandra’s mission What was the inspiration behind the studio? Alicia Ferguson: When you think of Brooklyn you don’t think of yoga studios, and you don’t think of Black folks coming together and centering around the idea of wellness through the lens of yoga. We just wanted to be that representation that wasn’t seen. How important is it to have plus-size representation at the BK Yoga Club? Paris Alexandra: I always say self-determination is an important thing at BK Yoga Club where people get to define their journey. So, wherever they are on that journey of cultivating self-acceptance, we want to meet them there. The whole premise of body positivity is to look for strength and look for markers of success outside of losing weight. It’s about focusing on what it means to build habits, and really focusing on those markers of success that inevitably help us build a sustainable, healthy lifestyle. How does your space help Black people release the trauma we carry as a result of the Black experience in the US? Ferguson: As Black folks, there are so many microaggressions and offenses we hold in our bodies. Yoga allows us, specifically as Black folks, to release. We don’t need to hold on to that, or feel like we need to shoulder the weight of what goes on in society, or [negative] family dynamics that continue to perpetuate. We really get to allow ourselves the space to discuss how we’re feeling, say we’re not OK and to breathe through it, move through it, and stretch through it. How did you weather Covid-19? Ferguson: We just started picking up steam when Covid hit. We took a moment to pray about it, and what we were getting was to be still, pray and try not to feel anxious. So we asked, “How can we be of service?” We looked at what the community needed, and we started creating the programming. We went digital fairly quickly and partnered with therapists in our network to offer a support group called Hey Sis, You Good? It was a space to unburden yourself. Tell me about On Dekalb by BK Yoga Club Ferguson: A coffee shop was part of our original vision for BK Yoga Club. When I moved to Brooklyn, coffee shops were where you found out everything about the people in your neighborhood, and who had something to rent or give away. Creating that space, where people don’t necessarily have to take yoga but can feel grounded or centered, is important. How is storytelling an integral part of your practice? Ferguson: We’re really showing the breadth of what Blackness looks like. Our experiences are so different, and we get to show that through the space. You notice that even in our Instagram. Storytelling in general, and telling the stories of Black women, is important. It’s the lens that I see everything through, and how we show up in life. Alexandra: In our space, we celebrate Blackness and the multi-dimensionality of who we are as Black folks. We don’t ask permission. It’s about knowing we are worthy of celebration, and we are worthy of our joy. It’s really about telling our stories collectively and I guess, by default, that is tackling anti-Blackness. But we aren’t defending our Blackness.With much current fiction seeking ticks for sensitivity and positive representation, the work of David Ireland is a spectacular defence of free speech and the right to offend. In Cyprus Avenue (2016), an Ulster unionist enacts a massacre after becoming convinced his baby grandchild is an IRA sympathiser, while Ulster American (2018) shows an Irish Protestant playwright driven to murder by Hollywood’s depiction of Irish history. However, an early work, Yes So I Said Yes (2011), belatedly receiving what is billed as its “Great Britain premiere”, suggests that the writer subsequently mellowed. Even a partial trigger warning for this script would have to cite rape, bestiality, priestly paedophilia and mental illness. These occur within a scabrous, surreal comedy also incorporating a possibly transexual talking dog. In dispute with a neighbour over night noise, Alan “Snuffy” Black, a former loyalist paramilitary made redundant by the peace process, goes to BBC Ulster to seek the mediation of Eamonn Holmes. (That broadcaster has been substituted for Stephen Nolan in the original script because, Ireland notes in the programme, Nolan is little known in England – a view that may depress BBC 5 Live, for whom he presents nine live hours a week.) With racial stereotyping rightly a serious concern in theatre, Ireland’s repeated presentation of Northern Irish Protestants as psychopaths whom Hannibal Lecter might hesitate to dine with could be problematic, except that the playwright identified in a recent Guardian interview as a “proud unionist”. He dramatises through exaggeration the abandonment and confusion that some in his community feel because of solutions to the Troubles and Brexit, which they see as nationalist victories. Daringly even by this writer’s standards, Yes So I Said Yes uses terrible acts of sexual violence as a metaphor for modern Northern Ireland from the loyalist perspective. On the cramped patch of the Finborough stage, director Max Elton marshals a marvellous cast of six with the quick fluidity vital to farce. Go prepared to be appalled and challenged. But, with Martin McDonagh now lost to movies, Ireland is the only British writer using theatre for extreme physical and intellectual provocation of audiences in the manner of recent American plays such as Suzan-Lori Parks’ White Noise and Aleshea Harris’s Is God Is. At Finborough theatre, London, until 18 December.The post-election impasse in the Czech Republic has been further prolonged after the country’s president tested positive for Covid-19 and was returned to hospital hours after being discharged following 46 days of treatment for an unrelated condition. Miloš Zeman was taken to Prague’s central military hospital on Thursday evening, prompting his staff to call off a meeting on Friday at which he was scheduled to appoint Petr Fiala as prime minister, replacing Andrej Babiš who failed to be re-elected to the office. Zeman, 77, who is believed to have chronic liver problems, was reported to have contracted the virus from a presidential staff member, who is understood to have been his personal nurse. He was said to have no symptoms, having recently received a Covid booster jab. During his long hospitalisation, members of Zeman’s staff were pictured meeting him without respirator masks, in breach of hospital Covid rules. Thursday’s announcement was greeted with widespread astonishment on social media, with renewed calls for parliament to invoke a constitutional clause that would allow it to declare the president unfit to exercise his powers so that a new administration could quickly take office. In response, Zeman’s spokesman, Jiří Ovčáček, announced the president would be discharged again on Saturday and his long-delayed meeting with Fiala, the leader of a centre-right grouping, Spolu, would happen on Sunday. This raised eyebrows among health officials, who suggested it broke Covid quarantine rules. Pavla Svrčinová, the chief hygienist, said Zeman’s office had not agreed the meeting with her. “Even for people who do not have clinical symptoms of Covid-19 but have tested positive, the isolation period lasts at least 14 days,” she told Czech television. Even that meeting at the presidential countryside retreat of Lány Castle will not lead to the immediate swearing in of the proposed new government, a coalition between Spolu and Pir-STAN, a liberal bloc of parties. Zeman has insisted on meeting each cabinet nominee personally, a process expected to take more than two weeks, and has said he will try to veto at least one minister, believed to be Jan Lipavský, the proposed foreign minister, who has pledged a hardline with Russia and China – countries with which the president has cultivated close ties. Zeman’s stance has drawn accusations of deliberate foot-dragging at a time when the Czech Republic is scrambling to contain a rampant fifth wave of Covid infections. A record 27,717 cases were recorded on Thursday, the third time this week that daily infection numbers had reached a new peak. The infection rate of 1,231 per 100,000 people is the highest in Europe after neighbouring Slovakia. “You have this artificial delay,” said Jiří Pehe, a political scientist and director of New York University in Prague, who contrasted Zeman’s meetings in hospital with the president of Slovakia, Zuzana Čaputová, and Babiš with an apparent reluctance to meet Fiala. “If he can meet the Slovak president, he could have met Fiala and he could also have met the ministerial candidates,” said Pehe. “But he didn’t so obviously he is dragging his feet. He is obstructing when the country is in a crisis.” Zeman was admitted to intensive care on 10 October, a day after a surprise poll defeat for Babiš’s ANO party, which he had vowed to support. His condition left him unable to fulfil the president’s constitutional role in appointing a new government. Despite two official medical reports declaring him too ill to fully perform his duties, parliament declined to invoke article 66 of the constitution which would have allowed MPs to temporarily take over his powers. The impasse also means the Babiš administration continues as a caretaker government, but its authority is dwindling as the Covid situation worsens. With many hospitals being filled to capacity and cancelling non-urgent operations, Babis government declared a state of emergency on Thursday, including a ban on Christmas markets and an order for pubs and restaurants to shut at 10pm. However, it has ruled out a further lockdown.Pictures released before the Thanksgiving holiday showed Donald Trump with Kyle Rittenhouse, with the head of a martial arts organisation – and with his own miniature Mount Rushmore, his own visage visable next to those of George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln and Theodore Roosevelt. The internet duly lit up. One of the South Dakota artists behind the work, Lee Leuning, confirmed its provenance to the Daily Beast. “Cool,” Leuning said. “That’s our piece. Definitely. That’s pretty cool.” Leuning also said he was glad to see the maquette on display at Mar-a-Lago behind the former president, the teenager found not guilty after shooting dead two people and wounding one in Wisconsin, and the martial arts executive, because often “stuff ends up in a closet”. Trump was given the “Mount Trumpmore” piece, also made by Sherri Treeby, by the governor of South Dakota, Kristi Noem, last year. The 45th president visited South Dakota in July 2020 for a speech in front of Mount Rushmore, into which are carved the faces of the first, third, 16th and 26th holders of the office. In his speech, Trump attacked criticisms of both Mount Rushmore itself – which the supreme court ruled was constructed on land wrongly taken from the Lakota Sioux and which was made by an artist, Gutzon Borglum, with ties to the Ku Klux Klan – and reinterpretations of US history which seek to emphasise the role of racism and white supremacy. Describing what he called “far-left fascism”, Trump said: “This movement is openly attacking the legacies of every person on Mount Rushmore. They defile the memory of Washington, Jefferson, Lincoln and Roosevelt. “Today, we will set history and history’s record straight. Before these figures were immortalised in stone, they were American giants in full flesh and blood, gallant men whose intrepid deeds unleashed the greatest leap of human advancement the world has ever known.” Trump was pictured so his head appeared in sequence with those on the mountain. He later denied reports that the White House asked how his likeness could be added to the monument – but said it “sounds like a good idea to me!” Noem, a rising Republican star said to have presidential ambitions of her own, has said her comparatively tiny gift to Trump cost $1,100 and was paid for by donors who retain two copies. In September, a spokesman said the governor’s “philosophy towards giving gifts is to always give the person something that they’ll appreciate, and that’s how she approached this sculpture”. Leuning and Treeby are Trump supporters. They were not invited to attend his South Dakota speech but Treeby recently told the Beast she was a Trump fan and would vote for him in 2024 if he ran again – which he remains free to do despite inciting a deadly attack on Congress in an attempt to overturn his defeat by Joe Biden. If Trump did not run again, she said, she would “vote for Noem or the Florida guy”, a reference to the governor of Florida, Ron DeSantis, one of Trump’s only remotely serious rivals in polls regarding potential Republican nominees.It’s that most wonderful time of the year: Where we start to get a real sense of where would-be rookie saviors are at once they’ve played some real, actual games. The five quarterbacks selected in the first round of last year’s draft were, as ever, the point of much debate. Let’s check in on where they’re at 11 and a bit weeks into their careers. Trevor Lawrence, Jacksonville Jaguars Passing yards: 2,141, TDs: 8, INTs: 9, Rushing yards: 192, Rushing TDs: 2, Passer rating: 72.8 It’s hard to think of a non-David Carr rookie that has been handed a tougher situation than Trevor Lawrence. He has been asked to breathe life into a barren roster. For much of the year, his number one skill weapon has been a lifelong special teams ace, Jamal Agnew, who now finds himself on injured reserves. Add to that: His head coach, Urban Meyer, has looked in over his head since he made the jump from college to the pro-game. That incompetence has flown throughout the organization. Not to get too far in the weeds, but the Jaguars are running route concepts and combinations that simply cannot work at the NFL level, in terms of the intricacies of the timing of play-action and the route spacing. Newsflash: Everything in the NFL happens quicker than in college. Yet even under those circumstances, Lawrence has flashed. He consistently delivers two-to-three special throws a game. He has steadily improved over the course of the season, playing less hero ball and getting the ball out quicker due to the, umm, surrounding talent. He is good. He can be great if the Jaguars sort out everything around him. Grade: B — Flashes of excellence. Sabotaged by the organization. Zach Wilson, New York Jets Passing yards: 1,168, TDs: 4, INTs: 9, Rushing yards: 22, Rushing TDs: 0, Passer rating: 63.5 Where to begin? Do you begin with the fact that Wilson has looked largely lost throughout his rookie season before he’s even let the ball go? Do you begin with the fact that once Wilson has let the ball go, he has been the most inaccurate, least effective passer in the sport? The data nerds keep track of a delightful figure known as the EPA+CPOE Composite. It sounds complex but stick with it. The composite takes the Completion Percentage Over Expected metric that is spat by the NFL’s Next Gen tracking data (the chips in the player’s shoulder pads) and pairs it with Expected Points Added per Play. In essence: How valuable was a play and how much was the quarterback responsible for that value. It is probably the best single metric for isolating a quarterback’s value. Wilson is last among eligible quarterbacks in the composite this season. In fact, he’s the only quarterback in the last five years to score a negative mark, a feat matched by only 20 other quarterbacks over the span of the past 15 years. Since 2006, as far back as such things have been tracked, only 12 quarterbacks have fared worse than Wilson has this season. Some of the luminaries comfortably ahead of Wilson include: Tim Tebow, Johnny Manziel, Brandon Weeden, and Gus Frerotte. That last name is not made up. The Jets wanted to chuck Wilson in at the deep end. It’s why they didn’t originally sign a veteran backup. They knew the supporting cast wasn’t great. They knew that Wilson was not the finished article, that he had a long way to go to move from a freelancing slinger into a professional quarterback. They bet that on-the-job training was the best solution. That, clearly, was a whiff. Grade: D — There is a long, long way to go. Trey Lance, San Francisco 49ers Passing yards: 354, TDs: 3, INTs: 1, Rushing yards: 137, Rushing TDs: 1, Passer rating: 88.4 Lance was drafted to help elevate the Kyle Shanahan offense to the next level. Defenses were starting to adapt, taking away some of the Shanahan-McVay-LaFleur stylings that had run through the league for the better part of four seasons. So far? Who knows. Lance has played only when Jimmy Garoppolo has been hurt. And when he has, he’s often looked lost, confused, and inaccurate, the holy triumvirate of messy quarterback play. Some players develop brick by brick, using one skill to unlock or elevate another. Perhaps one day it will all click for Lance – players, after all, develop at their own pace, and it’s not always linear. The fact he has not played at all ahead of Garoppolo, who is fifty shades of quarterbacking beige, is a concern. The history of QBs who sit out their first year in the modern game is fairly brutal. Patrick Mahomes and Aaron Rodgers are cited as examples, but they are the outliers. Modern history suggests if your rookie sits for the whole season, it’s because they stink – at some point, it means they could not beat out a quarterback that was already on the roster, one the organization was not sold on long-term, or else they wouldn’t have drafted the rookie to begin with. Still, Lance came into the league under unique circumstances. He missed his final year of college due to Covid, playing in only a single game. Taking the step up from the second division of college football to the NFL is a steep climb even in the best of circumstances. For Lance, it was always going to take a little more time. Grade: C — Incomplete. Justin Fields, Chicago Bears Passing yards: 1,361, TDs: 4, INTs: 8, Rushing yards: 311, Rushing TDs: 2, Passer rating: 69.0 It took far too long for Fields to be named the starter in Chicago. But since he has – and prior to his recent injury – he has steadily developed with each passing week. His down-the-field throwing has always been a major plus; his athleticism, obvious. And yet he has blended the two to become more of an on-the-fly, let’s-have-fun creator than in his college days. At Ohio State, with receivers wide-open all over the place, he was a symphony of efficiency. With a ragged roster and muddled coaching, he has been forced to unveil his inner playmaker with the Bears. From here on out, Chicago’s best hope is that Fields continues to deliver one-off, special moments, the kind of individual moments that could convince a coaching candidate to turn down other gigs in order to take on the Bears forthcoming rebuild. Fields has shown the kind of talent that could convince a coaching candidate to pick him, as an individual, ahead of any other open job, even if the foundational pieces are stronger elsewhere. Grade: B+ — As expected. Room to improve. Mac Jones, New England Patriots Passing yards: 2,540, TDs: 14, INTs: 8, Rushing yards: 60, Rushing TDs: 0, Passer rating: 94.7 Jones was given an almighty task when he first rolled up in New England. They dusted off a vintage 2011 playbook, handed it to the rookie, and let him know that he had to digest it all by week one. Good luck. The Patriots were willing to forgo some short-term pain for the long-term gain, banking on the idea that Jones could grow in increments over the span of the season. After an up-and-down start, things have started to click for Jones. With a feisty defense and a bulldozing run-game, Jones’ job is simply to keep things on script, to make sure the offense gets into the best possible play, to get the ball out in rhythm, to play efficiently, and to not turn it over. If Jones does that, the rest of the roster and his coaching staff can carry the team to wins. The Patriots haven’t won seven games because of Jones, but neither has he been the deciding factor in them losing four games. The Patriots are rolling at the moment. Jones has become incredibly daring as he gets comfortable with the expansive system. Other rookies have added pieces methodically. The Patriots dumped it all on Jones early, hoping it would pay dividends by the midpoint of the season if he and the team could hang in there through the growing pains. It worked. Jones looks every bit the part of the veteran, game-manager that inspires a burning in Bill Belichick’s football loins. Jones might never reach the playmaking heights of a Lawrence or Fields, but the Patriots don’t care. He plays complementary football, and that’s helping the team contented in a wonky AFC. Grade: A — Couldn’t be going much better.Two police officers have been served with misconduct notices over their handling of a stalking allegation made by 23-year-old Gracie Spinks several months before she was killed, the police watchdog has said. Spinks was stabbed to death in a field in Duckmanton, Derbyshire, in June as she was caring for her horse, and is believed to have been killed by Michael Sellers, 35, who was found dead nearby. She had reported Sellers to Derbyshire police in February for alleged stalking. The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) said officers spoke to her and the man whose behaviour she had reported. A police sergeant and two constables have been served misconduct notices over the steps they took after a bag of weapons, including a hammer, an axe and knives, was discovered in May near where Spinks was killed. She was discovered unconscious with stab wounds at Blue Lodge Farm stables, where she kept her horse, Paddy, just a few miles from her home at about 8.40am on 18 June. The body of Sellers, from Sheffield, who had been her supervisor at a warehouse where she once worked, was found in a nearby field a few hours later. The IOPC regional director, Derrick Campbell, said: “After consideration of evidence so far, we have reached a stage where we have now served disciplinary notices on five officers.” The watchdog was considering whether the force carried out all its safeguarding obligations to Spinks and whether its investigation into the stalking matter was carried out in accordance with relevant police guidelines and policies, it said in a statement. Spinks’s family and friends have been campaigning for “Gracie’s law” in recent months, which would lead to more funding being allocated to investigating stalking claims. “The purpose of such notices is to advise officers their conduct is subject to investigation, and do not necessarily mean that disciplinary proceedings will follow. We are keeping Gracie’s family informed and we note the work they have undertaken with others to campaign for Gracie’s law to help better protect victims of stalking,” said Campbell. Spinks’s mother, Alison Heaton, told Sky News the development was a significant step towards getting the answers they demanded. “It means that we can have some sort of justice for Gracie,” she said. “I totally believe that had the police done their job properly, Gracie would be alive.”Today’s widely accepted narrative is that we live in historically divided times. Voters are routinely described as “polarised”, while analysts compete to identify the essential schism of the age, whether this is metropolitan versus traditionalist, people versus democracy or anywheres versus somewheres. For a third year running, however, the YouGov-Cambridge Globalism Project supports a different interpretation: that extreme views are given greater visibility by social media, which in turn creates an especially dynamic climate of opinion – in that, for example, it can change quickly – but one whose underlying forces are defined more by cohesion than division. Released annually by the Guardian, the Globalism Project is an international survey and the largest of its kind on the public relationship with globalisation, produced by YouGov in partnership with academics at Cambridge University. Its findings have consistently challenged popular stereotypes of public opinion in this so-called polarised age. It turns out, for instance, that there is no deep divide between the mindsets of “open versus closed” societies. In fact, few voters support radically open or closed societies, while most tend to favour varying degrees of continued integration with the wider world. Academic theorists of “authoritarian populism” may perceive a new, mass disdain for liberal pluralism, but we found little evidence of this in public sentiment. Instead, majorities around the world maintain a determined belief in the superiority of democracy, with little partisan difference on the issue. Nor has modern society been overwhelmed by demographic schisms. When we compared those who feel generally more permissive or restrictive towards net migration, for example, we found some discernible patterns on average – between younger and older, metropolitan and provincial, graduates and school-leavers – but hardly to the extent of rival demographic blocs, or splintering, parallel societies. This is not to doubt that many countries have experienced an intensifying atmosphere of partisanship over the past decade. Strange as it might sound, however, partisanship and substantial division on policy can be two quite different things, as the Guardian recently reported. For example, in Britain, most respondents who described themselves as either leftwing or rightwing said they dislike others for identifying with the opposite camp (87% and 73% respectively). The same kind of partisan divide extended to other labels of political identity: a majority of leftwingers considered themselves feminist (62%) while a majority of the right did not (70%); or on the subject of Black Lives Matter, most of the left were favourable (70%) while most of the right felt the opposite (69%). Yet when it comes to opinions on underlying issues, a different picture emerges. The same respondents were next shown a list of three jobs – cleaner, nurse and politician – and asked if each one was more suited to either women or men, or equally suited to all genders. This time, overwhelming portions of the left and right agreed, answering “equally suited” for every job (94% and 89% for cleaner; 90% and 74% for nurse; 88% and 83% for politician). Majorities on both sides also shared the view that it is unacceptable for a man to whistle at a woman he doesn’t know in the street (85%, 58%), and that “promoting equality for women” should take some level of priority in modern society (98%, 88%). A similar pattern was evident for other progressive objectives of “combating racism of all kinds” and “moving the economy away from carbon-intensive industries towards greener alternatives”. In other words, when we compare these groups by their attitudes to specific issues, rather than by markers of identity, we find a considerable amount of common ground, rather than polarised clusters of opinion or clashing visions of what contemporary society should look like. In political science, this is being increasingly recognised as the gap between “issue-based” versus “affective” polarisation, and supports a thesis that the latter is decidedly more prevalent than the former in numerous western publics. Indeed, the study finds comparable patterns outside the UK, where notable levels of partisan antipathy coexist with significant overlap in views on gender and race equality and decarbonising the economy. This was found to be true among the rival voting camps of: Joe Biden versus Donald Trump in the United States; Emmanuel Macron versus Marine Le Pen in France; the Greens versus Alternative for Deutschland in Germany; the Left versus the Law and Justice party in Poland; Vox versus Podemos in Spain; and New Democracy versus Syriza in Greece. This all hints at perhaps the most surprising – but also reassuring – finding of our research into populism and globalisation over recent years: that in countless areas of life, far from being poles apart, people tend to cluster somewhere in between – that is, they fall on a generally moderate “bell curve”. In fact, this newspaper spotted a similar pattern when it first unveiled the Globalism Project in 2019, namely that the study was remarkable for how most respondents seemed so, well, “normal”. Large-scale studies of IQ and personality tell a similar story – of a bell-curve distribution in which most of us are unexceptional, statistically speaking, and often share our strongest traits with the majority. Social science researchers can be understandably keen to focus on what divides populations, or what marks out one type of person as being at odds with another. What is more striking is how much people tend to have in common, when you scratch beneath the surface of political labels and loyalties. Social media may be amplifying the role of identity markers in politics, but people are much more likely to agree than disagree on the underlying trends of what is acceptable behaviour, and what our priorities should be. • Stephan Shakespeare is CEO and co-founder of YouGov. Joel Rogers de Waal is academic director at YouGovAs coronavirus numbers spike across Europe, winter holidaymakers are being urged to ensure that they are vaccinated and to book ski trips with reputable firms. While it is highly unlikely that the UK government will reintroduce travel restrictions for travelling within Europe, the situation remains precarious. Austria has imposed a “firebreak” lockdown of up to 20 days. France and Germany are also experiencing fourth waves of Covid-19 infections. Lynsey Devon, founder of Heaven Publicity, who has worked in the ski industry for more than 30 years, said she hopes the Austrian lockdown is a preventive measure to get more people vaccinated. “Skiing is safe as long as you are vaccinated and follow local rules, and the hospital beds are not full. The real issue is the ever-changing rules. Book with a tour operator and they can handhold clients through the process.” Being unvaccinated, she said, was “a bigger headache”. Industry insiders say there is now very little availability in European ski resorts. Peak dates –Christmas, New Year, February half-term and Easter – are almost full. “The industry felt the full frontal of the pandemic when skiers had to stop from March 2020. Only diehard skiers who want glacier skiing are in resorts this early. The real thrust will come when the schools break up, and the industry needs this season,” Devon added. Austria’s lockdown is due to end on 13 December. In France, the government has emphasised that ski resorts will remain open. However, the French government has just reintroduced mandatory mask-wearing in a wide variety of indoor public spaces. Those that are unvaccinated must provide a negative Covid test every 24 hours – even to enter ski lifts. On Thursday, ministers announced that France’s vaccine passport, which is already mandatory for bars, restaurants, and entertainment venues, would be extended to ski lifts. Anyone over the age of 12 will need to provide proof that they are fully vaccinated; or have a negative current PCR; or the result of a positive PCR or antigen test showing recovery from Covid-19 that dates back at least 11 days and less than six months from infection.. Rob Stewart, founder of Ski Press and Mountain Press, said Austria’s lockdown was a blow for the industry, but it was encouraging that ski resorts were on course to be opened up before Christmas, with some even open now. “Unlike last winter, governments are keen to keep ski resorts operating, but they will impose strict rules depending on case numbers. If you’re vaccinated, things are straightforward; if you’re not, then it will be complicated,” Stewart added. Emma Morison, general manager of Oxygene ski school in France, said that while coronavirus infection numbers were rising, she felt confident that this season would go ahead. “We don’t have a crystal ball, but we have all learned a lot about Covid-19 and its transmission over the last 18 months. We have been planning for over a year to get skiing again and all the mountain professionals feel ready to open safely,” she added. Meanwhile, others working in the industry urged British skiers to book with reputable travel agents to avoid cancellations and difficulties. James Cove, editor of the ski news website PlanetSki, acknowledged that it had been a frustrating time for UK skiers and snowboarders who want to get back on the slopes, and suggested they look further afield for winter holidays. “No one really knows what will happen beyond the next four weeks. If they tell you otherwise, they don’t know what they are talking about,” he said. “Cases and vaccination rates in Austria and Switzerland are not looking good, but they are within expectations in the mountain regions of France and Italy. The numbers are looking good in Norway and Spain if people want to look beyond more traditional destinations,” he added.What is the new Covid variant and why is it a concern? Scientists have detected a new Covid-19 variant called B.1.1.529 and are working to understand its potential implications. About 100 confirmed cases have been identified in South Africa, Hong Kong, Israel and Botswana. B.1.1.529 has a very unusual constellation of mutations, which are worrying because they could help it evade the body’s immune response and make it more transmissible, scientists have said. Any new variant that is able to evade vaccines or spread faster than the now-dominant Delta variant may pose a significant threat as the world emerges from the pandemic. Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser to the UK Health Security Agency, said the R value, or effective reproduction number, of the B.1.1.529 variant in the South African province of Gauteng, where it was first found, was now 2 – a level of transmission not recorded since the beginning of the pandemic, before restrictions began to be imposed. For an R of anything above 1, an epidemic will grow exponentially. Where has the new variant been found? Early signs from diagnostic laboratories suggest the variant has rapidly increased in Gauteng and may already be present in South Africa’s other eight provinces. In a regular daily update on confirmed cases nationally, the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) reported 2,465 new Covid-19 infections, slightly less than double the previous day’s infections. The NICD did not attribute the latest resurgence to the new variant, although some leading local scientists suspect it is the cause. South Africa has confirmed about 100 specimens as B.1.1.529 but the variant has also been found in Botswana and Hong Kong. As many as 90% of new cases in Gauteng could be B.1.1.529, scientists believe. Hong Kong recorded two infections in people who served a period of quarantine at the Regal airport hotel. A traveller from South Africa was found to have infected the person in the room next to him. The hope will be that the quarantine period will have stopped it spreading further. Israel said it had detected its first case of the variant, in a person who had returned from Malawi. How does B.1.1.529 compare with other variants? Senior scientists on Thursday evening described B.1.1.529 as the worst variant they had seen since the start of the pandemic. It has 32 mutations in the spike protein, the part of the virus that most vaccines use to prime the immune system against Covid. That is about double the number associated with the Delta variant. Mutations in the spike protein can affect the virus’s ability to infect cells and spread, but also make it harder for immune cells to attack the pathogen. The Delta variant was first detected in India in late 2020 but has spread around the world, causing an increase in case rates and deaths. Other coronavirus variants include Alpha (which originated in Kent in the UK), Beta (formerly known as the South African variant) and Gamma (originally found in Brazil). It has been suggested, after a drop in cases in Japan, that variants can “mutate themselves out of existence”. What new travel restrictions are being imposed? South Africa will be placed under England’s “red list” travel restrictions from midday on Friday – affecting between 500 and 700 people who typically travel to the UK from South Africa each day through airlines including British Airways and Virgin. The ban will also cover flights from Namibia, Lesotho, Botswana, Eswatini and Zimbabwe. Scotland confirmed all arrivals from the countries must self-isolate and take two PCR tests from midday on Friday, while anyone arriving after 4am on Saturday will need to stay at a managed quarantine hotel. Recent arrivals from southern Africa will also be tracked down and offered tests in an effort to avoid the introduction of the variant. Israel also announced it would ban its citizens from travelling to southern Africa – covering the same six countries as well as Mozambique – and bar the entry of foreign travellers from the region. Germany, Japan, France, Bahrain and the Czech Republic are among other countries that have suspended flights. The European Commission plans to stop flights from the region. England’s travel red list had remained empty since the final seven countries were removed on 1 November. South Africa had been removed on 11 October, meaning vaccinated travellers were able to visit once again without having to quarantine in a hotel on their return. What does the new variant mean for the UK and for Christmas? It is too early to tell. Scientists in the UK are working around the clock to understand more about the variant. Because it has recently emerged, scientists do not yet have evidence of its transmissibility or ability to evade vaccines. With a month to go until Christmas, there will be concerns that the variant, if it is allowed to spread, could trigger the need for further restrictions.The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said there were “very live discussions” about adding further countries to the red list. It could be a few weeks before scientists have complete information about the variant and how serious a threat it may pose to the world. Is there anything I can do to protect myself? Yes. The advice remains to get vaccinated if you have not already done so. Britons aged 40 and above who received their second jab at least six months ago are eligible to have their booster now.President Emmanuel Macron has told Boris Johnson to “get serious” or remain locked out of discussions over how to curb the flow of people escaping war and poverty across the Channel. In a further sign of an escalating diplomatic crisis since the deaths of 27 people on Wednesday, the French leader criticised the UK’s decision to issue a five-point plan via Twitter instead of conducting bilateral talks. The letter to Macron was sent publicly as a tweet in time for the front pages of UK newspapers. “I spoke two days ago with Prime Minister Johnson in a serious way,” Macron said at a press conference on Friday. “For my part I continue to do that, as I do with all countries and all leaders. I am surprised by methods when they are not serious. “We do not communicate from one leader to another on these issues by tweets and letters that we make public. We are not whistleblowers. Come on. Come on,” he said. His words followed the French government’s decision on Friday to withdraw an invitation to the home secretary, Priti Patel, to attend a meeting on the issue. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, wrote to Patel to say the meeting on Sunday would proceed without British involvement. Darmanin told Patel the letter from Johnson to Macron, suggesting France take back people who cross the Channel, was a “disappointment”. Referring to Johnson’s posting of the letter on social media, he added: “Making it public made it even worse. I therefore need to cancel our meeting in Calais on Sunday.” The French government’s official spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, added to criticism of Johnson’s letter on French television, calling it “mediocre in terms of the content, and wholly inappropriate as regards the form”. Attal told BFM TV the letter was “mediocre because it does not respect all the work that has been done by our coastguards, police, gendarmes and lifeboat crews … It basically proposes a ‘relocation’ agreement, which is clearly not what’s needed to solve this problem. “We’re sick and tired of this double talk and outsourcing of problems.” Attal continued: “What we need is for the British to send immigration officers to France to examine here, on French territory, demands for asylum in Britain.” He added that the tone of the letter “did not in the least reflect the exchanges Emmanuel Macron had with Boris Johnson … It’s as if Boris Johnson was regretting leaving Europe, because as soon as he has a problem he considers that it is Europe’s responsibility to solve it. It doesn’t work like that – it works through cooperation.” France was planning to host ministers from all states with Channel coasts, including Patel, for a meeting on the refugee crisis in Calais on Sunday. A source close to Darmanin told Agence France-Presse and French media the meeting would be going ahead with the ministers from other European countries but said Patel was no longer invited after Johnson’s “unacceptable” letter. “We consider the British prime minister’s public letter to be unacceptable and contrary to the discussions we had with our counterparts,” said the source, who asked not to be named. “Therefore, Priti Patel is no longer invited to the inter-ministerial meeting on Sunday, which is maintained in the format of France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany and the European Commission.” Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, dismissed suggestions that Johnson’s letter was sent to generate headlines and insisted it was made in good faith. “I can assure our French friends of that and I hope they will reconsider,” he told Radio 4’s Today programme. Johnson wrote to Macron asking France to immediately start taking back all migrants who land in England after crossing the Channel. Taking people back “would significantly reduce – if not stop – the crossings, saving thousands of lives by fundamentally breaking the business model of the criminal gangs” behind the trafficking, he said. Johnson’s letter also set out areas for greater cooperation with France, proposing joint border patrols, aerial surveillance and intelligence sharing. The new row adds to the post-Brexit tensions between Britain and France, with French fishers on Friday due to stage a blockade of Channel ferry ports and stop freight entering the Channel tunnel in protest at fishing rights. In a further development, the head of a UK trade union that represents thousands of Border Force staff has warned members could be balloted to strike if they are asked to push back boats of people. Patel claimed in parliament on Thursday that Border Force was ready and prepared to turn around boats that have come from France and send them back. The PCS general secretary, Mark Serwotka, said: “It is shocking that the government is suggesting Border Force staff turn boats back, which will clearly be against international law and morally reprehensible. “PCS is reviewing all its options, including taking out a judicial review against Priti Patel’s plans and a possible industrial response.”Myanmar’s military junta has been accused of forcing people to the brink of starvation with repeated offensives since it seized power in a coup earlier this year. The Special Advisory Council for Myanmar said the junta had destroyed food supplies and killed livestock while cutting off roads used to bring in food and medicine. The council said military offensives in the country’s north-west and east have prevented farmers from harvesting their crops. The council of experts, which includes people who previously worked on Myanmar for the UN, said the international community should work with the parallel national unity government (NUG), set up by pro-democracy politicians, to get support to people. Chris Sidoti, former member of the UN fact-finding mission, said: “Instead of wringing our hands wondering what to do, the international community can and must work formally with the NUG and get assistance across borders into the country and to the people who need it. “There are trusted local humanitarian and medical networks including service providers [and] community-based and civil society organisations that are already helping people. They need to be supported and empowered.” The council has accused the junta of crimes against humanity, including intentionally depriving people of food. Yanghee Lee, former UN envoy to Myanmar, said it was important that the junta continued to be spurned internationally because of the impact of its actions. Lee said: “Anyone claiming to accommodate the military in the interests of the people is in fact only prolonging their suffering. These actions can be viewed as being complicit in the military’s crimes.” A UN emergency update said 234,600 people have been internally displaced since the February coup, with more than 600,000 displaced in the country in total as of November. The report said most internally displaced people and host communities were struggling for food, medicine and fuel. According to the UN, about 3 million people require life-saving assistance in Myanmar, with 2 million of them identified since the coup.In a surprising move, some climate crisis campaigners have praised Joe Biden for ordering the release of emergency oil reserves in an attempt to reduce energy prices across the country. On Tuesday, the president announced the release of a record 50m barrels of oil stored in the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, in coordination with other countries including China, India and the UK. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve is an emergency stockpile to preserve access to oil in case of natural disasters, national security issues and other events. Maintained by the energy department, the reserves, which consist of roughly 605m barrels of petroleum, are stored along the coasts of Texas and the Louisiana Gulf. “American consumers are feeling the impact of elevated gas prices at the pump and in their home heating bills, and American businesses are, too, because oil supply has not kept up with demand as the global economy emerges from the pandemic,” the White House said in a statement. The oil release is an attempt by the Biden administration to “lower prices for Americans and address the mismatch between demand exiting the pandemic and supply”. The move appears to contradict Biden’s long-term goals of addressing the climate crisis, including reaching a net-zero emissions economy and reducing American dependence on foreign fossil fuels, but some environmentalists have come out in support of his decision. Democratic Senator Ed Markey of Massachusetts, who has focused extensively on the climate crisis, praised the Biden administration. “This is what reserves are for – defending our economy against disruption. Profiteering can’t go unanswered, especially as Big Oil makes billions and fuels the climate crisis through exports,” he tweeted on Tuesday. Markey attributed the surge in oil prices to oil companies and corporate greed, saying: “Some of the upward pressure on oil prices today is directly tied to the fact that oil producers can make more money by producing less oil … the smartest thing we can do to insulate America from future global oil price shocks is to reduce our dependence on oil in general, and especially foreign oil. That means investing in America’s transition to a clean energy future.” Lorne Stockman, research director of Oil Change International, an environmental group focused on creating a “fossil-free future”, said Biden should have acted sooner, if only to counter a barrage of Republican criticism blaming him for high gasoline prices. “Presidents are always blamed for high gas prices, whether they have anything to do with it or not,” Stockman said, calling the measure a small step to bring short-term relief to American consumers. “I don’t see a conflict between having long-term policies on climate change and having a short-term policy that would protect the economic well-being of Americans in need,” Amy Myers Jaffe, managing director of the Climate Policy Lab at Tufts University, told Bloomberg. According to the Automobile Association of America, gas prices are about $3.40 a gallon, over 50% higher than a year ago. In September, Americans used an average of 20.7m barrels a day. The 50m-barrel release will provide about two and a half days of additional supply. Although tapping into federal reserves for more oil may appear counterintuitive to addressing the climate crisis, Biden has insisted that his efforts to fight climate change is not to raise the price of gas. “What it is doing is increasing the availability of jobs building electric cars,” he said. Americans who purchase electric cars will save up to $1,000 in fuel costs this year, said Biden, and “we’re going to put those savings within reach of more Americans and create jobs installing solar panels, batteries and electric heat pumps”. Kelly Sheehan, senior director of energy campaigns with the environmental organization Sierra Club, praised Biden’s actions but cautioned that the only way to fully attain energy security is to “rapidly transition away from risky fossil fuels like oil and gas and make it easier for more people to access clean energy”. Earlier this month, Biden vowed at the Cop26 environmental summit that the US will “lead by example” in tackling the devastating consequences of climate change. However, just four days after the landmark talks, the Biden administration launched an auction of over 80m acres of the gulf for fossil fuel extraction, a record sell-off that directly contradicts the president’s previous promise of closing down new drilling on public lands and waters. In addition to criticizing the auction, environmental groups have condemned the 2,500 new oil and gas permits authorized in the first six months of the Biden administration – a figure Trump’s administration took a year to reach. Yet despite previous criticisms, many environmental groups regard Biden’s recent announcement as a necessary evil in the long journey to reduce American dependence on fossil fuels and break up the monopoly of oil companies. “Price volatility will always be part of big oil’s playbook,” said Kassie Siegel, director of the Climate Law Institute at the Center for Biological Diversity. “Let’s break their stranglehold on our economy once and for all.” Agencies contributed to this reportThe great thing about Christmas is that no one – or at least practically no one – minds if you play it by the book. In fact, if anything, they tend to be mildly reproachful if you don’t. That’s why not having a bottle of port to drink with the stilton is as big a crime as forgetting the stuffing or, in my case, the bread sauce. But which one do you go for? Before I start, a quick port 101 (and I realise this will be well-trodden ground for many of you): port is a fortified wine, in other words one whose strength, and sweetness, is boosted by adding grape spirit to the base wine. There are two main types: ruby, the traditional, deep red, brambly style that’s generally aged in stainless steel; and tawny, which is aged in wood, amber in colour and with a more nutty, caramelly character. Tawny port is generally sold in multiples of 10 years, most commonly 10 or 20, while rubys either go under names like “special reserve” or date from a specific year, like a late bottled vintage. And despite popular belief, almost all ports don’t have to be decanted, with the exception of vintage and so-called “crusted” ports (Google how to do that, or it’ll take up the rest of the space I have for this column). Which one you go for, then, is a matter of preference and price (rubys tend to be cheaper). I generally prefer tawnies, especially with cheese, though ruby ports are nicer with mince pies and chocolate. I’ve noticed that port is getting fruitier and less “spiritty” of late, though that depends very much on the producer. Booth’s Late Bottled Vintage 2016 (£14.50 for 50cl, 19.5%), for example, which is made by Quinta da Rosa, is the most wonderful explosion of blackberry and dark cherry fruit, while Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference LBV 2016 (on offer at £10, 20%), which is made by Symington’s, is more traditional and better suited to the stilton. My own favourites from recent tastings are Warre’s gloriously nutty Colheita Port 2009 (£17 The Wine Society, 20.5%), a colheita being, unusually, an aged tawny from a single vintage, and the lovely Quinta da Pedra Alta No 10 Ten-Year-Old Tawny Port (£24.95 for 50cl Master of Malt and Trelawney Wines, 19.5%), which is laced with figs, raisins and hazelnuts. You also find some interesting copycat port wine styles that are not allowed to call themselves the P word. Argentinian producer Zuccardi’s lusciously sweet Malamado (£9 Tesco, 18.5%), which is made from malbec, is a good example and a great wine to put on the table if you want something that looks a bit more snazzy. There are, of course, other fortified wines, cream sherry being the other traditional Christmas option. It may not be fashionable (which is all to the good when it comes to price), but it is delicious. If you find the cheaper examples a bit sweet, try Harveys elegant Signature 12-Year-Old Cream Sherry (£13.99 for 50cl Waitrose, 19%), which is made in the slightly drier Spanish style. I’m also a big fan of palo cortado, a sherry style that’s similar to amontillado with a dash of clotted cream. I can personally vouch for the fact that Pedro’s Almacenista Selection Palo Cortado (£15.99 on Majestic’s mix-six, 20%) is irresistibly good with cheese straws. A sweet madeira such as Marks &amp; Spencer’s Five-Year-Old Madeira Wine (£12 a half-bottle in store and Ocado, 19%), which is made by the brilliant Henriques &amp; Henriques, would be the perfect glass to sip on one of those miserable afternoons when it gets dark at 3pm. Mince pie optional. Finally, a fortified wine you might not have heard of that, despite its strength, is a terrific match for Christmas pudding: JM Fonseca Alambre Moscatel de Setubal 2012 (£7.99 a half-bottle Waitrose, 17.5%) is a rich, orangey dessert wine from Portugal that wouldn’t be too shabby with one of those gorgeous custard tarts, either. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comNext week, Black Mirror will be a decade old. In that time, it has grown from a weird little British anthology show to a global hit, spawning no end of shoddy imitators in its wake. Perhaps its biggest legacy, however, has been its uncanny ability to tell stories about things that would subsequently become reality. But has every Black Mirror episode managed to predict the future? Below is every single episode ranked from least to most prescient. 23. Bandersnatch – 2018 special In which someone tried to make a computer game in the 1980s. The technology to make computer games in the 1980s, er, existed in the 1980s. This was not Black Mirror at its most Black Mirror-est. 22. Rachel, Jack and Ashley Too – series five, episode three Starring Miley Cyrus, this episode saw the personality of singer Ashley O become trapped in a toy, Ashley Too. You can buy a 2008 Hannah Montana Christmas doll on eBay for about 20 quid. Buyer beware, though: it’s unlikely to contain the actual soul of Miley Cyrus. 21. White Christmas – 2014 special Jon Hamm starred in this instalment, in which chips were implanted into people’s brains that “blocked” unwanted people by blurring them out. Nothing to see here. Sometimes even the awful world of big tech knows when something is a bad idea. 20. Arkangel – series four, episode two Another episode of Black Mirror, another chip. This time, a mother put one in her daughter’s brain to monitor her as a child and conveniently left it there, allowing her to see through her eyes. Another terrible idea that has yet to be implemented. 19. Men Against Fire – series three, episode five More chips. This time soldiers were implanted with microprocessors that dehumanised their enemies. No such chips exist, though soldiers have been taught to dehumanise their enemies without technology for hundreds of years. 18. White Bear – series two, episode two In which a prisoner had her memory wiped so that she could be hunted for sport on a gameshow. Thankfully this one hasn’t come to pass, although two years after it was broadcast Channel 4 launched Hunted, a series where members of the public are chased across the country for cash, so it kind of happened? 17. Smithereens – series five, episode two A man learned that social media might be bad. We’ve known that for a decade and a half already – do keep up. 16. Shut Up and Dance – series three, episode three Online blackmail definitely predates Black Mirror, although to be fair they are increasingly intricate, like the one seen in this episode. 15. Playtest – series three, episode two OK, we might be getting somewhere now. In Playtest, a neural network videogame learned players’ personal fears. It doesn’t exist yet, but that doesn’t mean that developers aren’t trying. 14. USS Callister – series four, episode one An embittered programmer tortured sentient digital avatars based on his real-life coworkers. It all seemed preposterous until Mark Zuckerberg started banging on about the metaverse – now it’s probably a couple of years away. 13. Hated in the Nation – series three, episode six In this Nordic noir-inspired episode, robotic bees killed people who used certain hashtags. Last year, scientists created robot bees to help pollinate flowers. Hopefully the hashtag thing will come along soon. 12. Metalhead – series four, episode five In which a killer robot mercilessly stalked a terrified woman. Boston Dynamics already makes similar robots that can dance really well – which is even scarier. 11. Crocodile – series four, episode three The chips returned and this time they were recording our subjective memories. Frighteningly, this technology actually predates the episode; in 2014, a group of scientists used neuroimaging methods to reconstruct human faces from the memories of their subjects. 10. The Entire History of You – series one, episode three Back in the third ever episode of Black Mirror, the series creator and co-showrunner, Charlie Brooker, and co imagined a reality where people are implanted with – you guessed it – chips, which record everything their owners say and hear, allowing them to torture themselves and others by replaying their memories. Luckily these chips don’t exist, but an alternative might be close: in 2019 Samsung was awarded a patent to develop technology for a smart contact lens that can record video. 9. Black Museum – series four, episode six In which a machine allowed people to feel the pain of others. This hasn’t come to pass yet, but last year scientists inched closer to making robots that can experience pain, which is somehow much more terrifying. 8. Hang the DJ – series four, episode four This twisted romcom introduced us to a dating app that guaranteed perfect compatibility, but also told you when your current relationship would end. There is no such thing as perfect compatibility, of course. However, this year saw the launch of Birdy, a dating app where – rather than swiping photos – users are matched with people who have complimentary Myers-Briggs personality test results. 7. Be Right Back – series two, episode one In Be Right Back, a grieving woman bought a robot who looked and sounded like her dead boyfriend. Again, thankfully, this hasn’t happened. However, in 2017 a woman named Eugenia Kuyda invented the Roman Bot. This AI program fed text messages written by her dead best friend into a neural network, giving it his vocabulary and speech patterns, so that she could continue to communicate with him from beyond the grave. So the robot might not be far off. 6. San Junipero – series three, episode four This pastel-coloured 80s paradise was in fact revealed to be a simulated reality designed for the elderly to remind them of their youth. Meet Rendever, a company formed five years ago to help the elderly combat social isolation with virtual reality “reminiscence therapy” that lets them revisit their childhood home or wedding venue. 5. Striking Vipers – series five, episode one Two friends played a video game with a twist: it let them sleep with each other. Meet Viro Playspace, a “haptic-driven virtual social space” where – with the aid of Bluetooth-enabled adult toys – VR users can meet virtually and have sex. One experience offered in Viro Playspace is “first time bi’, which may closely mirror the plot of the episode. 4. Fifteen Million Merits – series one, episode two Daniel Kaluuya starred in Black Mirror’s second episode, in which members of the public earned money (in the form of “merits”) by riding stationary bikes that generated electricity. A year after broadcast, inmates at a Brazilian prison were offered a day off their sentence every time they spent eight hours pedalling bikes hooked up to generators. Additionally, pre-orders are now open for a new exercise bike that can generate electricity for the home. The Re:Gen, we’re promised, can charge 14 iPhones in the space of a single one-hour workout. 3. Nosedive – series three, episode one Mike Schur and Rashida Jones were behind this 2016 episode, in which social interactions were given an Uber-style rating. In 2018, the Chinese government began to test a “social credit” system in several major cities. The system punishes citizens who commit “untrustworthy” infractions of etiquette – such as playing music on trains, cheating in exams, not showing up to restaurant bookings or refusing to visit their elderly relatives – by docking points from their records. Enough points docked and you can be punished by anything from an airline blacklist to throttled internet speeds. 2. The National Anthem – series one, episode one In 2015, an unauthorised biography claimed that, as part of his initiation into Oxford University’s Piers Gaveston Society, David Cameron once inserted a private part of his anatomy into a dead pig’s mouth. No corroborating evidence was offered, and the story has been denied, but it’s nevertheless a spooky coincidence that the first ever episode of Black Mirror was about a British prime minister who was blackmailed into having sex with a pig. 1. The Waldo Moment – series two, episode three This episode saw a lightweight entertainer become the figurehead for a cynical populist political movement. Boris Johnson was elected as British prime minister on 24 July, 2019.Little Simz has a reputation as a leading woman in British rap and an MC whose wordplay rivals that of more famous faces. Stormzy and Kendrick Lamar have each hailed her talent. But on this opening show of a UK and Ireland tour, she seems to care less about weighty labels and more about simply enjoying herself. Many of her peers in rap tend to go big, with entourages for their stage shows complete with hype men finishing off each of the main star’s bars to help them stay on point, but here it’s pared down to just Simz, her five-piece band and her incredible stamina: her set is nearly 90 minutes, deftly mixing old and newer material. At one point she freestyles a cappella, showing off vocals honed by years of such freestyling. Highlights include the trappy Might Bang, Might Not, which is expertly mixed into Venom, and her delivery of the latter track might even be speedier than on the record. Recent hits such as the rhythmic, pacing Point and Kill, and I Love You, I Hate You also thrill the crowd with their swagger. Simz rocks along to the percussion while performing, declaring herself “unstoppable” on the former tune. As well as gushing over her band multiple times throughout the night, she thanks her audience – a mixed range of excited teenagers and polite middle-aged couples – for letting her “try new things”. The things in question may just be some playful gimmicks designed to heighten anticipation. First donning dark sunglasses and a bandana, she quickly dips off stage, only to return minutes later in a new getup, the first in a series of false starts intended to tease the crowd. It makes the set feel slightly disjointed, but it’s made up for by her incredible form. Simz towers over her audience, closing the show with the luscious Woman; an expert in getting the crowd to follow her, she has everyone in song for the chorus. Towards the end of the show, she cheekily asks Birmingham whether they’re still there. The cheshire-cat grin she wears when hearing their response suggests this singular talent, whose lightning-speed flows never compromise her knack for powerful storytelling, never feared losing their attention anyway. • Little Simz plays O2 Academy, Newcastle, on 27 November; O2 Academy, Glasgow, 28 November. Then touring.When Jennifer Chilton and Graeme Thirde were looking at nurseries for their eldest daughter, Imogen, they quickly realised that the traditional approach to early education wasn’t for them. “We didn’t want her to be stuck indoors all the time,” says Chilton, an IT consultant from London. “We wanted her to be able to run around outside and climb and develop confidence in her body and the way it interacts with her surroundings.” Finding a nursery called Little Forest Folk, which encourages children to learn by immersing themselves in the outdoors, was the first step on a path to the family reconnecting with the natural world on a more meaningful level. Imogen, now seven, and her sister Florence, six, have continued their outdoor education at an independent primary school set in three acres of beautiful National Trust grounds. “We wanted to go back to basics with the way we raise the girls,” says Chilton. “When we were growing up we were always outdoors, but most children today no longer have that opportunity.” For all four family members, this desire to live closer to nature is reflected in their choice of footwear. “We all wear Vivobarefoot shoes and absolutely love them,” says Thirde, who spent nine years in the army before retraining as a garden designer. “When you’re wearing them, you’re experiencing a connection with the ground the way we were intended to.” Jennifer Chilton and Graeme Thirde with their daughters, Florence and Imogen Vivobarefoot was founded in 2012 by cousins and seventh-generation cobblers, Galahad and Asher Clark, part of the Clarks shoes family, who shared a dream of creating footwear that felt as close as possible to being barefoot. The brand’s philosophy is simple: modern shoes are bad for our feet and the planet. In contrast, Vivobarefoot shoes – which are made from sustainable materials, including leathers from wild-roaming cattle and recycled polyethylene terephthalate (polyester) – are designed to bring you closer to nature, and allow your feet to regain (or in the case of children, maintain) their natural strength and movement. Thirde first discovered the brand when he was working part-time as a fitness instructor. “I had a history of lower back problems brought on by carrying heavy backpacks during my time in the army. “My back would go, I’d see an osteopath and it would settle down, and then a few months later it would go again,” he says. “Quite a few of the other instructors were wearing Vivos so I tried a pair. Now I’ve got about 10 pairs – from walking boots to running shoes. I think they’ve managed to fix my back by changing the shape of my feet and the way I walk; my toes have opened up and they’ve got more dexterity. I haven’t had to see an osteopath in years.” The shoes have had a positive impact, too, for Imogen. “Imogen has sensory issues and can’t wear a lot of ordinary shoes, depending on how they touch her feet, or if they rub,” says Chilton. “Vivos feel like she’s slipping her foot into a sock; there’s no pressure on her toes, or seams inside. She absolutely loves them.” Beyond that, knowing their daughters’ feet aren’t being constrained by their shoes as they run, climb and play amid trees, fields and wildlife at the school they attend fits in with Chilton and Thirde’s philosophy of how they want their daughters to grow up. “We want the girls to have the stress-relieving benefits of being in nature, and Vivos fit perfectly with that,” says Chilton. “When they wear their shoes, I know they’re using their feet properly. And they can barely feel the shoes, which helps them really lose themselves in their environment.” Giles Hutchins, his wife Star and daughters Lilly-Belle and Hazel are another family dedicated to living in harmony with the natural world. For the past two years, they have lived in 60 acres of ancient woodland in West Sussex, with chickens and a vegetable plot. The woodland is where Hutchins, an author, strategist and coach, runs his business, The Future Fit Leadership Academy, taking leaders through transformative experiences in nature to help them transform their companies into “regenerative, life-affirming” organisations. Giles Hutchins and Star with their daughters Hazel and Lilly-Belle “We go off into the woods and I encourage them to notice the details of nature – the trees, the birdsong, the smell,” he says. “By the time we reach the main area, where they sit and talk and listen, they’re in a different space mentally, which they usually find means they have a clearer awareness of their fears, and personal and organisational challenges.” Before he tried his first pair of Vivobarefoot shoes, Hutchins says he’d never considered the impact of traditional shoes on our feet. But once he did, the revelation was instant. “I realised that we’ve been lessening our connection with nature all this time, as well as deforming our feet and those of our children,” he says. Now, he loves the sense of freedom the shoes offer. “They feel so much less tight – my feet feel as though they can spread out properly and breathe. There’s no bounce like with normal shoes, but over time you get used to that. “Most importantly, when I’m walking through the woods, I can feel every aspect of the ground beneath my feet, which makes me feel more present in my environment and in the moment. It’s a calming sensation.” Star, Lilly-Belle, nine, and Hazel, seven, are all similarly smitten with the shoes. “Star has been converting her friends to them, and the girls wear them everywhere, including school and in the woods. Children want to feel free to explore their surroundings without anything getting in their way, so Vivobarefoot shoes are perfect. “Now that we know what it’s like to feel that connection to the earth with every step we take, we’ll never go back.” To start your barefoot journey, head to vivobarefoot.comClimate activists have blockaded Amazon distribution centres across the UK to highlight the company’s treatment of its workforce and what they say are its “environmentally destructive and wasteful business practices”. Scores of Extinction Rebellion (XR) activists locked themselves together and used bamboo structures in an attempt to disrupt the online retail company’s distribution network on Black Friday – one of the busiest shopping days of the year. Unveiling banners reading “Infinite growth: Finite planet”, protesters said the blockade was part of an international action by XR targeting Amazon “fulfilment centres” in the UK, Germany and the Netherlands. In the UK, activists targeted sites in Dunfermline, Doncaster, Darlington, Newcastle upon Tyne, Manchester, Peterborough, Derby, Coventry, Rugeley, Dartford, Bristol, Tilbury and Milton Keynes. Rob Callender, 31, from Uxbridge, west London, was one of the XR protesters at the Dartford blockade. “We need to make Amazon pay for the damage it is doing to the environment … for the terrible damage hyper-consumerism is doing to our planet, creating emissions, poisonous waste and burned out workers who are denied the right to unionise in most places,” he said. Protesters say they hope to continue the blockades for several hours – possibly into the weekend. Amazon has been criticised for its treatment of its workers who have described gruelling conditions, unrealistic productivity targets, surveillance, bogus self-employment and a refusal to recognise or engage with unions unless forced. Employees have also called on its founder and chief executive, Jeff Bezos, to do more to tackle the climate crisis. In response to the protests an Amazon spokesperson said the company took its responsibilities “very seriously”. “That includes our commitment to be net zero carbon by 2040, 10 years ahead of the Paris agreement, providing excellent pay and benefits in a safe and modern work environment, and supporting the tens of thousands of British small businesses who sell on our store,” they said. The spokesperson acknowledged there was “more to do”, adding: “We’ll continue to invent and invest on behalf of our employees, customers, small businesses and communities in the UK. We’re proud to have invested £32bn in the UK since 2010, creating 10,000 new permanent jobs across the country this year alone, and generating a total UK [direct and indirect] tax contribution of £1.55bn in 2020.” Separate Black Friday protests organised by the Make Amazon Pay coalition of unions and campaign groups also took place at the company’s other sites across the UK on Friday. Supported by the GMB Union, the Trades Union Congress, the International Transport Workers Federation and War on Want, and co-convened by the Progressive International and UNI Global Union, the campaign aims to highlight what they describe as the company’s abuse of workers and the planet.In the early hours of Thursday morning, a group of newly arrived refugees huddled together on the coast of Dover. The smugglers had not halted their trade in moving people across the Channel and, just hours after 27 people died on the perilous journey, they were back at work. There is little evidence that the latest loss of life will deter others from making the dangerous journey. After the tragic drowning of the Kurdish family who tried to cross the Channel in October last year, two asylum seekers who survived told the Guardian that, despite being deeply traumatised, they continued trying to cross and not long after made it to the UK. One of the two, Ali, said: “The journey took seven to eight hours and my legs did not stop shaking for the entire journey.” Several asylum seekers who have crossed in recent weeks and months said they were fully aware of the dangers but felt they had no choice. Previously, fewer refugees crossed from northern France in small boats because it was easier to hide in lorries. But the recent increase in security at lorry transit points in northern France has added to the numbers trying to get to the UK by sea. Ali, 28, who fled Iran because he faced persecution for his Bahá’í faith and crossed the Channel six months ago, said: “I didn’t have any other way to do it while my life was in danger.” He is a fluent English speaker and said he had read many articles in the UK media about drownings in the Channel. He knew the Kurdish family who drowned, as he had spent time in northern France with them. He said he was fearful of getting into the boat, but the alternative was being sent back to Iran. “We are asylum seekers, not economic migrants. If it was safe for me in my country I would apply for a job-seeker visa and come to the UK that way, and I would not try this dangerous journey,” he said. A 23-year-old seamstress from Afghanistan, who fled forced marriage before the Taliban took control, escaping through Herat into Iran and then to Turkey, said a relative paid smugglers to bring her through Europe to northern France, where she boarded a small boat to the UK. She said: “My relative paid the smugglers a lot of money to bring me through Europe and to put me into a small boat. Because they paid a lot the smugglers treated me good. I was one of the lucky ones. If you have money it is easier.” She said she was afraid of crossing in the small boat but was also fearful of remaining in northern France. “I am glad I have survived until now. In Afghanistan I was not free. In the UK I am waiting but I am free,” she said. Ari, from Syria, crossed the Channel not once, but twice. He was removed to another European country under the Dublin rules, where one EU country can request permission from another to send an asylum seeker back there. Since Brexit, the UK is no longer part of this scheme. He said there was a fatalism among desperate refugees crossing the Channel. “Either I come, or I die,’ I heard this phrase every day in Calais,” he said. “When I came to Britain I felt a strange relief inside me because I knew that this journey would end either in drowning and death, or arriving in Britain. In both cases the misery would end.” Saam, 23, fled Iran after converting to Christianity and protesting against his government. He said the smuggler he spoke to promised that he would reach the UK by car, travelling on a ferry. He was put into a car by the smugglers, but then told to get out at the beach and forced into a dinghy at gunpoint. He said: “The smuggler said: ‘Get in or I’ll shoot you’. I thought about my mum. She is still in Iran and she is so worried for my life. I thought that for her sake, I have to get into the boat and take this risk to try to save my life. I said to myself ‘maybe I won’t arrive, but I have to try’.” Saam arrived in the UK but is still traumatised. “I am very afraid here. I have so much stress. I have to sleep with the light on because I am frightened,” he said. “If I was safe in Iran it would be crazy to come to a different country with different culture and different laws. I am a Christian but I will be alone here at Christmas in my room. I can only talk to the walls and the spiders.” Mohammad, 21, from Afghanistan, came to the UK in a lorry at the age of 15. He now has leave to remain in the UK and lives on the south coast, where he has seen some of the refugees arriving recently in small boats. “I understand why they are coming,” he said. Two of his younger brothers, aged 14 and 16, arrived in the UK just weeks ago after crossing the Channel on a small boat, escaping Afghanistan before the Taliban took control. He was overjoyed they had survived, as he had not known if they were dead or alive. “I was so excited when I spoke to them and they told me they had made it to the UK,” he said. “It was a really good moment.” They were not able to spend much time together before his brothers were moved to the north-west of England by the Home Office. “I have only been able to visit them once. I took them into the town and bought them some clothes and things they needed.” He said the Home Office is disputing his brothers’ ages, saying the 14-year-old is 25 and the 16-year-old is 23. When he himself claimed asylum, the ages of his brothers at the time was part of his evidence. “My country is very rich. There are many things in Afghanistan. My wish is that one day my country will be safe and free with no fighting and no killing. When that day comes I promise you, UK, I will leave from here.” “Everybody who gets into a small boat knows it is not safe. If there is a problem, you are going to die and the end of the day will be the end of your life.”The first European case of the new B.1.1.529 variant has been detected in Belgium, as the UK imposed new restrictions on travel from South Africa and five other nearby countries because of the risk that vaccines may not protect against it. Just hours after the UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, warned it was highly likely the new variant has spread further than where it was first discovered in South Africa, Belgium recorded a case in a woman who had recently travelled from Egypt via Turkey. The case was identified in an unvaccinated young adult woman who developed mild flu-like symptoms 11 days after travelling and had no links with South Africa or other countries in southern Africa. The identification of the variant in Europe raises questions about whether the restrictions on travel from six African countries will be enough to stop the variant reaching the UK. Javid said on Friday that he was “concerned this new variant may pose substantial risk to public health” because of the fear it may evade current vaccines. He said there were no known cases yet in the UK, but precautions were being taken because current vaccines “may be less effective against it” and it may be more transmissible than other variants. Flights from six countries – South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe and Namibia – have been temporarily banned from midday on Friday until hotel quarantine is set up again. The accommodation costs £2,285 for one adult. From 4am on Sunday, UK and Irish nationals arriving from those countries will be required to book and pay for a government-approved hotel quarantine for 10 days. Non-UK/Irish nationals will be banned from entry. Any UK nationals who arrive from those countries before Sunday, or who have arrived in the last 10 days, must get day two and day eight PCR tests even if they are vaccinated, and isolate at home along with the rest of the household. NHS test and trace will be contacting any travellers in this category and asking them to get PCR tests and undergo isolation. Javid said the government would not do anything to help British nationals get back from South Africa before midday and argued that the best thing for anyone who was now on one of the red list countries was to make their own way back and enter hotel quarantine from Sunday. He acknowledged that thousands of tourists and other travellers were likely to be hit by the restricitions, involving paying many thousands of pounds in hotel quarantine bills. “I understand whether it’s sports teams or the thousands of British tourists and others that currently find themselves in South Africa, Botswana and these countries, this is very difficult news, but I hope they will understand,” he said. Those who cannot pay may be eligible for hardship arrangements, which include repayment plans or fee waivers in “exceptionally limited circumstances”. The rules apply to England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, as all the devolved nations are aligning on the policies. Javid said it was a “fast-moving situation and there remains a high degree of uncertainty”. He urged everyone to get their Covid vaccine booster shots as soon as possible. The health secretary said there were “very live” discussions over the prospect of adding further countries to the travel red list. He was pressed on whether further public health measures – such as mandatory masking in public places and a return to social distancing – were necessary, but insisted they was not needed for now. “The plan A, the policies that we put in place, they remain the policies that I think we need at this time,” he said. “[The questioner] won’t be surprised to know we do keep this under review and if we need to go further, we will.”When I first started on this newspaper’s Diary column (still this millennium, but only just), we had a rolling competition called Stupidest MP, which aimed to celebrate Westminster’s non-finest minds. So many memories – too many to choose from, in some ways. But Archie Hamilton, then Tory member for Epsom and Ewell and a former 1922 committee chairman, was a perennial candidate. The Diary had previously contacted Sir Archie asking if he would sit an intelligence test, to which he had tentatively – and indeed bizarrely – agreed, as long as others did it with him. Alas, what we might politely term a “peer group” could not be found for some years. But everything changed when news emerged of a “talking” chimpanzee named Panbanisha that resided at the Great Ape Trust in Iowa. A call to Hamilton’s office was immediately placed. When he came to the phone, Sir Archie was asked whether he had seen the stories about this creature. He had? Very good. In which case: would he be willing to participate in an intelligence test against the chimp? Very regrettably, Sir Archie declined the opportunity, forcing the Diary to make a subsequent call to Conservative Central Office. “We can’t say to him ‘You must do it’,” fretted a press officer there. “If it’s something he feels he couldn’t do well, we can’t make him.” Understood. Had she any other suggestions? “What about someone from our education team? There’s Theresa May ... ” When Archie announced his retirement as an MP – he’s in the House of Lords now, obviously – we again called his office to arrange a fitting tribute. Would he finally do the animal kingdom the honour of taking the test, only this time against a mynah bird? “Are you serious?” wondered his agent. Yes. We have the bird on standby. There was a ruminative pause. “Look, I don’t think it’s Archie’s cup of tea. We’re Conservatives, you see. We have certain proprieties.” I suppose the point of this lengthy preamble is to set up the question: has anyone got a mynah bird to hand? Alternatively, has anyone got a chimp, talking or otherwise? For while Archie has taken his brains to the Lords, his spirit lives on in the Commons. In fact, there would have been two very strong candidates for Stupidest MP this week, from opposite sides of the house. We’ll begin with an eye-catching Westminster speech on the subject of international men’s day, which has long served as an occasion to draw out the cream of parliamentary intelligentsia. Announcing himself as one of their number was the Don Valley MP, Nick Fletcher, who delivered a neuron-killing address about a crisis in masculinity. “Everywhere ... there seems to be a call from a tiny, but very vocal, minority that every male character or good role model must have a female replacement,” explained Nick. “One only needs to consider the discussions around who will next play James Bond.” Not really – it’ll be a man, but go on. “In recent years we have seen Doctor Who, the Ghostbusters, Luke Skywalker and the Equalizer all replaced by women, and men are left with the Krays and Tommy Shelby.” Think he’ll find they’re mostly on TikTok and not bothered about this either way. But it’s the extrapolation that’s the really special bit: “Is there any wonder we are seeing so many young men committing crime?” Nick would later refer to this as “a rather nuanced point”, to which the only possible rejoinder is: no. Incorrect. Anyway, on to Labour’s Jon Trickett, who detected in Boris Johnson’s gibberingly shambolic Peppa Pig meltdown on Monday not simply a strategy, but a complex and brilliant strategy. “Peppa Pig,” explained Jon, “was a media distraction to disguise the handover of your NHS to private health.” Oh dear. Please, not the “dead cat”. I don’t know if you can technically kill a dead cat, but if this phrase were to be robbed of the ability to appear in British political discourse ever again, it would be of great benefit. Alas, among a certain breed of political watchers, the mention of dead cats has become almost reflexive. Everything is a dead cat for something else, and there must always be an unseen play at work. The dead cat is a close ally of other conspiracist assumptions that bolster those simply unable to accept that the political upheavals of the last few years were not largely the work of the Russians, or Cambridge Analytica, or any other hidden master villains manipulating the poor, stupid voters. These things might have made a small amount of difference. But the alternative, and in my view accurate, reading is that the UK basically cocked everything up/liberated itself on its own. With some low-level assistance, yes, but all the elements were already there. And yet in many political tribes this is regarded as unthinkably simplistic, probably out of a self-regarding inability to confront the fact. In the vast, vast majority of cases, dead cats are just a story people like to tell themselves – perhaps to sound cleverer, but more probably just to feel better. As a long-term Jeremy Corbyn supporter, you can quite see why Trickett needs to think some kind of fiendish mastery was underpinning Johnson’s Peppa meltdown: the alternative is facing up to the bald reality that people actually preferred THIS GUY to his guy. Which, let’s face it, is quite telling enough. All in all, then, an impressive week for Stupidest MP, an eminently revivable contest for which we might have to start coming up with some prizes. The chance to be rebooted with a female mynah bird? Or the opportunity to go head to head in an intelligence test with a dead cat? Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistBoth Jürgen Klopp and Ralph Hasenhüttl benefited from the work of top influencer Ralf Rangnick – although the late Wolfgang Frank was the Liverpool manager’s biggest inspiration – but bring contrasting form into their meeting at Anfield. The Southampton manager will be seeking improvement in front of goal following a wasteful defeat at Norwich. Klopp has no such worries. His Liverpool team have scored at least twice in each of their past 16 matches – the first English team to achieve that feat since Wolves in 1939 – and need two more to record 700 goals in the Klopp era. Andy Hunter Saturday 3pm Venue Anfield Last season Liverpool 2 Southampton 0 Referee Andre Marriner This season G7 Y35 R2 5.23 cards/game Odds H 1-3 A 10-1 D 27-5 LIVERPOOL Subs from Adrián, Kelleher, N Williams, Phillips, Matip, Tsimikas, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Milner, Morton, Origi, Minamino Doubtful None Injured Gomez (calf, 4 Dec), Keïta (hamstring, 4 Dec), Firmino (hamstring, 16 Dec), Jones (eye, unknown), Elliott (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y14 R0 Form DWWDLW Leading scorer Salah 11 SOUTHAMPTON Subs from Lewis, Forster, Obafemi, Simeu, Valery, McQueen, Lyanco, Long, Tella, Walcott, Diallo, Perraud, Djenepo Doubtful None Injured Stephens (knee, 4 Dec), S Armstrong (calf, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y22 R1 Form LWDWWL Leading scorers Adams, A Armstrong, Broja, Ward-Prowse 2Labour’s former deputy leader Tom Watson has revealed he has an eating disorder, saying his relationship with food is very complicated and that he has experienced some form of compulsive eating. Watson, who stood down as an MP and deputy leader in 2019, also said that during the third lockdown, his “disordered eating” became problematic again as he replaced his sugar addiction with a dairy one. Speaking candidly to the Guardian restaurant critic Grace Dent on the Comfort Eating podcast, released on Tuesday, Watson – who at one point weighed 22 stone and was diagnosed as type 2 diabetic – said at the age of 54, he had realised he had an eating disorder. During a conversation with a friend, who revealed her issues with eating, he became aware that his “disordered eating” was part of a wider disorder. “It was actually one of those idiot moments where … you realise something about yourself, and so I kind of think I’ve had some form of eating disorder,” he added, saying it could be akin to compulsive eating. After being diagnosed as diabetic, Watson changed his nutrition, giving up sugar, and lost eight stone. He left politics and started training, eventually putting his diabetes into remission, which he writes about in his book Downsizing. He said he was a “sugar addict” at one point. The former MP said he put on some weight during the third lockdown, after thinking he had “cracked it” because he no longer ate sugary treats. “The cheese crisis hit the cheesemaking industry. And I read Ned Palmer’s book [A Cheesemonger’s History of The British Isles] … and got a little bit obsessed with helping cheesemakers, so I was ordering cheese by mail order … And I was eating, like, 2kg of cheese in about 72 hours.” He said he was like “a drug addict”, and had read a book that noted how when people give up sugar, they often develop another dependency. “I had a year I was running 5km a day. I was lifting weights, riding bikes, and with lockdown came this sort of massive setback.” Watson was just 17 when he left his family home in Kidderminster, in Worcestershire, for Southampton, and said he was not well-equipped to look after himself as he did not know how to cook. He was elected MP for West Bromwich East in 2001 and held various other posts in his career. In 2015, under Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership, Labour members and supporterselected him as the party’s deputy leader. Watson – who describes life as a politician as having “no switch off” and says that he “went mad” – said that if he had anything to thank Corbyn for, it was for releasing him from the immense pressure of politics. Though often at odds with Corbyn, in previous interviews he has praised him personally but said conditions within Labour had contributed to making his own political career unsustainable. “He [Corbyn] did rid me of a 35-year, minute-by-minute obsession,” he said. “I mean, when I walked away [from politics] … it was, was like a sort of shedding of very heavy overcoat.” Watson said he started putting on weight from his early 20s and would go on “fad diets” that failed. As a politician he was sleep-deprived and said his eating was “chaotic”. He finished work at 10pm and would go to London’s Soho for drinks after work. “I’d go out on a Tuesday and Wednesday. And so it’s a very unusual life. And I definitely, you know, I reached a point where I was going to die if I carried on, I think; I mean, I was probably diabetic for some years before I formally got a diagnosis.” During his wide-ranging interview with Dent, Watson also described the murder of Jo Cox, who was killed as a serving MP, as the “worst day of his life” in politics.The bloom is well and truly off Brighton’s rose as their strong start fades into the distance. Graham Potter’s side put in an uncharacteristically weak-willed display in defeat at Villa Park but Leeds present an opportunity to bounce back. Last season’s darlings are struggling, sitting two points above the relegation zone, and spirits may be knocked further as Marcelo Bielsa provided painful news that Patrick Bamford’s return from injury has been put back. There has been little cutting edge without him and if Brighton can work a little harder, while keeping tabs on Raphinha, they could sneak a much-needed win. Graham Searles Saturday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Amex Stadium Last season Brighton 2 Leeds 0 Referee Craig Pawson This season G8 Y28 R1 3.63 cards/game Odds H 19-17 A 3-1 D 5-2 BRIGHTON Subs from Steele, Scherpen, Connolly, Sarmiento, Mac Allister, Richards, Webster, Burn, Locadia, Mwepu, Doubtful None Injured Alzate (ankle, Jan), Welbeck (hamstring, 26 Dec) Suspended None Discipline Y32 R1 Form DDLDDL Leading scorer Maupay 4 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Ayling, Cresswell, Struijk, Gelhardt, Roberts, Klich, Shackleton, Drameh, McKinstry, Greenwood, McCarron, Jenkins Doubtful Ayling (knee) Injured Bamford (knee, unknown), Koch (pelvis, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y28 R1 Form WLDWDL Leading scorer Raphinha 5Famously, there is no cure for the common cold. But with the success of the Covid vaccine, could it finally be in grabbing – or, rather, jabbing – distance? I asked Prof Sheena Cruickshank, an immunologist at the University of Manchester, about the possibility of a cold vaccine. I have just recovered from what everyone is calling the “super cold”. It was awful. Eyes streaming, head about to explode. I hadn’t felt like that since I found out Boris Johnson had won the election. Could a vaccine end this misery? Let’s take a step back. The common cold is just a blanket term for different upper respiratory viruses: adenoviruses, coronaviruses, parainfluenza and so on. Rhinoviruses are the most common cause, but there are roughly 160 variations. So a vaccine that works on one might not work on another. And they’re expensive and complicated to make. A company isn’t going to fund something that doesn’t work against many strains. It’s a shame that it’s not seen as worth funding. I know the 60s was a big time for cold research. I’ll never forget learning about a centre in Salisbury where, if they needed volunteers, they’d place adverts such as: ‘Come get a free holiday in the countryside – you just need to huff these bags of diseased air.’ Did any of those teams get close? No – their vaccines could only protect for a little while against one type of virus. But today we’re much more advanced. For example, there’s work being done on a cold vaccine that can recognise multiple virus strains at once. That’s amazing! It’s the Oxford group doing it, actually. It’s at phase-two trials, and it’s an intranasal vaccine. So up the nose. Sexy. Our better understanding of how the virus gets into cells means we can target that specific point. That’s what the coronavirus vaccine does – it targets the spike domains, which is how Covid gets into our body. Pfizer and Moderna are looking into doing the same for common cold viruses. Look at all those big names working on it! Dream team! It’s a shame vaccines aren’t like Waterstones or I’d pre-order. Well, you could sign up to the trials. No, thank you. It would be exciting – you never know, you might get the placebo rather than the vaccine. I would happily take nothing in pursuit of science. Oh, another thing about a cold vaccine: could it give lasting protection? Survivors of the 1918 flu pandemic were still producing neutralising antibodies 80 years later. We call that an “immune memory” – their immune system remembers how to fight and produces what it needs to ward off the virus. But we don’t see that with some cold viruses. In fact, the data suggests we need a bit to get in – a little poke from the virus – to remind us how to fight it. That might be why we’re seeing more severe cold symptoms now: lockdowns meant we didn’t get colds to give us the reminder. Also, some of these viruses interfere with our immune memory. Devious little critters Exactly. So it would be challenging to make a vaccine that lasts long term. You’re not going to stop me getting excited about a common cold vaccine. There is a cold-free future ahead! One day, Coco, one day.Plan your menu – and the shopping Festive shifts at a butcher’s shop are exhausting, with customers at their best and worst. Ben Curtis, previously a butcher, now head chef at Smoking Goat in Shoreditch, remembers people asking, “What should I have for Christmas?”, without saying who they were cooking for or what they liked, “so you could never give a helpful answer”. Butchers, fishmongers and cheesemongers want you to have delicious food, but give them something to go on. It might seem obvious but decide what you want to eat, so you can plan how to shop – whether in specialist shops, online or in a supermarket – either in one big splurge or in instalments. Do you want your shopping in the house well before Christmas or to pick up your meat, for instance, late on Christmas Eve? Max Rocha, chef-owner of Café Cecilia in east London, and his family usually start talking about their Christmas meal in June. “Planning a menu is a really nice chance to meet up with the people you’re going to have Christmas with,” he says. You’re the cook, so you get to decide “Everybody has their opinions about Christmas dinner – it could be a touchy subject,” says Gary Usher of Elite Bistros. “But I think if you’re the one who is hosting, the menu is up to you.” Family favourites should be accommodated to a point, says cookery writer Anna Jones, but a boundary needs to be set. “In most households, the Christmassing tends to fall to one person,” she says. “Over the years I’ve learned that’s me, so I ask for help to keep the day enjoyable.” Greek-Cypriot cook Georgina Hayden asks family members to make dishes at their place: an easily reheated red cabbage side, salmon for the pescatarians, favourites such as hummus. Some people may refuse to take direction, she adds: “Every year my yiayia [grandmother] brings an octopus stifado for the table. No one wants it, but we go with it.” Don’t even think of trying something new “I think there’s often a feeling of ‘Oh God, not that old chestnut again’, but this is one time of the year you can put on the same record,” says Jeremy Lee, chef-patron of Quo Vadis in Soho, of the roast dinner. “We should be proud of this wonderful tradition; it’s one of the most amazing celebratory feasts ever.” Gary Usher is more direct. “Have what you like, but definitely, definitely, don’t cook something you haven’t made before – especially if you have people coming round,” he says. “Cooking for people is stressful, so you’re asking for trouble with something new. Keep to the recipes you know are bulletproof.” If you’re a cautious cook, use the preceding weeks to practise: get to know your oven (is the temperature dial accurate, is the heat distributed evenly?); trial your Yorkies; test out recipes for gravy. And if you’re fed up with turkey, get a big fish Stephen Harris, chef-owner of the Sportsman in Kent, says fish – perhaps a large turbot, roasted and served whole – makes a fine festive dinner. “Order in advance from a good fishmonger,” he says, adding that if you don’t order something until 23 or 24 December, they likely won’t have what you want. “Offer them alternatives because seas can be unpredictable, but they should know what they can get.” As it’s moisture that causes fish to smell, ask your fishmonger to dry it thoroughly, inside and out. Wrapped in paper, your fish will sit happily and fragrance-free in the fridge for a day or two. Harris says to put a slash on the side facing up when cooking, so you can monitor when the flesh cooks down to the bone. “That is the point, or slightly before if you can do it, to take it out the oven – turbot will probably only need about 20 minutes.” Then cover the fish with tinfoil and leave it for 20 minutes, just as you would a joint of meat, to finish cooking. Veggie, vegan, omnivore: how to keep them all happy Although Anna Jones’s family runs from vegan through to omnivore, she cooks a vegetarian Christmas, with a vegan main. “Christmas has to be the day where no one feels left out,” she says, and she puts thought into finding something to please all palates. “Cooking something everyone can share and enjoy is generous in spirit, and I think that’s important.” Instead of a token vegetarian gesture, veg-omnivore households could do a vegetarian main with token meat sides: Felicity Cloake’s perfect nut roast can be made ahead, and is brilliant with pigs in blankets for those who want them. Married chefs Joe Woodhouse (vegetarian) and Olia Hercules (not) find elements to work with both their menus: the marie rose sauce for Hercules’s prawn cocktail (easily made ahead) will dress crisp-battered mushrooms for Woodhouse. For the main, Hercules thinks a small bird is a good option if not everyone is eating meat. She might roast a duck (stuffed with sautéed onions and sliced cabbage and carrots, the makings of a nice side and good leftovers), while Woodhouse might make a mushroom duxelles to fill some pastries, but will also be happy with a big plate of veg sides: “I have an onion sauce to tie it all together.” If you want to get ahead, make a list Melek Erdal is a chef and a cookery teacher at the charity Made in Hackney, where she teaches a Middle Eastern Christmas feast. She suggests first-timers break down their recipes into processes, which can be written down in columns of what to do two days ahead, the day before and on the day: “Being able to visualise your schedule will really help you not get flustered.” A stuffed squash is easy as it can be roasted ahead, and the filling made with Christmassy nuts and spices. Both elements can be refrigerated overnight, brought together on the day and heated through. If you’re a meat eater, her tip is to skip the expensive beef or turkey for a slow roast – maybe a lamb shoulder: “You don’t have to worry about keeping it pink or overcooking it. You can do it early in the day, or even the night before, and it will get better as it rests.” “Turkeys can be quite stress-inducing for a lot of people,” says food writer and chef Jane Baxter. Last year, she made “heat at home” boxes including boned and stuffed turkey thighs, which many butchers offer and make a tasty slow-roast for two or three people. “You get the best flavoured meat and it doesn’t dry out.” Not everything has to be made from scratch Buying readymade products isn’t cheating – it can save time and sometimes even money. Hayden loves mulled wine, but for ease will buy good-quality, ready-spiced bottles: “Crack one open, shove a clementine in the pan with it.” Also, she adds, “some of the nicest trifles are made with off-the-shelf stuff”. Usher agrees. “Buy your custard, get readymade stuffing, take the stress out of the day,” he says, suggesting you stick to something you’ve had before so you know it’s good. “Supermarket desserts are bloody brilliant these days, even in the value stores.” You can never have too many baking trays By Christmas Eve, Curtis will have tested how his roasting trays and tins fit in the oven for maximum efficiency: “It’s all about oven Tetris.” Rocha will clear the fridge of soft drinks, condiments and anything that will happily sit in a cool larder or a box outside, ready to keep meat and fish at the bottom, dairy in the middle and vegetables at the top. Hayden will have chosen serveware, marked with Post-it notes to show what is going where. If there are garnishes that can be kept at room temperature, she’ll often put them in the dish: “It’s a bit extra but, for me, stuff like that is important, and it is much easier to do the day before.” Hercules recommends grouping your ingredients for each recipe, and on the day setting up a scraps bowl lined with a compost bag on your counter to save having to keep walking to a bin. When asked what essentials made festive cooking easier, answers included: lots of bowls and scrapers; enough baking trays; a microwave; old-school hostess trolley (Baxter’s very specific request if cooking for a lot of people); lots of good washing-up liquid. Kirsty Cheetham knows a thing or two about delivering an epic roast – her pub, The Queen o’ t’ Owd Thatch in North Yorkshire, is a former winner of OFM’s Best Sunday Lunch award. She says you want a nice deep rack for your roasting tin to catch all the roasting juices. Curtis recommends a meat thermometer. Practise whenever you do a roast, so you get used to it. “People don’t expect meat to increase in temperature when resting, but it does – up to 10C.” Always make yourself some time Everyone says that when your meat is resting (and do rest your meat), you shouldn’t be cooking, just finishing sauces, crisping roasties and heating sides. Everything comes together in that time; you’ll have about 30 minutes, so get ahead on it. “Nothing will make you more stressed than feeling under time pressure,” says Cheetham. She prepares vegetables the day before: peeling and parboiling, then tossing in fat and chilling (in the pan they’ll be roasted in). She makes Yorkshire pudding batter a day ahead; and notes that pigs in blankets can be popped in the oven from frozen, as can chestnuts chopped through butter, ready to be stirred into roast sprouts. Rocha makes his stuffing a month in advance and freezes it – just remember to defrost it in time. He also coats his parboiled carrots in a glaze, ready to caramelise in the oven. “We always have a cold pudding, and my mum makes them on the 23rd,” says Curtis. “Something simple and happy: by that point in the day you don’t want anything complex.” Fewer dishes means better dishes While what you cook will somewhat be dictated by your kitchen – “Don’t attempt 12 different vegetables, and turkey, beef and a ham if you’ve only got four burners and a single oven,” says Cheetham – choosing to make fewer dishes means fewer decisions, less cooking and less stress. Curtis likes roast potatoes (“they always take longer than I think”) and carrots, and usually cabbage: “It’s in season, super sweet, and it takes about two minutes on the hob: chop it, boil it, then quickly sauté it with some brown butter.” Woodhouse agrees with choosing something that takes minutes: “You can wilt down Brussels tops at the last minute.” Hercules will poach quince for a trifle, but will make enough so that in the days between Christmas and new year it can do for breakfasts, or go on a cheeseboard. When choosing cheese, Woodhouse opts for two or three and says don’t be tempted to go overboard: “Maybe a good cheddar and a good stilton, or whatever your family likes, that’s it. Otherwise you end up with so much and it gets expensive.” It’ll be ready when it’s ready “If your lunch is at 3pm, it doesn’t have to be at 3pm,” says Cheetham, urging a relaxed approach. “It’s not a deal breaker. It is Christmas, after all.” Most of our contributors opt for 4pm or 5pm, to accommodate a leisurely breakfast. “Everything doesn’t have to be hot,” says Woodhouse, adding he prefers it not. His wife agrees. “I find it quite weird, culturally,” says Hercules. “Most things in Ukraine will be room temperature, so it’s not a concern for us.” If anything goes wrong, go with the flow Inevitably, things go wrong. If the stress is getting too much, Jones might take a moment to make things look nice: “Laying the table sorts my head out. Plus, it creates a different atmosphere – that spark that tells you it’s Christmas.” Limit hazards by not having small children underfoot or drinking too much around blades and hot oil, or until the main course is done. An emergency trip to A&amp;E means the goose is dry? “Hot gravy saves the day!” is Curtis’s Christmas motto. If a major change of plans means creating a last-minute feast, Megan Davies, author of Fridge Raid, says look to kitchen staples to make dishes special. Butter is another day-saver. It only takes a minute or two to brown, she says: “You’ll immediately have luxurious richness to spoon in pools over mash or fold through boiled frozen vegetables.” Toast festive spices in the pan before you add the butter, stir in a spoonful of honey and you have a warm, spiced sauce for ice-cream. Rather than trying to find cranberry sauce at the last minute, she’d use open jars of jams and chutneys: warm a combination in a pan with a bit of seasoning and a splash of water to get a sweet-acidic fruity sauce to go with roast meats, or stir them through roast vegetables 10 minutes before the end of cooking to help them caramelise. “It will go wrong,” says Curtis. “Something always does. That’s the time to get everyone squished in the kitchen, getting in each other’s way, trying to help out. Play some Christmas songs. Have fun. It’s only dinner – the day is really about having a nice time together.”Tom Harrison, the England and Wales Cricket Board chief executive, insists he is still the right man to navigate the sport through the racism scandal he has described as an earthquake set off by Azeem Rafiq’s allegations of systemic discrimination at Yorkshire. Speaking after the publication on Friday of the ECB’s 12-point action plan to address diversity in the sport, Harrison said he had no intention of resigning despite fierce criticism and pressure from MPs and the government following Rafiq’s moving testimony in parliament earlier this month. “I am so committed to sorting this issue with the game,” he said. “I understand I have the backing of the game and I am very motivated to make sure we provide this more welcoming environment across our sport for everybody. That is something I’ve felt passionately about since the moment I walked into this job and I’m not going to walk away from that now. “The last few weeks have been very, very tough for cricket. It feels like an earthquake has hit us. “The most damning part of Azeem’s testimony was he didn’t want his son to be part of the game. For someone in my job that’s the most difficult thing you can hear. “It’s sad, frankly, but I think sometimes an earthquake can provide the opportunity to accelerate years and years of change in a very quick period of time. Perhaps this has been the shock that is going to give us the opportunity to bring this game together once and for all.” However, within minutes of the publication of the ECB’s action plan, shadow secretary of state for digital, culture, media and sport, Jo Stevens, said: “The report today is a reminder of previous ECB failures to get a grip on the racism scandal engulfing cricket. Many of the measures listed should have been in place years ago. “Players, staff and fans will struggle to have faith in a process which is being overseen by the same people who have stood by for so long. What we need is a proper independent inquiry to encourage victims to come forward for real changes to be made across cricket.” Harrison is due to share a bonus of £2.1m with other senior ECB executives if he remains in his job when a five-year long-term incentive plan matures next year. Asked whether it was appropriate for that bonus to still be paid despite the damage sustained to cricket’s reputation in recent weeks, Harrison said: “It’s a matter for the board. Look, that is part of the contract I signed to join the ECB many years ago.” The ECB plan unveiled on Friday comprises 12 action points grouped under five key areas: education, dressing-room culture, diversity of talent pathways, environments and governance. As the Guardian revealed on Tuesday, a key stumbling block that delayed the announcement from its proposed Wednesday launch was a point that required boards to diversify their leadership boards by April, with at least 30% of every county board required to be made up of women or “representative ethnicity” of the area. When the plan was announced on Friday, it acknowledged the difficulties, saying: “Compliance will be subject to a ‘comply or explain’ provision to ensure Counties can respect their own governance processes in making the required change,” Other key proposals include continuous diversity training for all players, staff, umpires and coaches from elite level to local clubs and tough action against discriminatory crowd behaviour, and the availability of alcohol-free areas, prayer areas and halal food at all county grounds to create a welcoming environment for all. Harrison admitted: “I know there are people who feel we should have gone further and I’m probably in that camp myself but we have to get everyone to agree to every one of these commitments in full.” There will also be a full review of dressing-room culture in all men’s and women’s professional teams, including at England level. Commenting on the England men’s team, whose players preparing for the Ashes have not spoken to the UK media since Rafiq’s appearance in parliament on 16 November, Harrison said: “I know the impact of recent events has been embraced in full by the England men overseas in Australia. They’ve spoken about it in positive ways – how they continue to evolve dressing-room culture to effectively reflect some of the feeling that’s coming out of the conversation in the game at the moment. “You’re seeing the leaders of that dressing room leading that conversation.” There will also be a governance review of part of this action plan that Harrison admitted could see an independent regulator appointed to oversee cricket – a job the ECB currently does as well as promoting the game. “If a governance review comes back with a recommendation you have to have a very good reason not to go along with it,” he said. The ECB’s plan did garner support from the sports minister, Nigel Huddleston, who tweeted: “I welcome the action from the ECB in the wake of the treatment of Azeem Rafiq and other recent revelations. We will now work closely with them to ensure that all measures, including a review of governance structures, are acted upon and racism in cricket is stamped out for good.”A 24-year-old rock musician has appeared before magistrates charged with the murder of 18-year-old Bobbi-Anne McLeod, who disappeared from a bus stop in Devon. Cody James Ackland, who lives in the Southway area of Plymouth, appeared in court dressed in a grey sweatshirt and grey trousers, flanked by two custody officers. During a two-minute hearing he spoke only to give his name, age and address before being remanded in custody. He is due to appear at Truro crown court in Cornwall on Monday. Members of McLeod’s family watched from the public gallery and one of them shouted at Ackland as he was led from the dock. A small crowd gathered outside court to watch him being driven away. McLeod, who was described as looking much younger than her age, went missing on Saturday evening and her body was found on Tuesday close to Bovisand beach, seven miles away. Ackland attended a local school and is the lead guitarist and songwriter for a Plymouth indie rock band called Rakuda. Named after a bar on the city’s historic waterfront, the group has a loyal following in the area. On Friday his bandmates issued a statement saying: “The remaining members of Rakuda are all extremely shocked and in complete disbelief by the tragic event that has unfolded over the last several days. Our thoughts and prayers are with Bobbi-Anne McLeod’s family and friends who must be devastated at their loss. “As a mark of respect, we have decided that we shall not be going forward as a band and will be disbanding with immediate effect. We will not be making any further comments at this time.” A candlelit vigil was taking place on Plymouth Hoe on Friday evening to remember McLeod and to express concern about women’s safety. Many Plymouth residents were also planning to place candles in their windows as a show of solidarity with McLeod’s family. The Conservative leader of the city council, Nick Kelly, has been criticised after saying in an ITV News interview about the McLeod case: “Everybody has a responsibility to try to not put themselves in a compromising position.” He went on to say that women should not need to be concerned about where they are walking or what they are wearing, but added: “That is probably not where we are right now.” The Labour party in the city has claimed the remarks are insensitive and has called for him to apologise. Hundreds of people attended a candlelit vigil on Thursday evening close to the bus stop where McLeod was last seen. The teenager’s mother, Donna McLeod, sobbed as she paid tribute to her daughter and thanked friends, family and the wider community for their support. Speaking in public for the first time, she said: “Unfortunately, our beautiful Bobbi-Anne has been taken from us, but she will never be forgotten. I’d like everyone to hold their candles up. This is for Bobbi-Anne”. There followed a moment of silence as the crowd held up their candles in unison. The family group released about 40 balloons into the sky. Searches continued to take place in connection with the inquiry across the city and at the spot where McLeod’s body was found.Animal rights activists have threatened legal action against the national park that runs a group of islands off Italy’s Tuscan coast as controversy intensifies over the culling of rare mouflon sheep on the tiny island of Giglio. Hunters arrived on Giglio this week and have so far killed four mouflons, a wild sheep native to the Caspian region that is thought to be an ancestor of domestic breeds. There are 30 or so mouflons left on the island and authorities were granted permission to cull the animals as part of an EU-funded project after they were deemed to be a threat to the island’s biodiversity. Animal rights groups, which have appealed to the European parliament’s environment committee, say this argument is false and the animals should instead be transferred and given sanctuary off the island. Giglio comes under the authority of the Tuscan archipelago national park, which comprises seven islands including Elba, where mouflon sheep also roam free. Animal activists are urging citizens to boycott Giglio during the Christmas holidays, and also Elba, over fears the cull could be extended there. It is unclear how many mouflon sheep are present across the archipelago, but Corriere della Sera reported that more than 2,000 had been killed since 1997. A petition to stop the current cull has been signed by more than 15,000 people. Mouflons were brought to Giglio by a private landowner in the early 1960s and kept in a reserve until the owner abandoned the facility and the animals escaped. Sergio Ortelli, the mayor of Giglio, said their number has proliferated over the years and that while he supported the idea of transferring them off the island, he had to act swiftly after receiving several complaints from farmers about damage to their land. He said even if the animals were transferred to mainland Italy, they could still be legally hunted as they are not a protected species. “This is a legitimate project. I don’t get why there is all this pantomime,” he said. “The animals are not indigenous to Giglio and they can be legally hunted, like wild boar.” LAV, Italy’s anti-vivisection league, said it would take legal action unless the killing stops within the next 24 hours. LAV said the animals could instead be taken to the San Rossore wildlife reserve in Tuscany. “The reserve is available to take the animals,” said Claudia Squadroni, a spokesperson for LAV. “Therefore, if an alternative to killing the animals exists, then it’s against the law to kill them.” Ortelli said: “This is a democracy, and taking legal action is legitimate … but then we will see what a judge thinks.”As Christmas approaches, now is the perfect time to curl up with a festive film – and there’s certainly plenty to choose. From recent rom-coms to timeless classics, we want to know which films you love watching at Christmas and why. Is there a movie which holds sentimental value for you at this time of year? Or perhaps there’s a festive flick which always gets you in the mood for wrapping presents and decorating the tree? Whether you’re an Elf enthusiast, can’t wait to re-watch Carol, or more of a Krampus fan, tell us about it below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Germany’s top health officials have raised the prospect of a national lockdown, warning that a rapidly rising number of coronavirus cases and a dramatic increase in the number of patients in intensive care meant contact reduction was the only way of tackling the crisis and avoiding “the road to chaos”. “We need a massive contact reduction immediately,” said Prof Lothar Wieler, the head of the Robert Koch Institute, Germany’s federal disease control agency. He called on political leaders to utilise all available measures to prevent gatherings in large numbers and to urge the public to avoid any unnecessary contacts with people outside their own households, as the incidence rate in Germany rose by 75,400, a week-on-week increase of 44%. “I expect right now for the decision-makers to trigger all measures in order that we can bring down the incidence rate together,” Wieler said. “We are at a crossroads. We have one choice. Either we choose the road that leads to chaos and to a bad end … or the one which unburdens the health system and maybe enables a peaceful Christmas.” Germany’s outgoing health minister, Jens Spahn, called the situation “dramatically serious, to the extent that it has never been at any point in this pandemic”. He added: “It is half an hour after midnight, but some people have still failed to hear the alarm.” Of 22,000 available intensive care beds in Germany, 4,000 are occupied with coronavirus patients, 85% of whom need breathing assistance. Their average age is between 50 and 79 years. Wieler said while the figure might not seem that high to some, it marked an increase of 100% in a week, and even if there were no new infections, 1,000 more patients could be expected to end up in intensive care within the next 10 to 14 days. Elective surgery around Germany has been cancelled to free up beds and staff. Germany’s air force is on call to transport patients from full hospitals to those with capacity. Spahn called for decision-makers on the federal and state level to recognise the urgency of the situation and bring forward a meeting planned for 9 December. He said it would be foolhardy to wait for 10 days, as the participants had said they planned to do, in order to see whether the current measures in place were working. “The medical staff don’t have 10 days to wait and see,” Spahn said. He criticised the fact the Christmas markets were in full swing in Berlin while the city’s university hospital, the Charité, was full. “It is just not appropriate at this time,” he said. Wieler also expressed his concern over the newly detected variant in southern Africa. Both men urged Germans to get vaccinated or, if they had already done so, to get booster shots. Spahn said that between 20 and 30m vaccines would be administered before Christmas. Just over 68% of Germans have been fully vaccinated. Incidence rates across Europe are rising fast. Portugal, which has vaccinated 86% of its population, is reintroducing a series of restrictions as cases continue to rise. On Thursday the prime minister, António Costa, announced that from 1 December, face masks would once again be obligatory in enclosed spaces and that a digital certificate showing vaccination or recovery would be needed to enter restaurants, hotels and cinemas. All those entering hospitals, care homes, bars, clubs and sports events will need to show a negative test. From 1 December, anyone flying into Portugal will need to show a negative test result – even if they have a digital vaccination certificate. Catalonia – which had become the latest Spanish region to decree that Covid passports are needed to get into bars, restaurants, gyms and care homes – was forced to suspend the requirement until at least Monday after “very intense” demand crashed the system for downloading the passes. The passports are also in use in Aragón, the Balearic islands, Galicia, Murcia and Navarre, but their specific use varies between regions. Meanwhile, the Spanish government has said plans to restrict flights from South Africa and Botswana will be proposed at the next cabinet meeting, which is scheduled for next Tuesday. To date, 89.2% of Spaniards aged over 12 have received two doses of the vaccine. In the Netherlands the government is due to announce new measures on Friday to tackle a rise in infections. Despite about 85% of the adult population being fully vaccinated, cases hit a record high of nearly 24,000 on Wednesday, about 40% more than the previous week, with hospitals close to capacity. This month the government reintroduced mask-wearing and ordered bars and restaurants to close at 8pm. Switzerland is planning a referendum on Sunday in which voters can decide on how far the national government’s powers to respond to the pandemic can go. The question will focus on whether the government has the continued authority to insist on certificates to enter bars, restaurants, cultural and sporting events. Cases there are rising and just over 65% of the population is fully vaccinated, one of the lowest in Europe. Austria became the first country in western Europe to re-enter lockdown on Monday and also announced a vaccine mandate from February. It was followed by neighbouring Slovakia, which on Wednesday entered a two-week lockdown after the health ministry said that hospital admissions had reached a “critical point”. Less than 50% of the population is fully vaccinated.Thousands of Britons in South Africa and many more with bookings to travel have had their plans thrown into disarray as flights were suspended on Friday. The UK government temporarily blocked direct flights as it placed six southern African countries on the red list due to concerns over a new Covid-19 variant. The move comes at the start of peak holiday season, with airlines having booked tens of thousands of passengers to fly before Christmas. British Airways and Virgin Atlantic, which operate the only direct flights to the region, linking London with Johannesburg and Cape Town, were forced to cancel flights landing in the UK before 4am Sunday. Both were urgently reviewing schedules to decide whether services will remain viable after the ban lifts. British and Irish nationals on flights landing after 4am Sunday will have to go into hotel quarantine, while foreign nationals will be barred from entry under red list rules. Virgin said it had cancelled holiday packages for the next month, while BA has so far only yet confirmed that flights will operate from South Africa on Monday evening. BA and Virgin said they would contact customers who had booked flights. A BA spokesperson said it was “working through plans for our customers and colleagues currently in South Africa and those due to travel from the UK in the coming days”. Virgin operates a daily return service from Heathrow to Johannesburg and was due to commence Cape Town services from 17 December, with sales taking off since restrictions were eased. The airline reported earlier this month it had taken 32,000 bookings on the routes in October, mainly for travel ahead of Christmas. A spokesperson said the airline would allow all customers to rebook ahead of possible travel although some flights would likely go ahead for repatriations, cargo, and for those prepared to enter hotel quarantine. Virgin has cancelled, and stopped selling, all package holidays to the country until 6 January. According to data from analysts Cirium, 289 direct flights in total, carrying up to 80,000 passengers, were scheduled by the two carriers between the UK and South Africa in December. Up to 22,000 passengers may have flown directly to or from South Africa to the UK in the past fortnight since the variant was first identified. Airline and travel stocks fell sharply on Friday, with BA owner IAG, travel firm TUI and cruise firm Carnival all seeing their share price slide between 12% and 15%, amid fears travel restrictions will spread as the virus crosses continents. The travel industry warned of the effects on wider consumer confidence as well as the direct hit on operators specialising in the region at the start of high season. Abta, the body representing travel agents and tour operators, said that while public health was a priority and that it recognised why the red list decision has been taken, “this news will be devastating for many travel companies that specialise in travel to the Southern African countries affected. These businesses have had very little opportunity to generate income for almost two years and now face a further period of being unable to trade – just as the region’s peak season begins.” Abta urged the government to consider targeted support for affected firms, adding: “It is also vital the decision is kept under careful review and that restrictions are lifted promptly if it becomes clear there is not a risk to the UK vaccination programme.” Others strongly criticised the government’s actions, with a review of the red list restrictions unlikely for several weeks. Paul Charles, of travel consultancy the PC Agency, said: “They’ve created a loss of confidence based on possibles, maybes and no certainty. It will kill off Christmas for travellers. “This is South Africa’s summer season, they were looking forward to recovery like many countries – this action will end it. Why not allow those who are fully vaccinated, up to date on boosters and fully tested to isolate at home?” He said that there had been concern over other variants which were now forgotten, and added: “The government is falling back on early pandemic policies which are unproven and highly damaging to the economy.” The government has said that the new variant may evade vaccines and may not respond to current treatments. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said on Friday that a key lesson of the pandemic was “that we must move quickly and at the earliest possible moment”. Among affected passengers were Alistair Maiden, 41, from Leeds, who works in legal technology and was in Cape Town for business. He was due to fly out tonight. “At 5am we received an email saying it has been cancelled,” he said. Maiden considers himself luckier than others because his company will pay for additional flights on Saturday booked via Dubai to Spain, where he plans to quarantine – although he wants to get back as quickly as possible as he has three young children, including a four-month-old baby, at home. He said: “I do feel really sorry for people – it’s not like we went out and there was any risk that anyone was aware of. The government should probably pick up the tab for the people who are going to have to quarantine.” A couple who planned to marry next month in Cape Town said they were “devastated, disappointed and deflated” by the changes. Amelia, 38, an actor and producer who lives in Hampshire and did not give her surname, and her fiance Nathan were due to fly out on 1 December but now are unsure if the wedding can go ahead. She said they initially decided to postpone their wedding but when South Africa was removed from the red list in October they “jumped with joy” and decided to revive their plans. Around 20 guests and family were due to travel from the UK. She added: “Part of us thinks we could go on our own and get married but we want to take the new variant seriously and not put anyone at risk. “I picked up my wedding dress and only yesterday had my travel jabs done. My head, heart and arms are sore today but we’re living in hope.”I am 62 years old and semi-retired. I’ve worked hard all my life. In my 30s I had a son; it was just the two of us for a long time. My son had mental health issues in his teens and has autism; I am still friends with my son’s father, and they have a good relationship. Ten years ago I met a lovely man and we moved in together. My son went to uni; the expectation was he’d move out once he’d graduated. He’s now 27 and still living with us. My partner can be kind and self-sufficient, but the relationship can be hard work. He doesn’t believe in autism. We agree to disagree. Most of the time they rub along together, but I sometimes feel as if I’m treading on eggshells. I told my son he would have a home with me as long as he needed it. He is fragile mentally. I’d like to live alone with my son. A few days a week I also care for my elderly dad, who lives an hour’s round trip away. My two closest friends have life-limiting diseases and also live some distance away; moving closer to my dad would also make it easier to see them more often too. Can I justify seriously upsetting a good, loyal and honest man just to please myself? I don’t know how long I can carry on with this charade. What was so interesting about your letter was that the second version you sent was carefully curated to eliminate a lot of the more negative details about your partner, and thereby your justifications for wanting to leave. I could see that you had deleted certain words, making him sound better and weakening your own case. I wonder if you’ve always done this – ignoring how you feel for the sake of others? Going on your first letter, your partner doesn’t, actually, sound that easy to live with. And some of his beliefs – not believing autism exists – are fundamentally misaligned. Family psychotherapist Dr Reenee Singh felt you needed to be given permission “to focus on what you need, that your own happiness matters. It doesn’t sound as if your partner is supporting you enough; it sounds like the relationship is very much on his terms.” It seemed to both of us as if your life had been largely about other people’s needs, and perhaps it started earlier than that: you mentioned you had started work young. Singh wondered if, possibly, the thought of also becoming responsible for your partner into old age was a consideration for you? This may be hard to admit. “It’s important to recognise your needs,” said Singh. “You have a right to happiness. But whether you stay with him or not, you do owe this man a conversation.” Singh felt individual counselling might benefit you. Whenever we contemplate a big life change, it’s important to think about the reasons we are doing it and how we’d feel if those reasons were no longer there. For example, although you seem convinced he won’t, how would you feel if your son did leave home, or met someone? What happens when your father dies or if your friends move? Would you be happy then with the decisions you’ve taken? When we want to leave a relationship, it’s tempting to think of it all from our own point of view, and guilt and confusion make us think that leaving will result in nothing but unhappiness – and it may, in the short term. But another way to look at it is you leaving could allow your partner to be with someone else or on his own, and that might result in greater happiness for both of you. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Storm Arwen is expected to deposit the most significant rainfall for several weeks on Newbury racecourse before the Ladbrokes Trophy Chase on Saturday, which adds an extra layer of uncertainty to the task of sifting a value bet from a long list of possibilities. Second-season chasers have a strong recent record in this historic handicap, though, and it seems likely to go to an up-and-comer again this year with at least half a dozen plausible candidates towards the top of the betting. Those include Eklat De Rire, with just four chase starts in the book, who will attract plenty of support to give Henry de Bromhead and Rachael Blackmore another big Saturday winner. The seven-year-old was still travelling well when he unseated Blackmore at the 12th fence in the three-mile Grade One novice chase at last season’s Festival meeting, and made a satisfactory return from his summer break in a four-runner Listed event at Wexford in October. Today’s race is a very different test, however, and Eklat De Rire has also done all his winning so far on heavy ground, so at the likely odds, Remastered (3.00) makes more appeal. David Pipe’s eight-year-old was a Grade Two winner as a novice last season in the Reynoldstown at Ascot, gets weight from most of the market leaders and has the useful Fergus Gillard taking off another 3lb. Like several recent winners of this race, he also likes to race up with the pace and looks overpriced at around 14-1. Newbury 1.15: Kalooki has not seen a track since March, but he was an easy winner first time up last season over this track and trip and remains on a fair mark. Newcastle 1.30: Cooper’s Cross made plenty of ground to win last time and looks overpriced at around 7-2 against likely favourite Valleres. Newbury 1.50: The bare form of Black Mischief’s easy win at Newton Abbot in July is backed up by the clock and he is a solid each-way bet at around 14-1. Newcastle 2.05: The Ferry Master should improve for his comeback run earlier this month and was a cosy winner over course and distance – from a 4lb lower mark – on this card 12 months ago. Newbury 2.25: Nicky Henderson is going for a hat-trick in this race and his recent Ascot winner, Captain Morgs, gets 18lb from likely favourite Soaring Glory. Newcastle 3.15: Monmiral is an interesting new opponent for former Champion Hurdle winner Epatante but Nicky Henderson’s mare gets 7lb from the four-year-old and should make the most of it. Newbury 3.35: Grey Diamond has been dropped 1lb after a promising return to action at Ascot and could be another winner for the in-form Sam Thomas yard.Shalev Hulio, the co-founder of Israel’s NSO Group, was in Washington DC on a mission to try to resuscitate the surveillance company’s battered reputation on Capitol Hill shortly before the news broke that he had probably arrived too late to make a difference. With little advance warning to its allies in Israel, the Biden administration announced on 3 November that it was putting the spyware maker – one of the most sophisticated cyber-weapons companies in the world – on a US blacklist, citing use of the company’s software by regimes around the world for “transnational repression”. “That’s how little they knew. Then, boom, this came out,” said one person familiar with the matter. Since then, the news has gone from bad to worse for the company, which has long defended itself against critics by claiming that its principal surveillance tool – the Pegasus software that can penetrate phones and intercept encrypted calls and messages – is used by governments around the world to silently hack into the phones of criminals and suspected terrorists, and save lives. This week Apple, the world’s largest technology company, became the latest to challenge that narrative when it accused NSO in a scathing lawsuit filed in California of being “amoral 21st-century mercenaries” whose tools had invited “routine and flagrant abuse”. “For their own commercial gain, they enable their customers to abuse [Apple] products and services to target individuals including government officials, journalists, businesspeople, activists, academics, and even US citizens,” Apple said in its lawsuit. While NSO was busy “hiding behind their unnamed customers”, it was committing “multiple violations of federal and state law” as it developed and used – “or assisted others in using” – tools that had harmed Apple’s users, the lawsuit alleged. Hours after the lawsuit was filed, activists said Apple began sending threat notification alerts to alleged victims of state-sponsored hackers in Thailand, El Salvador and Uganda. Reuters reported at least six Thai activists and researchers who have been critical of the government received the notification. At the same time, the credit rating agency Moody’s warned NSO was at risk of defaulting on about $500m (£375m) in debt, which would force the group into insolvency. For Alaa Mahajna, a lawyer who for years has waged a lonely – and difficult – legal battle against NSO, the company’s barrage of bad news has been vindicating. “NSO spent years dismissing any criticism and dodging accountability for human rights violations. It is very encouraging that most major tech companies and the US government now see the pernicious effect of NSO’s technology,” he said. Mahajna represents Omar Abdulaziz, a Saudi dissident living in exile in Canada who experts at the Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto have claimed was hacked in 2018, months before Abdulaziz’s friend, the journalist Jamal Khashoggi, was murdered in the Saudi embassy in Istanbul. “As the first lawyer to bring legal proceedings against them, I am happy to see that these major actors are seeing what we saw four years ago. The atmosphere is definitely changing. It was and still is hard work for everyone involved, and some of us paid a price, but it is gratifying to see the tide turning,” Mahajna said. There are other complications on the horizon. One person familiar with the matter said at least one bank working for NSO and related entities had voiced concern about its listing on the US commerce department’s entity list. A person close to NSO said its banking relationships were intact. While placement on the list does not prohibit the provision of banking services, Kevin Wolf, a partner at law firm Akin Gump, said the listing did prohibit the transfer of any technology or software to the company from the US, a fact that generally made banks and other financial institutions who work for companies on the entity list nervous about the possibility that they could inadvertently fall foul of the rules over the normal course of business and provoke a response from the US government. Another person familiar with the matter said Berkeley Research Group (BRG), a US-based consulting group appointed in August 2021 to manage the financial fund that owns a majority stake in NSO on behalf of its investors, consulted legal experts at the law firm McDermott Will &amp; Emery to ensure its own work managing the fund did not inadvertently violate the entity list rules. It took those steps, a person said, as a matter of normal business practice and it is understood it received legal advice that the Biden administration’s actions did not prevent BRG from managing the fund’s NSO investment. The main investors in the financial fund are US pension funds. A person familiar with BRG said it still had limited information about NSO’s decision-making. Multiple media reports have suggested NSO is focused on trying to convince the Biden administration to remove the company from the entity list. In response to the Guardian’s questions about its viability in the face of the developments, an NSO spokesperson said: “NSO Group remains strong, proud, and confident, and we will continue to provide technologies to help law enforcements catch paedophiles, terrorists and criminals.” One person who spoke to the Guardian on condition of anonymity said the administration had been moved to act at least in part because of the number of US citizens who had been targeted using Pegasus in the past – including Americans living and working abroad. NSO has denied its surveillance tools are used against US-based mobile phones. The Pegasus project, a major investigation into NSO by the Guardian and other media outlets, which was coordinated by the French media group Forbidden Stories, reported in July that Carine Kanimba, the American daughter of Paul Rusesabagina, the imprisoned Rwandan activist who inspired the film Hotel Rwanda, had been the victim of a near-constant surveillance campaign by a government client using Pegasus in the first half of 2021. Forensic analysis of Kanimba’s phone, conducted by Amnesty International’s security lab, found it had been hacked multiple times while Kanimba, who is also Belgian and was living in Europe, was campaigning and lobbying for her father’s release. In response to questions about Apple’s lawsuit this week, an NSO spokesperson said in a statement: “Thousands of lives were saved around the world thanks to NSO Group’s technologies used by its customers. Paedophiles and terrorists can freely operate in technological safe havens, and we provide governments the lawful tools to fight it. NSO Group will continue to advocate for the truth.”In recent speeches, Boris Johnson has cited Kermit the frog and James Bond, and drawn up on all manner of football analogies. Yet none of them were as widely panned as the one he gave to business leaders earlier this week, when he went on a long – and seemingly unscripted – riff about Peppa Pig. According to political scientists, the furore is a sign that cracks are beginning to show in his freewheeling political style. While they (mostly) admired the way he has always got his message across, they said the criticism suggested people were beginning to tire of the crisis-mode boosterism that felt appropriate for the early stages of the pandemic. It’s not that Johnson’s speech to the CBI on Monday was particularly different from ones he has given before. But this time it was widely criticised as “shambolic”, “a mess” and the “most embarrassing by a Conservative prime minister”. Experts who spoke to the Guardian said that rather than a departure in style, the speech could represent a point at which voters were no longer amused by his jokes, in a new chapter of his premiership. Michael Kenny, the director of the Bennett Institute for Public Policy at the University of Cambridge, said the CBI speech was a “car crash”. “As the political context changes, the big question for him is whether that mode of speaking needs to adjust. “His boosterism – relentless optimism and inflationary rhetoric about what the government is doing – works better in a position of political strength, not when you’re under huge pressure and there are lots of obvious problems people are starting to worry about. The risk is you look disconnected and almost avoidant.” Yet Johnson’s speeches have been a cornerstone of his “unique” political style, which draws on comedy and the performing arts. This had made him “the first true celebrity prime minister in British political history”, said Matthew Flinders, a politics professor at Sheffield University. “He’s absolutely fantastic in terms of his performative skills and his ability to work a crowd. He uses speeches not to convey information, but as a tool of entertainment, to ingratiate himself and develop himself as a character.” This use of humour also enabled him to control the conversation through deflection, Flinders said. “His most famous tactic is you ask him a serious question, he’ll respond with a story that will evolve into a joke, and by the time you’ve heard that, you’ve forgotten the original question.” The political scientists agreed Johnson’s style formed part of a broader trend towards a more informal way of doing politics that rejected the technocratic professionalism of the 1990s. Steven Fielding, a political history professor at the University of Nottingham, said the way Johnson’s speeches drummed in clear messages – such as “get Brexit done” – were a better fit for today’s “attention deficit culture” than the more complicated political arguments of the past. Academics specialising in linguistic analysis said Johnson’s speeches showed a distinctive use of language. Helen Thaventhiran, a lecturer in the philosophy of language at the University of Cambridge, said he used many of the “stylistic tricks” of populism, for instance his reliance on everyday language, slogans, anecdotes and jokes. “You think you’re getting something that makes you feel full or satisfied. You remember the ‘Picasso-like hairdryer’ [as Johnson described Peppa Pig’s appearance], but you’re not really getting anything nutritious, you’re not getting policy or logical thinking.” Dai George, a UCL researcher specialising in syntax, said that unusually, sentences in Johnson’s transcribed speeches were “broken and scattered”. “This allows a more complex syntax to land with the punch of a tabloid soundbite.” George added that while usually Johnson’s analogies were well received thanks to their “imagistic flair or a cognitive spark of surprise”, the Peppa Pig story failed because it resembled a “boorish anecdote from a best man speech”. Zahira Jaser, an assistant professor at Sussex University who specialises in the psychology of leadership, suspected the CBI speech might also not have succeeded due to the audience. Whereas during his much-lauded Conservative party conference speech Johnson was able to take a more natural position as a “heroic leader” through classical references and grandiose statements, at the CBI “the people in front of him will be persuaded by numbers, and he finds it much more difficult to reason in numbers than in words”, she said.The Bank of England appears to have move a step closer towards increasing the cost of borrowing next month after its new chief economist, Huw Pill, said the UK’s recovery from the pandemic was strong enough for the central bank to take “policy action”, despite fears over the new Covid strain. Pill, a member of theBank’s nine-strong monetary policy committee (MPC), indicated he was preparing to vote in favour of an increase in interest rates on 16 December after official figures suggested concerns about a jump in unemployment at the end of the furlough scheme had proved unfounded. Speaking at a CBI conference in Tyne and Wear, Pill said he wanted to increase interest rates to calm inflation if the potential hit to the economy was minimal. “In my view, the ground has now been prepared for policy action,” he said. The former Goldman Sachs economist, who joined the central bank in September, said there was a risk workers would react to rising inflation by demanding higher wages, feeding into a wage-price spiral that would damage the economy. Bank forecasts suggest the consumer prices index (CPI) will hit 5% next spring, having risen to 4.2% in October. Pill said: “Recent indicators point to a further tightening of the labour market. On this basis, the end of furlough is, of itself, unlikely to dent the high level of vacancies, ease bottlenecks or weigh on the elevated level of underlying wage growth that characterise the labour market at present. “In other words, given where we stand in terms of data and analysis, I view the likely direction of travel for monetary policy from here as pretty clear.” The MPC surprised investors earlier this month by voting to maintain the central bank’s base rate at 0.1%, but signalled rates would have to be increased by at least 0.5% over the next year to bring inflation down to a 2% target durng the next couple of years. Several analysts said the prospect of a rate rise had diminished after the discovery of a new Covid-19 variant in southern Africa which triggered a slump in global stock markets. While Pill did not address the threat to the recovery from a new potentially deadly version of the virus, analysts said moves by the EU and Britain to block flights to southern Africa could have a negative economic impact. Andrew Godwin, the chief UK economist at the consultancy Oxford Economics, said: “Ordinarily, the strength of recent survey evidence would have tilted the balance further toward a rise in [the base rate] next month. But the discovery of a new Covid variant and the resulting market turmoil has thrown that prospect into doubt. “It’s too soon to be clear about the health consequences of the new variant. But the latest Covid developments leave us more confident that the MPC will wait until next year before hiking rates.” Simon French, the chief economist at the stockbroker Panmure Gordon, said: “The potentially fast-spreading variant throws a spanner in BoE’s December policy decision.” In the weeks before the new variant was discovered, the financial markets placed a 93% probability on UK interest rates increasing on 16 December. On Friday, investors lowered their expectations to a 63% probability. French said the likelihood of fresh restrictions on western economies to contain the new variant meant the likelihood of an interest rate rise would recede further over the coming weeks.From her infamous corset bodysuit with conical bra cups to her bondage-inspired outfits at the Met Gala and MTV video music awards, Madonna has never been shy of causing a stir with her looks. But now the international superstar has come up against an unlikely and powerful foe: Mark Zuckerberg’s social media empire. On Thursday, the singer criticised Instagram for taking down photographs in which her nipple was exposed, telling her 17 million followers she was grateful she maintained her sanity “through four decades of censorship … sexism … ageism and misogyny”. She added it was “perfectly timed with the lies we have been raised to believe about the pilgrims peacefully breaking bread with the Native American Indians when they landed on Plymouth Rock! God bless America.” The 63-year-old had earlier this week shared risque images of herself on and underneath a bed, wearing a cut-out bra, a thong, fishnet tights and high heels. Re-sharing the images, this time with emojis covering her nipple, Madonna explained the original posts had been taken down by Instagram, saying it was “astounding” that women could show any part of their body except their nipples. “I’m reposting photographs Instagram took down without warning or notification,” she said. “The reason they gave my management that does not handle my account was that a small portion of my nipple was exposed.” She added: “It is still astounding to me that we live in a culture that allows every inch of a woman’s body to be shown except a nipple. As if that is the only part of a woman’s anatomy that could be sexualized. The nipple that nourishes the baby! “Can’t a man’s nipple be experienced as erotic??!! And what about a woman’s ass which is never censored anywhere. “Giving thanks that I have managed to maintain my sanity through four decades of censorship … sexism … ageism and misogyny.” Instagram’s guidelines ban “photos, videos and some digitally created content that show sexual intercourse, genitals and closeups of fully nude buttocks”. The company says this “also includes some photos of female nipples”, though photos of mastectomy scarring and women actively breastfeeding are allowed. For years, artists and activists have put pressure on Facebook and Instagram to treat female and male nipples equally. The #Freethenipple campaign has since 2012 challenged the general convention of allowing men to appear topless in public while considering it sexual or indecent for women to do the same. Various high-profile women including Miley Cyrus, Rihanna, Scout Willis and Cara Delevingne have publicly supported the movement. Last year, Instagram was forced to update its nudity policy after it was accused of censoring and silencing the plus-size model Nyome Nicholas-Williams. A wave of content creators then said the platform was repeatedly discriminating against black people, plus-size users and other marginalised communities by deleting their photos or failing to promote them in the same way it did for its white, straight-sized users. Instagram has been approached for comment.Michigan is now leading the country in new Covid cases and hospitalizations, accounting for about one in 10 new cases in the US, even though the state represents only 3% of the country’s population. Cases across the US have risen by 18% in the past week, but some states have seen much more dramatic increases. In Michigan, new cases have gone up by 67% and new hospitalizations by 46% in the past two weeks. “It’s gobsmacking,” Aron Sousa, interim dean of the College of Human Medicine at Michigan State University, told the Guardian. A week or so ago, cases in the state were fairly steady, at about 5,000. Then they shot up to about 8,000 in just a few days. “It was astonishing, the rapid increase,” Sousa said. Now hospitals are full and patients are being treated in hallways and recovery lounges, while deaths are going up. “It’s actually as bad as or worse than it was during our last big peak in April or the peak that we saw the November-December before that,” Sousa said. And what’s happening in Michigan is a sign of what’s likely to come in other parts of the US, particularly in states with low vaccination rates. “I don’t think there’s anything unique about Michigan,” Adam Lauring, an associate professor of infectious disease and microbiology at the University of Michigan Medical School, told the Guardian. Some northern states have seen big increases recently as people headed indoors in cooler weather. But as winter and holidays approach, other states could see dramatic surges like these as well. “This is exactly what happened in November of last year. The timing is almost exact, when we had our fall surge,” Lauring said. More than half of the state, 54.8%, is now fully vaccinated, which is lower than the national average. More than 10% of children aged five to 11 have received their first doses of the vaccine. Several school districts, facing outbreaks and staff shortages, are closing temporarily. “The best predictors of case levels are going to be your vaccination coverage,” said Lauring. “The counties that have high vaccination rates have lower case rates.” The reasons behind any rise in cases are complicated. “However, those who are not immunized contribute disproportionately to hospitalizations and deaths due to Covid-19 in Michigan,” Chelsea Wuth, a public information officer with the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, told the Guardian in an email. Three-quarters of recent hospitalizations and deaths were among those not fully vaccinated. “As more individuals are vaccinated, it is less likely that the virus will circulate and mutate, avoiding the development of more transmissible and vaccine-resistant variants in the future,” Wuth said. “If you aren’t vaccinated, you’re gonna get it,” Sousa said. And “there are still a lot of people who haven’t previously gotten sick and haven’t been vaccinated,” so the surge will likely continue at least for a few weeks. Experts hope that higher rates of vaccinations will mean a rise in cases will not necessarily result in more hospitalizations or deaths. While vaccinated people can have breakthrough infections, they are much less likely to get very sick or die from Covid – which also puts less strain on health systems. In response to rising cases, Michigan last Friday recommended that all residents above the age of 2 wear a face mask indoors, as well as urging the early use of monoclonal antibodies among those who test positive and vaccinations for all who are eligible. “Covid-19 cases are high as we head into the holidays, and we must take every measure we can to keep our families and loved ones safe – which starts with getting vaccinated,” Dr Natasha Bagdasarian, chief medical executive, said in a statement. The University of Michigan is also seeing a major outbreak of influenza, with 760 cases reported since the beginning of October. The flu and other respiratory illnesses can put a strain on hospitals in normal times; layering Covid on top of a bad flu year could be catastrophic. “It doesn’t take a whole lot of cases to overwhelm a hospital system,” Lauring said. It’s not just about not having enough room at hospitals to treat patients. “You have to have enough staff to take care of everybody,” Sousa said, including physicians, nurses, respiratory techs, phlebotomists and housekeepers. “And all those people have been working flat out for just shy of two years.” A surge in cases is not inevitable, though. Proven precautions can help tamp down the rise now. “At the end of the day, we know what we have to do. We need people to be vaccinated, we need people to mask and we need people to put a little space between us,” Sousa said. Vaccination, in particular, is critical to preventing long Covid, severe illness and death – and, ultimately, to ending the pandemic. “Until we build up enough immunity, through vaccination or infection, we’re going to continue to have these surges,” Lauring said.Despite the repeated warnings of health leaders, our failure to put vaccines into the arms of people in the developing world is now coming back to haunt us. We were forewarned – and yet here we are. In the absence of mass vaccination, Covid is not only spreading uninhibited among unprotected people but is mutating, with new variants emerging out of the poorest countries and now threatening to unleash themselves on even fully vaccinated people in the richest countries of the world. On Thursday, the UK’s Department of Health, which has placed a travel ban on southern Africa, warned that the B.1.1.529 “Omicron” variant was the most “complex” and “worrying” seen so far. And yet with 9.1bn vaccines already manufactured and 12bn expected by the year’s end – enough to vaccinate the whole world – this was the “arms race” that we could have won. No country should be facing yet another winter with the uncertainty of a new wave of Covid hanging over us. On Monday, the World Health Assembly, the decision-making body of the World Health Organization, will meet in a special session. They will hear that vaccination rates in the six countries now subject to UK travel bans are still dangerously below the 40% target that was set for December. In Zimbabwe, only 25% have had a first vaccine and just 19% of the population are fully vaccinated. In Lesotho and Eswatini, which have had the Johnson and Johnson single-shot vaccines, just 27% and 22% respectively have been vaccinated. In Namibia the figure is even lower: 14% vaccinated with only 12% fully vaccinated. While South Africa has achieved 27% vaccination rates, its rural areas are often in single figures, and the whole of the continent is justifiably angry because their own efforts to vaccinate have been impeded for months by the neo-colonialism of the European Union. Even as the gap between the vaccines haves of Europe and the vaccine have-nots of Africa mushroomed, the EU insisted on commandeering millions of South African-produced Johnson &amp; Johnson one-shot vaccines and sending them out of Africa into Europe. In June, Boris Johnson promised he and the G7 countries would use their surplus vaccines to immunise the whole world. In September, at a summit chaired by President Biden, a December target of 40% vaccination was set for the 92 poorest countries. Two and a half months on, there is little chance of this target being met in at least 82 of them. By Thursday the US, which to its credit has been responsible for half the vaccines donated, had still delivered only 25% of the vaccines that it promised. The arithmetic of failure in the rest of the world is even more embarrassing. According to Airfinity, the European Union has delivered only 19%, the UK just 11% and Canada just 5%. China and New Zealand have delivered over half of what was promised, but their pledges amounted to just 100m and 1.6m respectively. Australia has given just 18% of what it offered and Switzerland just 12%. The result is that even now only 3% of people in low-income countries are fully vaccinated, while the figure exceeds 60% in both high-income countries and upper-middle-income countries. Every day, for every vaccine delivered as first vaccines in the poorest countries, six times as many doses are being administered as third and booster vaccines in the richest parts of the world. This vaccine inequality is the main reason why the WHO is predicting 200 million more cases on top of the 260 million so far. And after 5 million deaths to Covid, another 5 million are thought to be possible in the next year and more. What’s most galling is that this policy failure is not because we are short of vaccines or manufacturing contracts to secure them. The problem is not now in production (2 billion doses of vaccine are being manufactured every month), but in the unfairness of distribution. The stranglehold exercised by the G20 richest countries is such that they have monopolised 89% of vaccines, and even now, 71% of future deliveries are scheduled for them. As a result, the global vaccine distribution agency, Covax, has been able to secure only two-thirds of the 2bn vaccines promised to poorer countries. The good news is that our medical genius has ensured that the new Omicron variant has been identified quickly; is being sequenced at speed; and, if it proves not only more transmissible but immune to current vaccines, a new vaccine could potentially soon emerge. But given the contrast between the success of our scientists and the failure of our global leaders, only a herculean effort starting this week can allay fears that new mutations among unvaccinated people in the least-protected places will take Covid into a third year – with even fifth, sixth and seventh waves. We can act quickly. As of today, 500m unused vaccines are available across the G7. By December, the figure will rise to 600m, and by February, it will be 850m vaccines, which can be sent to the countries in greatest need. At the last count, the US has 162m vaccine doses it could immediately deliver to the rest of the world, a figure that grows to 250m next month; Europe currently has even more: 250m, which by February could exceed 350m. The UK has 33m vaccines – expected to rise to 46m over the next three months. The alternative is too awful to contemplate; vaccines are being destroyed while lives are being lost through lack of them. According to the data research agency Covax, around 100m of western countries’ vaccines will pass their use-by dates in December and could easily go to waste. Of course, there will be issues of absorption in Africa, but the bigger problem is that too many of the vaccines gifted to the poorest countries are within 12 weeks of their “use-by-dates”. These short lead times between donation and expiry show why a strengthened G20 and a month-to-month delivery timetable is now urgent; and why the expeditious transferring of delivery dates, from rich to poor countries – as has happened with Switzerland’s recent transfer to Covax – is the best way of speeding up the transfer of unused vaccines to where they are needed most. Nothing so dramatically illustrates the urgent need for what might be called a pandemic non-proliferation treaty . A new and binding international agreement that the World Health Assembly will consider next week must improve our surveillance and early warning systems, ensure the early transfer of medical supplies to countries in need, and finally agree sufficient funding of a worldwide effort to deliver what is clearly the most important global public good of all: cross-border control of infectious disease. Only when we reject vaccine nationalism and medical protectionism will we stop outbreaks becoming pandemics. Gordon Brown is the WHO ambassador for global health financing, and was UK prime minister from 2007 to 2010The failure of wealthy nations to get vaccines to the developing world is “coming back to haunt us”, Gordon Brown has warned, as experts said the emergence of variants such as B.1.1.529 could have been avoided if jabs had been more fairly distributed. Writing in the Guardian, the Labour former prime minister said the world had been “forewarned” that a lack of vaccines in poorer countries could have serious consequences for the pandemic. He said there had been embarrassing failures to meet promises on fair distribution of vaccines by the west, highlighting figures that show only 3% of people in low-income countries are fully vaccinated compared with more than 60% in the rest of the world. “In the absence of mass vaccination, Covid is not only spreading uninhibited among unprotected people but is mutating, with new variants emerging out of the poorest countries and now threatening to unleash themselves on even fully vaccinated people in the richest countries of the world,” Brown said. He said world leaders now needed a global accord to ensure better distribution and accused the EU of “neocolonialism” in its approach to buying up vaccines made in South Africa. “The good news is that our medical genius has ensured that the new … variant has been identified quickly; is being sequenced at speed; and, if it proves not only more transmissible but immune to current vaccines, a new vaccine will soon emerge,” Brown said. “But given the contrast between the success of our scientists and the failure of our global leaders, only a herculean effort starting this week can allay fears that new mutations among unvaccinated people in the least-protected places will take Covid into a third year – with even fifth, sixth and seventh waves.” Scientists have described B.1.1.529, detected in countries including South Africa, as the “most worrying we’ve seen”, with it found to contain a large number of mutations that may not only make it more transmissible, but could also help it to evade the body’s immune response. Experts such as Tim Bierley, a pharma campaigner at Global Justice Now, said the rise of the variant had been “entirely avoidable” and that conditions for its emergence had been created by low- and middle-income countries being “actively prevented” by the UK from having equitable access to vaccines. “For more than a year, South Africa, Botswana, and most countries have been calling for world leaders to waive intellectual property on coronavirus vaccines, tests and treatments, so they can produce their own jabs,” he said. “It’s a vital measure that will be discussed at next week’s World Trade Organization conference. But, so far, the UK and EU have recklessly blocked it from making progress. “If and when this new variant starts to tear through the world, remember that the British government has led opposition to the plan that could have stopped it.” Dr Ayoade Alakija, a co-chair of the Africa Vaccine Delivery Alliance, said: “I am so angry right now. Even if the moral argument didn’t work for them, if we had lost sight of our common morality, and common humanity, then even from an enlightened self-interest perspective, surely, surely, they understood that if they did not vax the world as equitably and as quickly as possible, that what we were going to see was variants springing up that we don’t know whether we’re going to be able to control.” Prof Azra Ghani, an epidemiologist at Imperial College London, said new variants were likely to arise in any setting where the virus was circulating at high levels, including in the UK. Adam Finn, a professor of paediatrics at the University of Bristol and a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), warned that the approach of vaccinating and revaccinating increasingly low-risk people in wealthy countries would “rebound on rich countries”, noting they would end up with more deaths and more economic damage as a direct consequence. “There isn’t any need for altruism here, just hard-nosed self interest – but somehow the politicians continue to fail to grasp this and those of us advising them are told very clearly that anything outside our borders is outside our remit,” he told the Guardian. Danny Altmann, a professor of immunology at Imperial College, emphasised there were additional complexities around B.1.1.529, as South Africa had excess vaccine stocks that it could not use due to vaccine hesitancy. Research has suggested the problem is larger among white adults, with one study from August revealing just over half were willing to receive a Covid jab compared with about 75% of black adults. But Alakija said the issues were unrelated. “Had South Africa and indeed the rest of Africa been allowed access to vaccines at the same time as the rich countries of the world there wouldn’t have been uncontrolled spread replication and subsequent mutation of the virus,” she said.The UK government has added six countries to the travel red list after the emergence of a new coronavirus variant. As of midday on Friday, South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe and Namibia are subject to restrictions and a temporary flight ban. Non-UK and Irish residents who have been in any of those countries in the previous 10 days will be refused entry into England. And the move will have an impact on anyone who has a trip planned. What happens if I’m due to fly? Direct passenger flights between the UK and the six countries have been banned until 4am on Sunday morning, to allow time for quarantine arrangements to be put in place in England. However, it is worth keeping an eye out for messages from the airline you have booked with in case the ban is extended, or it makes a decision to cancel later flights. If your flight is cancelled you should be contacted by the airline and refunded in full – you do not have to accept a voucher or an alternative flight. The refund should be made within seven days, although since the start of the pandemic some airlines have take much longer to return money so be prepared to wait. Refunds are not automatically offered on flights unless they are cancelled, so if your flight goes ahead and you do not want to take it you will need to contact the airline and find out your options. “The good news is that BA and Virgin, the two most popular carriers to South Africa, have good flexible booking policies – you can rebook fee free for a later date, or hold the money as a voucher,” says Rory Boland, travel editor at Which?. “It’s more sensible to do the latter as you don’t know when travel will be possible again right now.” If the airline won’t pay, you may be able to claim on your travel insurance. Nationwide building society, for instance, says customers with a policy through its FlexPlus account are covered if they decide to cancel their trip due to quarantine requirements. What about accommodation costs? Travellers stuck in red-listed countries who now need to spend more on accommodation may be able to make a claim on their travel insurance – but must check the small print. Last year, many insurers withdrew Covid-related cover from their policies. And while some have added it this year, many have not. You may have to pay the bills yourself. If you were due to travel to one of the six countries added to the red list this weekend and had booked your accommodation separately to your flight you may lose money. It depends on the cancellation policy at the place you planned to stay. Do not just assume you will not be able to rearrange or cancel – contact the accommodation provider to see whether it is willing to offer new dates. Can my travel insurance help? Yes, if you have the right policy. Some providers introduced Covid cover this year, and if you bought one of those policies you should check what it will pay out for. You may be able to claim for unused accommodation, or the cost of extending your stay if you are already overseas. For your flight, the airline should pay up so that will not be an insurance matter. The UK Foreign Office is now advising against all but essential travel to these countries, so if you do visit any of them you will not be covered by your travel insurance. Should I cancel my Christmas trip? Not before reading the small print of your bookings – if you are not within a free-cancellation period on your accommodation and face a fee for cancelling or moving your flight, you should stick with it unless you have decided you don’t want to travel. This is because if the airline has to cancel the flight, you will be entitled to all your money back. Similarly, if a package holiday provider has to cancel, it cannot withhold your money. If the Foreign Office warning against travel is still in place when you are due to be away, you can cancel a package holiday and get a full refund, even if flights are back on. Boland says tour operators will “only be looking at dates due to depart in the next few weeks, and contacting customers in departure order. If your trip is several weeks or months away, the best advice is to do nothing for now as the situation may change.” If I do travel will I need to be tested? Anyone travelling back from a red-list country will need to take a Covid test in the three days before they come back and then quarantine in a government-approved hotel for 10 days when they arrive, and pay for their stay there. This will apply from 27 November in Scotland and from 28 November in England. These rules apply even if you have been vaccinated. While at the hotel, people will take Covid tests on day two and day eight. The hotel costs £2,285 for one adult and £3,715 for a couple. The charge for children aged between five and 11 is £325 each. Anyone who has recently returned from the red-listed countries will be contacted by NHS test and trace and asked to do a PCR test. Is it unwise to book a holiday for next year? Anyone booking any kind of trip should make sure they are aware of what costs they will face if it has to be cancelled for any reason – this is true wherever you think you might want to go. Insurers will not exclude countries from cover simply because they have previously been on the red list. Some appear to still be selling policies including Covid protection for trips to South Africa, although it is not clear if they will pay out if something goes wrong. Nationwide says of its policy: “Customers who book a new trip while the FCDO advice is still all but essential travel will not be covered should they need to cancel their trip.” Boland says: “There remains a risk of disruption wherever you plan to travel at the moment. While the additions to the red list have made the most headlines, several other countries have introduced further restrictions around curfews, tests and vaccination booster shots in recent weeks that make holidays difficult or even impossible.”Many of the world’s leading Covid-19 experts are raising the alarm about a new variant which has been described as “horrific” and “the worst ever”. Authorities are understandably worried. But it’s important to place their concerns in context. We have detected variants before that looked worrying but never took off. It’s early days for a variant that wasn’t on anyone’s radar until only last week. Much about the new variant is still unknown. The very fact we have detected this new variant early is good news, and shows that the global surveillance system is working. But the high number of mutations detected in its genome are concerning. This is the primary reason scientists around the world are warning it must be taken seriously. Every time a virus replicates, it has the opportunity to mutate. The more opportunities the virus has to replicate, the larger the number of mutations, and the higher the chances of new variants emerging – that much is simple mathematics. Most mutations will go unnoticed and have a neutral or negative impact on the resulting virus. Occasionally we will see mutations that fundamentally change the nature of the virus and what it is able to do. There are typically three things that dictate how worried we should be about an emerging variant: does it spread faster? Is it more deadly? And does it evade our existing immunity? We are still at the beginning of the race to understand this new variant, B.1.1.529, which was first detected in southern Africa. But if the answer to any of these questions is yes, then it could be a serious threat – and we will need to do whatever we can to limit its spread. Based on preliminary data, this variant seems to be out-competing other variants, growing faster even than Delta, which quickly rose to global dominance earlier this year. This assessment is based on a small numbers of cases in South Africa, and there is still a great degree of uncertainty over how transmissible it is. Some of the mutations that B.1.1.529 has acquired have been previously associated with higher transmissibility in other variants. This has scientists worried about its ability to spread. Beyond the relatively limited case data, the small number of sequenced genomes are perhaps a bigger cause for concern, due to the sheer number of mutations that have been discovered in this new variant. As well as mutations associated with increased transmission, some of the mutations in B.1.1.529 have been associated with changes to the spike protein that might make it unrecognisably different to the version of Covid our vaccines were designed to target. This potential for immune evasion is the most worrying aspect of all. It’s why nations are currently scrambling to prevent the variant from arriving on their shores. Despite being among the first countries to limit travel from southern Africa, Israel has already found a case of the new variant in a traveller returning from the region. Whether this will tip over into community spread remains to be seen, but Israel is taking few chances: it has already quarantined two other returning travellers who are suspected to be infected with the variant. The new variant is also believed to have reached Europe, with Belgium confirming the continent’s first case. As the situations in Israel and Belgium demonstrate, it is possible that the variant is already here in the UK. As of yet, no cases have been detected. The government has reacted quickly, placing Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe on England’s red travel list. Managed hotel quarantine, however, does not come into force until Sunday, and arrivals between now and then are asked to undertake the less reliable measure of isolating at home. And even with managed isolation from listed countries in place, there are still concerns about the variant being imported from countries that aren’t on the red list, where it has spread but not yet been detected. The potential for loopholes, including people travelling via a third country in order to bypass quarantine measures, also presents a possible route for the new variant to spread. These loopholes need to be tightened quickly. Moreover, if and when the variant starts spreading among people in the country, we will need enhanced contact testing and tracing – including the testing of those who have come into contact someone who is Covid-positive before or after their infection was detected . This would help to stamp out potential outbreaks as they emerge. Surge testing should also be on standby in case the variant is found to be spreading in the community. The new variant doesn’t change the fundamentals of how the UK should be tackling Covid. We should still be encouraging people to get the vaccine and their booster shots. As the winter draws in and people spend more time socialising indoors, we need to focus on better ventilation in communal spaces. We should be taking mitigation measures to prevent spread in schools, where pupils are again seeing the highest rates of Covid among any age group. We should be updating our messaging on Covid symptoms so that people know when to get tested, and we should be redoubling our efforts to get in touch with close contacts of infected people so they know to get a test themselves. Masks should be made mandatory again in enclosed public spaces, on transport and in supermarkets, and businesses should be encouraging people to work from home where they can. In short, we must be doing all the things that we should have been doing all along to prevent the spread of Covid-19. What the emergence of this new and potentially dangerous variant highlights more than ever is that we, in the UK, are not immune to Covid in other countries. It doesn’t make sense for the UK government to talk about being first to exit the pandemic. By its very definition, the pandemic is a global problem that will only truly be solved with global solutions. Worldwide vaccinations will be vital in order to reduce Covid cases around the world and limit the potential for novel variants that could undo all our hard work. Up to this point, rich nations have not been doing enough to achieve this goal. The emergence of this new variant reinforces the message that should have always been the overriding mantra of our pandemic response: nowhere is safe until everywhere is safe. Kit Yates is director of the Centre for Mathematical Biology at the University of Bath and author of The Maths of Life and DeathA fire that reduced a Michelin-starred restaurant in North Yorkshire to “ashes” is being treated as arson. Investigators believe the blaze at the thatched, 14th-century the Star Inn at Harome on the edge of the North York Moors was started deliberately on Wednesday evening. More than 40 firefighters tackled the fire at the restaurant, which was one of the first British pubs to be awarded a Michelin star. North Yorkshire police said: “Following an examination of the scene by police crime scene investigators and fire investigation officers, it is now believed that the fire was started deliberately. “A number of groups of people were in the area around the time of the fire, and police are urging anyone with information about the incident to contact them.” No one was injured in the fire. On Thursday, the chef Andrew Pern tweeted that the business had been “reduced to ashes”. Pern said he received a call after 10pm to say the straw roof was on fire. “With it being a 14th-century thatched pub, it didn’t really stand a chance once the fire had got hold,” he told BBC Radio York. He praised employees for their early attempts to put out the blaze. “It was smouldering at first and the staff did a brilliant job, they grabbed all the fire extinguishers, got a hosepipe from the cellar, they did an amazing job themselves. “But with the thatch and the straw and beams that are 700-800 years old, it didn’t stand a chance really.” The Star Inn has won many awards including UK gastropub of the year. It has held a Michelin star for much of Pern’s 25-year tenure. Pern, a finalist with Tom Kerridge in the BBC’s Great British Menu in 2011, estimated it may take a year to get the main dining area up and running again. A newer section of the pub “should be OK, so we’ll be able to function in a fashion, somehow”. The Michelin Guide praises the Star Inn as “one of our most delightful places” in a building that oozes character. “While the restaurant side has a plush, luxurious feel, it’s still very much the village local and you’ll find the regulars supping on a pint of bespoke ‘Two Chefs’ beer in the characterful bar.”Jürgen Klopp has described the imminent arrival of Ralf Rangnick at Manchester United as bad news for the rest of the Premier League as the Old Trafford side “will be organised on the pitch”. Klopp has been friends with the 63-year-old since starting his managerial career at Mainz and believes Liverpool’s fierce rivals have made an astute choice for their interim manager. He expects Rangnick to rectify the failings that prompted Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s sacking, and which Liverpool exploited in their 5-0 rout of United last month, by turning a collection of expensive individuals into a coherent team. Rangnick has agreed to join United as interim manager with a consultancy role to follow, starting from June 2022. “Unfortunately a good coach is coming to England, that’s how it is, to Manchester United,” the Liverpool manager said. “Ralf is obviously a really experienced manager. He most famously built two clubs from nowhere to proper threats and forces in Germany with Hoffenheim and [RB] Leipzig. He did a lot of different jobs in football but always his first concern was being a coach and a manager. That’s what his best skill is. “United will be organised on the pitch, we should realise that, and that’s obviously not good news for other teams. But all coaches in the world need time to train with our teams and Ralf will pretty quickly realise he has no time to train as they play all the time, so that makes it a bit tricky for him. Apart from that, a really good man and an outstanding coach, if it happens, will come to England.” Rangnick has been cited as a major influence on a generation of successful German coaches, Klopp included, and the Liverpool manager insists his reputation is merited. He added: “Between the coaches [in Germany] he is very highly regarded and wherever he was he did an incredible job. He started early as a very young man at Stuttgart coaching the second team and going from there. I’m pretty sure he then went to Ulm and took them to the Bundesliga which was insane at that time. “We faced each other for the first time when I was a very young coach and he was at Hanover. He might have forgotten that. They always played our opponent the week later, so he called me, the young manager at Mainz, and asked plenty of questions. I was happy that big Ralf Rangnick was calling me but he got all the information he needed. They got promoted, and we didn’t, so he still owes me something! In the football world in Germany he is very well regarded and rightly so.” Rangnick’s influence on German coaches extends to Thomas Tuchel, whom he managed at Ulm and started on the path towards a coaching career by bringing him into Stuttgart’s academy. “He helped me a lot, because he was my coach and then he was one of the main figures to convince me to try coaching,” said Chelsea’s manager. “He had a huge influence on all of us at this time. He showed us that it’s not necessary to follow people to the toilet in football games, because that was the belief in these days, that defenders follow strikers wherever they go. He showed us it’s possible to defend everybody in a zone.” Tuchel praised Rangnick’s influence on German football. “For sure he is an elite manager. He was one of the very first to implement a back four in Germany and introduce the style of not man-marking and still being aggressive, and was one of the pioneers to introduce a 4-4-2 and high pressing. Still he is one of the leaders of this development in German football so tactically for sure he is an elite coach.” Asked why Rangnick has not had an elite job before, Tuchel said: “So far he focussed on giving himself a certain amount of freedom to be in charge and he found himself in Hoffenheim, to get them to the top division and into international football. He found the same environment at an even higher level with Red Bull Leipzig. “You can call it enterprise. In these environments he was the decisive person and he found a managing role far more than only the coach. Maybe this was the key stopping him from stepping into every offer that he got for sure. He was very early a leader in bringing zonal marking and pressing and the line of a back four into German football. So big credit for that.”Her bestselling adventure stories have entertained generations of readers but, like so many working mothers today, Enid Blyton struggled to juggle her career as a children’s writer with looking after her own children, according to previously unpublished letters. Writing in 1950 to Roland Heath, her editor at Macmillan publishers, the Famous Five author confided: “I would love to write another book for you straight away … but I feel I really must cut down just a little on my books for a while – it’s really my correspondence that gets me down, and the continual public appearances I am always pressed to make.” She continued: “I don’t feel tired, but I feel a bit strained sometimes especially when the children are home and we have other children in the house too – it’s such a strain to run the whole house, see to the children, keep my work going, and answer thousands of personal letters, which even a dozen secretaries couldn’t answer without being dictated to.” Previously overlooked correspondence show Blyton struggled to juggle the pressures of motherhood and literature, a far cry from her modern image as a “ruthless writing machine”. The trappings of fame, including requiring to make public appearances in front of fans, also held Blyton back from penning more novels. “If I could give up all these public appearances it wouldn’t be so bad,” she said. “I don’t see how I can lead quite so many lives – especially as I really am not keen on much personal publicity!” Referring to her second husband, Kenneth Darrell Waters, she added: “Kenneth is getting worried about my work. I haven’t admitted to him that I’m feeling a bit pushed after these holidays, in case he does something drastic, so please don’t tell him!” These letters to Macmillan, one of her publishers, are in the British Library and researched by Andrew Maunder for his forthcoming book, Enid Blyton: A Literary Life, which is to be published by Palgrave on 8 December. It draws extensively on Blyton’s business correspondence, including archives held by Macmillan. Written between 1940 and 1960, the letters are mostly about business although, as Blyton got to know the editorial staff, she discussed everything from holidays to work pressures. Maunder, associate dean in the school of humanities at the University of Hertfordshire, and editor of the series British Literature of World War I, explained that they had been largely overlooked “partly because they’ve not been catalogued yet”. Blyton, who died in 1968 aged 71, made her name with collections of stories including The Famous Five, Noddy, The Secret Seven, The Faraway Tree and Malory Towers, totalling more than 400 titles. They encapsulate an age of innocence in which children search for hidden treasure and secret passages, with sandwiches and “lashings” of ginger beer. Such is her enduring popularity that total sales have topped 600m. Writing 30 or more books a year as well as looking after her two daughters, Gillian and Imogen, was not unusual for Blyton. Maunder said: “By 1950, she’s on a kind of treadmill, juggling the demands of family, husband and home. At one point, it sounds like things are coming to a halt because she can’t cope any more. So this goes against the idea that she’s a ruthless writing machine … Juggling all these different commitments starts to take its toll. She literally just worked all the time. She didn’t have a secretary. So she did all her own correspondence, everything.” He added: “It kicks back at the idea that Blyton was some kind of monster or a bad mother, which came out in a BBC film with Helena Bonham Carter, where she’s presented as some kind of psychopath. These letters re-establish her as an early career woman and concerned mother.” But she was overwhelmed by her popularity, writing to her editor in 1943: “I was amused to see that the excellent bookshop here had one of its windows devoted to Enid Blyton books. I went in and made myself known to the manager, who was overcome with delight as it appears that the children of Swanage are one and all my fans, and he cannot get a quarter of my books that he wants … I have promised to go to his shop … next week and autograph any books the children bring … I am afraid his shop will be crowded out.” Earlier this year, English Heritage acknowledged the “racism, xenophobia and lack of literary merit” in Blyton’s writing. It points to a 1966 Guardian article that highlights the racism of Blyton’s The Little Black Doll. In the story the doll of the title, Sambo, ostracised for its “ugly black face”, is only accepted when its face is washed “clean” by the rain.UNWRECK IT, RALF Just eight years after Lord Ferg left the club, Manchester United finally appear to have stumbled upon something resembling a decent succession plan. On Thursday, it was revealed the club had agreed personal terms to give it Ralf Rangnick til end of t’season, a decision that prompted some t1ttering from sceptical hacks who remembered the professorial German turning down a similar gig when Frank Lampard’s Chelsea fired FLCMFL on the grounds that “to the media and players you would be the ‘four-month’ manager, a lame duck from day one”. The proposition he has accepted from United is rather different, however, as Rangnick has been offered a two-year consultancy role to help whip the club into shape once his time in charge of interim managing the team is up. Rangnick’s appointment has prompted a slew of chin-stroking articles detailing just what a great acquisition the professorial German egghead will be once his exit from his role as head of sports and development at Lokomotiv Moscow has been negotiated. Credited with having invented gegenpressing almost 10 years after Jack Charlton had perfected the tactic with the Republic O’Ireland, he is widely credited with having been a huge influence on Jürgen Klopp, Julian Nagelsmann and Tommy T and has worked largely as a director of football in the past decade. While some cynics have pointed out that if he’s as good as assorted excitable hipster fanboys make out he wouldn’t be working in relative obscurity in Moscow, it’s worth noting that since Manchester United last won a trophy, Lokomotiv have won their domestic league and two Russian Cups. Currently interim to the incoming interim, Michael Carrick will be in charge of United when they get thrashed at Chelsea on Sunday and the former midfielder was unable to provide much enlightenment to reporters regarding Rangnick’s imminent arrival when asked if he had any news. “To be honest, from my point of view, not a lot, really,” he parped. “Speculation and reports are speculation and reports. As I’m sitting here now, I’m preparing the team for the game, really. My head’s on the game, I haven’t got any more news to share with you on that front.” Asked for his thoughts on Rangnick’s imminent appointment, Klopp said his arrival ought to be a source of concern for other clubs. “Ralf is obviously a really experienced manager,” he warned. “He built most famously two clubs from nowhere to proper threats and forces in Germany with Hoffenheim and Leipzig. United will be organised on the pitch, we should realise that – that’s obviously not good news for other teams.” It may also spell bad news for a certain high-profile Manchester United forward, who may have re-signed for the club this summer labouring under the false impression that his days of gegenpressing were long behind him. QUOTE OF THE DAY “The club is outstanding outside, to create a stadium but now we start from behind. It is important to know this because I am not a magician, and after three weeks I have found players that want to work and have great commitment but sometimes it is not enough” – welcome to Spurs, Antonio Conte, fresh off their 2-1 Tin Pot loss at Mura. FIVER LETTERS “Forget fan-led reviews into football governance (yesterday’s Fiver). There’s only one serious issue facing football this week. Is Ralf Rangnick going to ban ketchup in the United canteen?” – Steve Malone. “‘STOP FOOTBALL’ was not among the 47 recommendations to save the game? What a missed opportunity” – JJ Zucal. “I’m not sure I’ve ever seen someone so savagely damned with faint praise as Tracey Crouch was by the Fiver yesterday. ‘Far from the worst [Tory]’, indeed” – Oliver Billenness. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Steve Malone. WIN! WIN! WIN! In the first weeks of lockdown The Blizzard started running online quizzes, the result is The Quizzard: The Blizzard Quiz book, which is available in print or digital form. The Fiver has two print copies to giveaway, all you have to do is answer this fiendish question: Which former Liverpool forward is the only player to play international football in four decades? Send your answer with the Subject ‘Fiver Quiz’ along with your name and postal address to info@theblizzard.co.uk. Guardian readers can also buy a copy of The Quizzard for the reduced price of £6.99 (print) or £5 (digital) by entering the code GQUIZ at the checkout. Good luck. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS A string of missed opportunities allowed the predatory paedophile Bob Higgins to sexually abuse scores of schoolboy players while he worked as a coach at Southampton, a damning report by the children’s charity Barnardo’s has concluded. Fifa head honcho Gianni Infantino reckons that those opposed to having a World Cup every two years are just scared of change. “We cannot close the door, we need to keep the door open, we need to give hope and opportunities,” he cheered after African countries voted unanimously to back the biennial plan. Eddie Howe will make an unexpected return to the technical area at Arsenal on Saturday after returning a negative Covid test in time to take charge of Newcastle for the first time in person. “We’ve missed seeing the manager out on the grass,” whooped assistant Jason Tindall. Czech cash mountain Daniel Kretinsky has agreed an option for a full takeover of West Ham after purchasing a 27% stake in the club. PSG suit Leonardo insists they’ve not met with Zinedine Zidane behind manager Mauricio Pochettino’s back. Then again he wouldn’t say otherwise, would he? “We don’t want Pochettino to leave,” sighed Leonardo. “He has never asked to leave and no club has contacted us about him.” In the latest round of Women’s World Cup qualifiers, Norn Iron routed North Macedonia 11-0, Spain smited the Faroe Islands 12-0 and Belgium edged past Armenia 19-0. And while West Ham and the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers are through to the Big Vase knockouts, with Leicester on course to join them, the Queen’s Celtic are out, out, out and in, in, in to Tin Pot after a late loss at Leverkusen. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … 30 November. Tickets are available now. STILL WANT MORE? Ben Lyttleton on Ralf Rangnick’s journey towards Old Trafford, via Viktoria Backnang, Hoffenheim and RB Leipzig. Karen Carney notes that Manchester United have top-class players, but desperately need a manager to match. The government’s fan-led review covers familiar ground – but this time it carries some political weight, writes Proper Journalism’s David Conn. Ten things to look out for in the Premier League this weekend, from Fred to Claudio Ranieri. Get your box-fresh Premier League match previews right here. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! BACK ON THE ROAD TO WEMBLEYThe leader of Spain’s Podemos party has defended the coalition government’s push to change its predecessor’s “gag law”, calling it “the greatest blow to civil and political liberties” since the country’s return to democracy. Ione Belarra, who serves as the minister for social rights in the Socialist-led minority government, said the public security legislation had eroded basic democratic rights since it was introduced by the conservative People’s party (PP) six years ago. The so-called gag law – which has been criticised by UN experts, journalists and human rights groups – allows authorities to fine journalists and media organisations who distribute unauthorised images of police, sets strict limits on when and where protests can be held and imposes hefty financial penalties on offenders. The PP, the far-right Vox party and dozens of policing groups are opposing the changes, claiming they will impede officers’ ability to do their job and tilt things in favour of criminals. Speaking to the Guardian, Belarra said change was long overdue and suggested the legislation had been deliberately engineered by the PP to clamp down on dissent as Spain endured the socioeconomic effects of the 2008 financial crisis. “I think it’s certainly the greatest blow to civil and political liberties since the transition [to democracy], and I don’t think that’s an exaggerated view,” she said. “It’s also clear that the People’s party undertook this reform during a brutal economic crisis and that it was done specifically to stop people protesting against … measures such as the cuts to public services.” Belarra acknowledged that the Unidas Podemos alliance – the junior partners in the coalition – would have liked the amendments agreed with the Spanish Socialist Workers’ party (PSOE) to have gone further, but said the bloc was satisfied with the deal. One area of disagreement – the contentious issue of the pushback of migrants and refugees – was left out of the reforms. “There are measures in the amendments that are good news: you don’t need to give notice of [spontaneous] demonstrations, and they’re going to reduce the fines and base them on people’s different economic capacities so as not to deter people from exercising their civil and political rights on financial grounds,” she said. “And people will no longer be punished for taking and sharing images, which has really limited freedom of information in Spain and seen the repression of journalists who were doing their jobs legitimately and legally.” But the proposed changes have received short shrift from many rank-and-file officers and from the Spanish right. According to the Jupol union, they will leave officers “having to face violent people with their hands tied”. The PP leader, Pablo Casado, joined police at a protest in Madrid on Wednesday, as did Santiago Abascal, who leads Vox. Another demonstration is due to be held in central Madrid on Saturday. Casado said he would take the matter to Spain’s constitutional court if the changes were passed. “We’re not going to put up with this outrage when it comes to protecting those who protect us,” he said. “There’s no freedom without security and the Policía Nacional and the Guardia Civil are the ones that guarantee our freedoms. If the reforms in this law go through, they’re going to end up being totally sold out to the criminals.” At least one police union – the ARP (Police Reformist Group) – has thrown its weight behind the changes and announced it will not participate in any of the protests. Belarra said the police were well within their rights to demonstrate, but added the reforms backed by the government were intended to redress the PP’s wrongs. “Everyone – and all these organisation and associations – are free to express any opinions they have about the legislation we’re bringing in,” she said. “Having said that, I think the gag law actually upset the necessary balance between the rights of the people who protest and the rights of the state security services who also obviously need protection.” Belarra, who succeeded Pablo Iglesias as Podemos leader in June, admitted there had been tensions with the Socialists, but said disagreements and different approaches were only to be expected in a coalition. “But I think things are stabilising and people are working together well,” she said. “People need to understand that it doesn’t matter if we don’t agree on everything or if Unidas Podemos ministers say something different to PSOE ministers.” Belarra said the fact the government had won approval in congress for its 2022 budget “allows us to send a clear message that there’s stability and that the government’s moving forward in the direction it has chosen”.Centre-back shuffle The defensive stalwart Steph Houghton is still out and her stand-in Leah Williamson, who staked a claim for an extended place in the XI in the Manchester City player’s absence, has a hamstring injury. Millie Bright has the captain’s armband for Saturday’s World Cup qualifier against Austria and Tuesday’s against Latvia, but who will partner the Chelsea player in the middle of the defence as the team get ready for their toughest qualifying test is the big question. Alex Greenwood, traditionally a left-back, has been filling in in the middle for City, whose injury crisis has forced the manager, Gareth Taylor, to get creative. But the obvious choice is Williamson’s Arsenal teammate Lotte Wubben-Moy, who has been thrust into the thick of things since returning to England in 2020 after three years at the University of North Carolina. Wubben-Moy is relatively new to the Lionesses’ senior setup but she could lay the groundwork for a long-term England run with Williamson if she has good performances alongside Bright. The wonder of Wiegman Sarina Wiegman has an impressive CV, having won a home Euros with the Netherlands and taken them to a World Cup final. Importantly, though, she has lightened the mood. “You can see the confidence of people in training, you can see that people are enjoying training,” Fran Kirby said this week. “It was funny – when she came in she was like: ‘You know you can enjoy training? Have a laugh.’ But I think because we went through a period with so much uncertainty, where performances weren’t the best and results weren’t the best, people were starting to get a bit tense, but now everyone’s just let loose and enjoying it again.” Wiegman oozes confidence without arrogance and her keenness to open up all training sessions bar the one directly before a game to media and fans speaks to that. For now, the players are hanging on her every word, eager to impress the woman who has been to the place they want to get to. White’s goal target All eyes will be on Ellen White against Austria and Latvia, with the forward two goals away from matching the England goalscoring record held by Kelly Smith. Bright and Wiegman gave short shrift to any question that the gameplan would be to get the ball to White with that in mind though. “We just have to score goals as a team,” Wiegman said. “Of course we will all be very happy when Ellen gets that record but the main point of the game is not to get Ellen goals.” Can England get the best from Kirby and Nobbs? The England journeys of Kirby and Jordan Nobbs have not been straightforward, blighted by serious injuries and illness. Yet even when they have been fit and thriving domestically the national team have struggled to extract their best form consistently. Wiegman is extremely fortunate to have both creative players in a good place physically but finding a formation that suits them is not easy. That Kirby said this week she is expected “to be more in the midfield area, rather than being higher up the pitch” is something to keep an eye on. Kirby has been in formidable form when played further forward as part of a front three for Chelsea and dropping her deeper implies Wiegman will be shifting Nobbs from her attacking midfield berth or considering not playing the pair together. Home time The Lionesses’ tour of the country in recent years has been great at promoting the team and women’s football in many regions that will host games during next summer’s Euros. However, perhaps it will be time after Saturday’s game in Sunderland (where the Euros will not be held) and Tuesday’s in Doncaster to consider whether the team should have a permanent home after that tournament. A regular base would make arranging travel and accommodation far easier and could do as much to grow the fanbase as touring does. The other UK nations have taken this route, with Wales adopting Newport as their home, Northern Ireland primarily playing home games at Seaview and Scotland increasingly using Hampden. It doesn’t have to be Wembley, but perhaps it is time for England to settle down.A man accused of murdering a mother and three children has also been charged with raping one of the victims, who was 11. Damien Bendall, 31, is now alleged to have raped and murdered Lacey Bennett. He was previously charged with killing her and her brother, John Paul Bennett, 13, their mother, Terri Harris, 35, and Lacey’s friend, Connie Gent, 11. The victims were discovered at a house in Killamarsh, near Sheffield, on 19 September. The murder charges allege Bendall killed all four on a day between Friday 17 September and Monday 20 September. Bendall was due before Nottingham crown court on Friday for a plea hearing, but failed to appear and the case was adjourned to 4 January at the crown court in Derby. An inquest opening at Chesterfield coroner’s court previously heard the four died as a result of a “violent attack”. A spokesperson for Derbyshire constabulary said the provisional cause of death for the four victims had been identified as “blunt force trauma”. The coroner’s court also heard how a relative of Bendall had phoned police to say the defendant had sustained a self-inflicted stab wound. In a statement, the CPS said: “The Crown Prosecution Service has authorised a further charge for Damien Bendall, 31, after reviewing a file of evidence from Derbyshire police. He has now been charged with rape of a girl under 13. “The additional charge was today confirmed to the court at a hearing held at Nottingham crown court. All are reminded that criminal proceedings against the defendant are active and that he has the right to a fair trial. “It is extremely important that there should be no reporting, commentary or sharing of information online which could in any way prejudice these proceedings.” Family members said Connie was at a sleepover at the home of her best friend, Lacey, when they were killed. Speaking shortly after their deaths, Jason Bennett, the father of John Paul and Lacey, said: “Life will never be the same again. Families have been left broken by the awful loss of John, Lacey, Terri and Connie.” He described John Paul as “loving, fiery, funny and passionate, with the most beautiful caring heart you could find” and said Lacey was his “TikTok queen, creating dance after dance”.A forgotten children’s classic is coming back into print after more than 30 years, on the back of Mark Gatiss’s new version of the 1972 movie The Amazing Mr Blunden, which comes to TV this Christmas. Ahead of the festive production directed by and starring Gatiss, who appears alongside Tamsin Greig and Simon Callow, Virago Books is republishing the original 1969 novel by Antonia Barber, which was last in print in the UK in 1988. Originally titled The Ghosts, Barber’s book will appear under The Amazing Mr Blunden title as a tie-in to the film, which will be broadcast on Sky Max. Although The Ghosts was shortlisted for the Carnegie medal when it first came out, and was given a movie-tie in edition when the Lionel Jeffries big-screen adaptation was released in 1972, it fell out of print; secondhand copies are scarce and selling for upwards of £100 online. The fact it is back in print at all is testimony not only to Gatiss reviving interest, but the tenacity of Virago editor Donna Coonan. Coonan was first introduced to the novel a decade ago, and immediately fell in love with Barber’s story of siblings Lucy and Jamie who move to a dilapidated country mansion in 1918 when their mother is offered a job as housekeeper by the mysterious solicitor Mr Blunden. But Blunden has an ulterior motive as Lucy and Jamie discover when they encounter what appear to be the ghosts of two children who lived in the house a century before. Sara and her younger brother Georgie are seeking help before they die in a fire at the hands of the evil housekeeper Mrs Wickens and her vile husband, who have designs on the orphans’ inheritance, so Lucy and Jamie have to travel back in time to avert tragedy. Coonan said, “I was familiar with Antonia Barber but had never read this before, and I just thought that it was the most magical novel, kind of a wonderful children’s version of The Turn of the Screw.” Coonan heads up the Virago children’s list, which publishes classic authors such as Nina Bawden and Joan Aiken. She was desperate to add The Ghosts to the list but as it wasn’t quite as well known as, say, Carrie’s War or The Wolves of Willoughby Chase, she was unable to justify it. “I was really sad about it, because I just fell in love with the book. But I kept the idea by me, waiting for such a time as I could push for it, and that happened this year when Antonia Barber’s agency contacted me to say there was going to be a new film version of it, and I knew I had my chance.” Coonan had already parted company with the secondhand book she had read almost a decade earlier, and had to quickly track down another copy – this time a tatty copy of the 1972 movie-tie in, retitled The Amazing Mr Blunden, which was published by Penguin with a still from the movie on the cover. It cost Coonan £45 from an online seller. And this was the book that formed the basis of the typesetting of the new version, released through Virago on 9 December. Barber – who is perhaps better known for her 1991 picture book The Mousehole Cat, illustrated by Nicola Bayley and set in the Cornish seaside village where Barber lived, alongside her family home in Kent – died in 2019. The new version of The Ghosts, her second novel, will be published the day before what would have been her 89th birthday. “I do wish she could have been here to see the new film and this new edition of her book, and the revived interest in her work,” said Coonan. “It has been out of print a long time but I am hoping many children will now make a discovery of this neglected work and it will become the children’s classic it has long deserved to be.” Gatiss has long been a huge fan of both Barber’s novel and the 1972 film, which starred Laurence Naismith as Mr Blunden (which Callow will reprise for the new production) and Lynne Frederick, Garry Miller, Rosalyn Landor, and Marc Granger as the time-hopping children. For a limited edition Blu-ray release of the original movie a few years ago, Gatiss was interviewed for a special extra feature. He told the Guardian, “I’m so thrilled Antonia Barber’s beloved classic is being reissued alongside my new screen version. It’s such a charming, strange and delicate story. Powerfully redemptive, moving and yet so much fun! The Wheel of Time turns again …” • A preview of The Amazing Mr Blunden, followed by a Q&amp;A with Mark Gatiss and cast members Tamsin Greig and Simon Callow, hosted by Mark Kermode, will take place at the BFI, Southbank, London, on 29 November at 6.15pm. Book tickets here.Despite the UK’s much-vaunted vaccination programme, and scientists’ ever-growing understanding of Covid-19, Britain and the rest of the world face the challenge of a new, potentially more transmissible variant just a month before Christmas. While Sajid Javid, the health secretary, announced the red-listing of six southern African countries and said “we must act with caution”, he ruled out immediate new Covid measures including triggering winter plan B – which would involve working from home, mask-wearing and Covid passports. So what should the UK do in the short term and what is the chance of fresh restrictions? Prof Mark Woolhouse of the University of Edinburgh said travel measures might buy time but, as they could not prevent the arrival of B.1.1.529 in the UK, the key was what was done with the time bought. “The priority must be to establish whether B.1.1.529 really does pose a significant threat to public health. If it does then we have a suite of tools available to lessen its impact,” he said. Ravi Gupta, professor of clinical microbiology at the University of Cambridge, is among experts backing an increase in precautions now, saying this would also limit flu and the spread of the dominant delta variant of Covid as people started gathering in groups in the winter. Prof Rowland Kao, an epidemiologist at the University of Edinburgh, said that while more information was needed about the new variant, “we can’t afford to wait”. Local lockdowns in areas where the variant was found could be necessary to reduce its spread, he said. “The greatest concern at the moment is that, because [B.1.1.529 is] so different, vaccines will be less effective at preventing infection. And without direct evidence that it is less deadly, it would mean any introduction into the UK would require measures, at the very least at a fairly large local level,” he said. Stopping the variant entering the UK could be a means to avoid such measures “and that means we should be prepared to extend the red list rapidly and generously if needs be”, he said. Prof Azra Ghani, an epidemiologist at Imperial College London, said the appropriate response was hard to gauge but alongside red-listing countries, genomic surveillance – decoding the genome of virus samples – was key. “We have very good genomic surveillance in place but the recent relaxation of testing post-travel, [for example] no longer requiring PCR tests after return, may limit the speed with which the new variant entering the country is detected,” she said. But Prof Adam Finn of the University of Bristol, a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), said until there was more clarity on distribution and transmission of the new variant, there was “not much else to do at this point”. Evidence was needed on whether it did indeed escape immune responses, he said, but tweaking the vaccine would take time. Experts have previously suggested the process could take six months. “Vaccines can be modified relatively rapidly but they then additionally need to be produced at scale, delivered and administered,” said Ghani. In other words, it is unlikely the UK will be able to rely on new jabs to tackle the variant in the short term at least.Thanksgiving holiday travel in the US is expected to reach near pre-pandemic levels, with industry insiders predicting that 53.4 million people will hit the road over the long weekend, compared with 47.1 million in 2020, the largest year-on-year increase since 2005. The travel boom comes amid rising Covid cases, as public health authorities fear another winter surge. “This Thanksgiving, travel will look a lot different than last year,” said Paula Twidale, senior vice-president with AAA Travel, adding that the increase was also fuelled by the recent easing of restrictions for international travelers who are fully vaccinated. “Now that the borders are open and new health and safety guidelines are in place, travel is once again high on the list for Americans who are ready to reunite with their loved ones for the holiday,” Twidale said. According to AAA Travel, 48.3 million were expected to drive, 4.2 million were expected to fly, and 1 million were expected to use other means of transit, such as busses, trains or cruises. In 2019, 56 million Americans traveled for Thanksgiving. Transportation Security Administration data show a large increase: 1,382,230 people went through TSA checkpoints on 25 November, compared with 560,902 in 2020 and 1,591,158 in 2019. On Wednesday, the day before Thanksgiving – typically the busiest travel day each year – TSA screened 2,311,978 travelers, compared with 1,070,967 in 2020 and 2,624,250 in 2019. Travelers have said they are willing to endure clogged roads and congested airports if it means taking a long-awaited chance to see family, as many feel more secure visiting relatives after having received the coronavirus vaccine. One traveler, Ashley Summerville of Baltimore, told the Washington Post she would put up with the “hot mess” of driving to Brooklyn, in New York, where she was due to see around 10 relatives, some of whom she had not seen in more than two years. “We were all being very, very safe about Covid,” Summerville said of how her family spent 2020. “This year, we’re all vaccinated and excited to see each other … We miss each other.” Friday, the day after Thanksgiving, also saw shoppers turn out to seek traditional bargains in a retail sector subject to shortages and staff problems made worse by the pandemic. In a statement, Marc Perrone, international president of UFCW, America’s largest retail union, called on shoppers to observe public health precautions meant to lessen the spread of Covid. “We can all help keep each other safe and make a difference in the lives of others,” he said, “especially frontline workers who have already sacrificed so much. This holiday season we’re asking every American, no matter where they call home, to shop safe and give thanks.” Dr Anthony Fauci, the top US infectious disease doctor and chief White House medical adviser, warned earlier this week that there was not much time left to stave off a “dangerous” new surge of coronavirus cases over the holiday season. New cases have started to rise in recent weeks. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data from 23 November indicated 100,636 new cases and a seven-day rolling average of 94,266. “We still have about 60 million people in this country who are eligible to be vaccinated who have not been,” Fauci told CNN. “That results in the dynamic of virus in the community that not only is dangerous and makes people who are unvaccinated vulnerable, but it also spills over into the vaccinated people.”Norwich’s hopes of surviving in the Premier League had been virtually written off three weeks ago. Two measly points from 10 games had many observers tipping them to eclipse Derby’s record low tally of 11 points from 2007-08. Victory against Brentford was not enough to save Daniel Farke’s job and his replacement Dean Smith began his reign with success against Southampton to raise hopes at Carrow Road. Norwich’s chances of extending their mini-renaissance face a stern test, however, against a Wolves side that have recovered from a sluggish start under Bruno Lage to emerge as genuine contenders for a European spot. Stephen Hollis Saturday 3pm Venue Carrow Road Last season n/a Referee Simon Hooper This season G3 Y10 R0 3.33 cards/game Odds H 13-5 A 5-4 D 27-11 NORWICH Subs from Gunn, Dowell, Tzolis, Sørensen, Idah, Placheta, Giannoulis, Dowell, Kabak, Cantwell, Lees-Melou, Omobamidele Doubtful None Injured Byram (match fitness, unknown), Zimmermann (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y24 R1 Form DDLLWW Leading scorer Pukki 4 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Hoever, Boly, Dendoncker, Cundle, Campbell, Podence, Traoré, Silva, Marçal Doubtful None Injured Jonny (knee, unknown), Mosquera (hamstring, unknown), Neto (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y22 R0 Form WWDWLW Leading scorer Hwang 4Two ticket touts who made at least £11m by using websites such as StubHub and Viagogo to sell seats at gigs by artists including Ed Sheeran have had their appeals against a conviction for multiple counts of fraud dismissed. In a landmark verdict that could have significant ramifications for the practice of ticket touting, the court of appeal rejected the appeals of Peter Hunter and David Smith against their February 2020 conviction. The duo were prosecuted by National Trading Standards, after a 2016 investigation by the Observer exposed the practices they had used to fleece fans. NTS found Hunter and Smith had used “dishonest and fraudulent tactics” to purchase multiple tickets from primary ticket sellers such as Ticketmaster, Eventim and AXS. This meant that their company, BZZ Limited, was elbowing out genuine fans trying to buy tickets, then listing those tickets for sale to consumers at inflated prices. The court of appeal noted that their convictions, on multiple counts of fraud, were “entirely safe”, adding that the ticket resale market was “one which appears to be characterised by a high degree of criminal fraud”. The verdict could have a major impact on the “secondary ticketing” industry, which is dominated by professional touts who deploy a variety of techniques to harvest tickets in large numbers and sell them at massively inflated prices. The tactics used by Hunter and Smith to mop up tickets circumvented automated systems designed to block multiple purchases and breached legitimate ticket sellers’ terms and conditions. In one example from 2017, they purchased more than 750 Ed Sheeran tickets in 2017 and sold them at inflated prices, despite knowing customers might be refused entry because the singer had banned resold tickets. To evade measures designed to stop touts by limiting individual purchases, Hunter and Smith used the personal details of other people they knew to buy the tickets. They deployed at least 97 different names, 88 postal addresses and more than 290 email addresses, as well as deploying automated computer programs known as “bots” to facilitate bulk purchases. Emails to nearly 300 email addresses they used were all auto-forwarded to one email address held by BZZ Limited, while they used multiple concealed IP addresses to disguise bulk buying. The defendants also engaged in fraudulent trading by listing tickets for sale on secondary ticketing websites that they had not purchased and did not own. Known as speculative of “spec” selling, the tactic involves inducing consumers to buy non-existent tickets at an inflated price. Once the sales were secured, the defendants would try to source the tickets to fulfil the purchase. Consumers were therefore tricked into paying an inflated price and also exposed to the risk that BZZ Limited would be unable or unwilling to supply the ticket. The court of appeal noted that in one case a secondary ticketing website had helped Hunter and Smith by providing them with a barcode scanner so that they could generate barcodes used for the resale of digital tickets. Wendy Martin, programme director of National Trading Standards, said the ruling was a “major milestone in the efforts to tackle the dishonest and fraudulent practices in the secondary ticketing market. “Consumers continue to be at a disadvantage when trying to spend their hard-earned money on tickets for music concerts and sporting events and we hope our work to test the current legislation and make recommendations to government will make it easier and safer for consumers buying tickets in the future.” StubHub were contacted for comment. Viagogo said the company had “never approved of using bots to gain an unfair advantage when buying tickets”. A spokesperson said: “We are pushing for increased industry-wide collaboration to facilitate information-sharing, allowing all platforms to target suspicious activity and act swiftly to remove any rare cases of fraudulent selling.”The tantalising prospect of Wales facing Scotland in Cardiff for a place at the World Cup finals had added gloss to the play-off process before the final tie was confirmed. Either Italy or Portugal – or potentially both – will miss out on Qatar 2022 after they were drawn in the same play-off path. If Italy beat North Macedonia and Portugal see off Turkey in late March, the last two European Championship winners will go head-to-head days later in Lisbon for a World Cup berth. Scotland and Wales have history in World Cup qualifying. A penalty awarded to Scotland during a crucial tie against Wales, staged at Anfield in 1977, remains a source of hot debate 44 years on. The Welsh are adamant, not without justification, that Scotland’s Joe Jordan handled inside their penalty area. Instead Dave Jones was punished, Don Masson scored from the spot and Scotland marched towards Argentina. Jordan has always denied being the beneficiary of a wrong decision but the matter lingers in Wales. “It puts a little bit more spice on it, doesn’t it?” said the Wales interim manager, Rob Page. “When you get one of the home nations, a potential play-off final to get through to the World Cup, it doesn’t get better than that. Full focus will be on the first game and we’ve got to earn the right to get to that final and Scotland will have to do the same.” For the pair to meet, Scotland must see off Ukraine at home and Wales beat Austria in Cardiff. Ukraine enjoyed their last trip to Hampden, defeating Sweden there in June at Euro 2020’s last-16 stage. The only previous meeting between Scotland and Ukraine in Glasgow, 14 years ago, ended in a 3-1 Scotland win. Wales have lost only one of their past 19 home qualification matches. Scotland and Wales must be content with their opportunity given the other teams in the Zurich hat. Page said: “If you had a wish, you’d want two home games. We had to work hard for one and we got the luck of the draw for the second one, so the incentive is there for us. We’ll have two packed houses. We’ve seen the impact supporters can have on us in the recent campaign. In the last two games, the stadium was rocking. We’ve given ourselves a great opportunity, haven’t we? It’s all there to play for.” Steve Clarke characteristically played down the potential for a battle of Britain. “We certainly won’t be distracted by that,” Scotland’s manager said. “We always treat our immediate opponents with the utmost respect so that is what Ukraine will get. We will prepare properly. “Ukraine will be a tough game. We will go away, do our homework on them and try to come up with a winning formula. With the confidence the boys have and the way the team is playing, we would have been happy to play anybody anywhere but the home crowd should give us an extra boost. This is something to look forward to over the winter months.” Given Italy have never lost a home World Cup qualifying tie, they will be heavy favourites to defeat North Macedonia. Portugal’s task against Turkey is sterner. Nonetheless, thoughts have widely and understandably turned towards a conceivable final between two of European football’s powerhouses with a World Cup place at stake. Italy were nudged into the play-offs after finishing second to Switzerland in their group. Serbia took an automatic spot at Portugal’s expense. Russia or Poland will enjoy home advantage against the winners of the semi-final between Sweden and the Czech Republic. There is, then, the possibility of a high-profile showdown between two of the world’s finest strikers: Poland’s Robert Lewandowski and Sweden’s Zlatan Ibrahimovic. Clarke believes a yellow card amnesty will soon be confirmed for the play-offs. As it stands, any player now on a booking would miss the final if cautioned in the semi-final. After representations by various associations, Fifa is close to backing down and resetting suspension records.Lleyton Hewitt has expressed his dismay at the state of the Davis Cup following the news the tournament could be held in Abu Dhabi from 2022. Hewitt, the captain of the Australian team, said the current format is “not what Davis Cup is about”, an event he believes once stood as the pinnacle of the sport. “Davis Cup was held in the highest regard because it was up there with the pinnacle of our sport in men’s tennis, which was five sets. Grand slams and Davis Cup, they are the only ones that played five sets. We threw that out the door, and now we are throwing the home and away out the door, as well,” Hewitt said as Australia prepared to face Hungary in Turin, having lost their opening match in this year’s finals to Croatia. He continued: “So if they are going and selling the soul of the Davis Cup to the Middle East for another five years, I think it’s ridiculous, and they are really killing the competition.” A proposal for Abu Dhabi to host the 2022 Davis Cup finals will be voted on at an International Tennis Federation board meeting in Madrid next week. Asked whether he thought the Davis Cup captains and leading players should have more input in the development of the competition, Hewitt shrugged and said: “We didn’t have input four years ago. I’m not sure it’s going to matter much now. It’s been run by a soccer player and his company. So it’s totally different to anything that tennis has been through in the past and such a big event.” As Great Britain prepared to begin their finals tournament in Innsbruck, the captain, Leon Smith, took a more measured approach by stating that he did not know enough about the new proposal to give his full opinion. Earlier in the week, before the news about the 2022 location, Smith said he wanted there to be more communication between the organisers and players. On Friday, he reiterated his belief that it should be one of the biggest events on the calendar. “When all is said and done, look, I’m biased, this has been a huge part of what I’ve gone through in the last decade,” Smith said. “A lot of players here have either grown up around it, played in it, being part of it. Everyone loves playing. No matter what we think, we just want this competition to be the best it can be. I don’t know what that looks like or what may happen in the future, but we love this. You love it more when it feels like a big event, it feels like a big deal, it’s in front of a lot of fans.” His team will face France on Saturday and then the Czech Republic on Sunday as they look to advance from their group and reach the knockout rounds. This is the second Davis Cup Finals since Kosmos, the investment group cofounded by the Barcelona defender Gerard Piqué, joined the ITF to run the Davis Cup in a partnership. The group stage of this year’s event is spread across Innsbruck, Turin and Madrid, where the final two rounds will be held. In Austria, matches will now be played behind closed doors due to the lockdown there. This is a positive period for Great Britain. Despite contesting their first tie without the presence of both Andy and Jamie Murray since 2013, they boast a deep, well-rounded squad across both singles and doubles. Cameron Norrie, the world No 12, heads the team while Dan Evans, ranked 25th, is the second highest-ranked second singles player in the competition. Among the doubles players, Joe Salisbury is now ranked third and Neal Skupski is 20th. Liam Broady, who has enjoyed the season of his life, rounds out the team. “Everyone is highly motivated, coming in on a wave of confidence,” said Broady. “We have not just excellent tennis players but an excellent staff behind us, as well, an excellent team. I just think everyone wants to be the best he can.”They Shall Not Grow Old was the title Peter Jackson gave to the first documentary he made, and he could have named his latest exactly the same way. Instead it is called Get Back, and while the earlier film restored archive footage of the young British men who fought the first world war, this new one – nearly eight hours long and making its debut in three parts this weekend – does the same for the young British men who conquered the world by more peaceful means; four of them to be precise, known for ever as the Beatles. Obsessives across the globe have had their anoraks zipped up in readiness for a while, eager to study the differences between the ninth and 13th take of Don’t Let Me Down, but the resonance of these films is not confined to muso aficionados alone. On the contrary, they have something to say to anyone interested in Britain and how it’s changed – and in the universal themes of friendship, creativity, regret, loss and time. The brightest light shed on Britain comes in the film’s climax: the famous rooftop concert on a cold January lunchtime in 1969. Part of the crew who had been filming the band over the preceding month, as they worked up material for what would become the Let it Be album, went into the streets below to interview Londoners who were hearing what was the first live Beatles performance for nearly three years. For a 2021 audience, it’s a revelation. The buildings of Savile Row are not all that different, but in every other respect, the past truly is another country. The vox pops show a London that is largely white, English-born and marked by a class divide that is wide and clear. There are men in suits, ties and bowler hats – disapproving of the disruption to business in the area – and cheeky-chappie cabbies giving an approving thumbs up. There are young women sharing their delight in a cockney accent that has all but vanished, and plummy ladies who lunch. What’s missing is the group that would dominate now: everyone in between. Statistically, Britain today is majority middle class; no one would have suggested such a thing then. It’s a jolt to realise this is the same country: we seem to have so little in common. In fact, one of the few points of connection between this place and that one – besides the Queen – is the Beatles. They listened to them then; we listen to them now. There’s a cheery optimism to the London of 1969, and the Beatles were surely part of that too. Yes, the postwar years had been humbling; the economic and political story was one of decline. But it was possible to cling to a mild form of British exceptionalism, at least in terms of popular culture. Because when it came to pop music, Britain really did lead the world. And yet, when you watch the Beatles in these films, it’s not the Britain of 1969 that you’re thinking about. That’s chiefly because the four somehow stand outside it, or rather ahead of it. They look so current, so fresh – John wearing trainers, George in baseball boots – they seem like visitors from the future, emissaries from 2021 who have somehow landed in the world of Bedford vans, Charles Hawtrey and the Daily Sketch. The modernity finds other expressions too. The form is contemporary: all that fly-on-the-wall footage, watching the dynamics of a group close up, suggests that to the long list of innovations credited to the Beatles, perhaps we should add an early form of reality TV. But the content of the conversations brims with modernity too. There’s an arrogant temptation to assume that it’s the current generation of men, in particular, that has acquired emotional intelligence, that the men of 50 years ago were strangers to empathy or self-awareness. But then you eavesdrop on John Lennon and Paul McCartney reflecting on how they have driven George Harrison to walk out. We’ve already seen it for ourselves in the film, the way the older two treat Harrison as a kid brother, failing to enthuse over songs he has tentatively brought to the group. “It’s a festering wound,” says Lennon, “and yesterday we allowed it to go even deeper. And we didn’t give him any bandages.” They say explicitly that, since the death of their manager, Brian Epstein, they’re missing a father figure. McCartney has stepped into the leadership vacuum but he knows that none of them likes it, including him: “I’m scared of me being the boss,” he says. On the well-worn topic of Yoko Ono’s constant presence, glued to Lennon as the band plays, McCartney is understanding rather than irritated. “They just want to be near each other,” he says, adding that it needn’t be “an obstacle, as long as we’re not trying to surmount it”. Indeed, Get Back serves in part as a study in male friendship. What you see on screen between John and Paul, especially when they play, is a chemistry that crackles as fiercely as any sexual or romantic attraction. The connection between the two is so intimate, the shared glances full of such understanding, that when they play Two of Us, you realise that the love that song celebrates is theirs – even if they didn’t know it. Which brings us to the music. There can be few truer expositions of the creative process than these films. Yes, it can be long and tedious and repetitive, going over the same ground again and again. Yes, it’s as much about hard work as innate talent – and the Beatles’ work ethic, returning to the studio to make a new record a matter of weeks after they had finished the “White Album”, is striking. But we also witness the miracle of the act of creation. Before your very eyes, McCartney’s random strums turn into Get Back: it’s like watching a chick hatch from a shell. All of this has great poignance, because we know what they don’t: that the concert on the roof will be their last performance together and that, a little over a decade later, John Lennon will be dead. Part of you is filled with regret: you want to urge the four of them to find a way to keep going, if only for a little longer; you pine for all the songs that went unwritten and unsung. And the larger part of you marvels at what these four people in their 20s did in little over six years: creating music that is truly timeless, in the sense not only that it will live on, but that much of it seems to exist outside time altogether. The finest Beatles melodies sound as if they are part of nature, as if they always existed and were only waiting to be picked up. This is why Jackson could once again have found his title in that same poem of war. Because even without his masterful digital effects, the Beatles will always be those four young men bursting with improbable talent. Age shall not weary them. • Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistUB40 have launched a series of maps celebrating Birmingham’s musical heritage that will be featured at every railway station across the city. Revealing the first of 30 specially commissioned works at Hall Green station as part of the Musical Routes project, the reggae group welcomed the installation that celebrates the underappreciated musical impact of the city. “Birmingham has been a cultural melting pot for generations and it’s made some very successful musicians of all different genres, but we’ve never celebrated it really. Birmingham has never blown its own trumpet,” said Robin Campbell, one of four founding members of the band at the official unveiling of the map. Speaking alongside fellow bandmates James Brown, Earl Falconer and Norman Hassan, as well as new vocalist Matt Doyle, he said: “It’s about time we shouted it from the rooftops because really we’re proud of our Birmingham heritage.” The maps celebrate Brummie artists including Ozzy Osbourne and Black Sabbath, the Beat, Laura Mvula, Joan Armatrading, Andy Hamilton, Jamelia, and Duran Duran. They also profile venues in the city such as the Que Club and Rum Runner. Jez Collins, director of Birmingham Music Archive, which produced the project, said: “I noticed that we didn’t celebrate or recognise the achievements of musicians from the city, so I wanted to challenge that narrative and say actually Birmingham is a city of music. Manchester, Liverpool, London, Glasgow – they have all recognised their music culture and we haven’t.” The wooden 3D maps, designed by local artists Bobbie-Jane Gardner and Claire Hartley and funded by West Midlands railway, each features a scannable code that links to a specially curated Spotify playlist featuring musicians from each area. Collins said the maps were the first stage of a wider project to celebrate the city’s musical heritage, which will culminate in the opening of Birmingham Music Museum in Digbeth in 2025. “If you don’t know about the things that have happened in your area, and you’re told that nothing of value ever comes from the place you live, you can stop and look at these maps,” said Collins. “Music culture resides everywhere and hopefully these maps will inspire people a little bit.” Adam Regan, director of Birmingham live music venue and club the Hare and Hounds, which hosted UB40’s first ever gig in 1979, said: “I think Brummies need to be cajoled into shouting about what they’re good at. There’s a lot of talent and music that has come from the region, and this will hopefully get people talking about it.” “Birmingham informed everything we do, we wouldn’t exist without Birmingham,” said UB40’s Brown. “The cultural mix of the band, the style of the music, all that is informed by the fact that we were brought up in the city of Brum.” “People are starting to recognise things more, we have a walk of fame here now and they’re starting to put benches in the city commemorating different artists,” said Campbell. “I think it’s wonderful, the more of that there is, the more we can celebrate it. And it’s about time too.”A popular French environmentalist and former government minister faces new allegations of rape and sexual abuse after several woman came forward in a TV documentary to testify that he had assaulted them. The claims come four years after Nicolas Hulot, 66, was first accused of rape by the granddaughter of the late Socialist president François Mitterrand. In an interview given just before the documentary was aired on Thursday, Hulot strenuously denied the accusations and accused the women of lying. He said he was withdrawing definitively from public life. The Paris public prosecutor, Laure Beccuau, on Friday announced a preliminary inquiry would be launched into the allegations. Whatever its findings, such an inquiry would not lead to any formal charges as the alleged events happened outside the time limit for prosecution. Four women, described as unknown to each other, claimed on Envoyé spécial that they had been assaulted by Hulot. Sylvia – who did not give her second name – broke down in tears as she described how Hulot forced her to perform oral sex in a vehicle in an open-air car park in May 1989 when she was 16. “I was young, I’d never done anything like that. I didn’t understand what he wanted,” she said. “I froze. I knew that what was happening shouldn’t be happening, that it was bad … I knew I was trapped and because I didn’t want to do what he was trying to make me do, I tried to lean back in the seat.” She recalled what she said were his last words to her as he dropped her off in Paris: “He said a phrase that that has haunted me for years, he said: ‘Redo your makeup a bit because people can see you’ve been doing something.’ That’s all he said to me. “I left, I didn’t know what had happened. Had I seduced him? Was it normal? Is that what adults do? I’ve kept this to myself for 30 years. I was a 16-year-old kid, he was Nicolas Hulot. Who was going to believe me?” Hulot stood as a presidential candidate in 2012 and later served as the ecology transition minister in Emmanuel Macron’s first government between 2017 and 2018. In 2018, when in his ministerial job, a magazine claimed he had raped the daughter of a high-profile figure, later revealed to be Pascale Mitterrand, the granddaughter of the late Socialist president. A few months later, Hulot resigned suddenly during a radio interview, citing a disagreement over the government’s environmental policy. Mitterrand, who was in contact with Envoyé spécial but did not appear in the documentary, alleged to police that Hulot had raped her in Corsica in 1997 when she was 19 and a trainee photographer with the SIPA agency, whose founder is a close friend of Hulot. Because the allegations were made out of the legal time limit, the investigation was closed. Hulot, who was questioned by investigators, admitted he had sex with Mitterrand but said it was consensual. He began defamation proceedings against the magazine, but later dropped the action. Another woman, named only as Cécile, claimed on Envoyé special that Hulot assaulted her in 1998 when she was 23 and was working at the French embassy in Moscow. She said she was sent to help Hulot – who told her he was a friend of the then president, Jacques Chirac – sort out a problem with customs officers when he arrived to make a documentary in Russia. Later she said she was in a taxi with Hulot when “he jumped on me, tried to kiss me”. She said: “I slapped him. I did what I could. My ‘no’ was very clear. I made it very clear I didn’t want sexual relations with that man.” Asked if she had envisaged making a police complaint then, she replied: “In Russia, in Moscow, against a friend of President Chirac. No, I didn’t even think of it. Of course not.” A third woman, Claire Nouvian, who worked on one of Hulot’s shows, was warned to avoid being alone with the presenter and to lock her cabin door at night when they were out in a boat filming in Costa Rica. She said two or three people had advised her: “Avoid situations where you are alone with him. If you’re working, it’s in the hotel restaurant, not in your room. When you are on the boat, lock your cabin at night. Don’t open if he knocks on your door at night, pretend to be asleep.” The film shoot passed without incident but she added: “There was an ecosystem around this personality that allowed this abuse.” A fourth woman who worked with Hulot, but spoke anonymously, said he had suddenly grabbed her and “kissed me fully on the mouth” after a production meeting in 2001. Hulot refused to speak to Envoyé spécial on camera, but told the programme in a telephone call: “You know very well that it will be word against word … and today the word of women is sacred. I have never in my life coerced anyone into anything. Never, neither by hand nor by force.”Jeremy Corbyn’s supporters expect him to stand as an independent in Islington North at the next general election if he is not allowed to represent the Labour party – and believe he would have a good chance of winning. Keir Starmer has said Corbyn, his predecessor as Labour leader, may not be able to stand as a Labour candidate in the constituency he has represented since 1983 unless the party whip is restored after it was suspended amid a row over antisemitism. With a general election unlikely until at least 2023, no decision has been taken by Corbyn. But backers now expect him to follow the example of Ken Livingstone, who stood as London mayor in 2000 despite not having been selected to run for Labour. Corbyn won the seat with 63.4% of the vote in 2019 and a thumping majority of 26,188. His supporters believe he would be able to win despite having had the party whip removed, and would likely be joined in the campaign by members who have drifted away from Labour under Starmer’s leadership. On Friday, Starmer said he had not spoken to Corbyn in more than a year and repeated his insistence that the ball was in his predecessor’s court when it came to having the whip restored. Asked whether it was likely Corbyn would not be able to stand as a Labour candidate, Starmer replied: “I don’t know, but at the moment that may be the case.” Speaking on the BBC’s Political Thinking podcast, Starmer added: “He’s not got the whip at the moment, so he’ll be able to run, but wouldn’t be able to as a Labour MP. It’s up to him … he knows what he must do in order to move this forward. He’s not chosen to do so – that’s his choice.” The Labour leader said he and Corbyn had not spoken together since the publication of the Equality and Human Rights Commission report into antisemitism in the party in October 2020. Corbyn was suspended from Labour after he said antisemitism in the party was “overstated” following the publication of the report. His suspension was lifted by the party’s national executive committee after he issued a conciliatory statement clarifying his remarks, but Starmer ordered that the Labour whip be withheld from him, in effect suspending him from the parliamentary party. The Labour leader’s refusal to readmit Corbyn as an MP prompted a furious backlash from leftwingers including Diane Abbott, John McDonnell and Richard Burgon, who accused Starmer of jeopardising party unity. Corbyn has been threatening legal action over Starmer’s decision. He believes his suspension was handled unfairly and was the object of political interference. Court backlogs mean it may be some time before the case is heard even if he does proceed. In January, Corbyn lost a legal fight to force Labour to hand over documents that his lawyers believed would help him show that an agreement to fully readmit him to the party following his suspension had been reneged upon. Labour denied in court that any such deal existed. Starmer, who repeatedly promised during his leadership campaign to tackle antisemitism, also told Political Thinking he hoped Luciana Berger, a Jewish MP who left the party over its handling of antisemitism cases during Corbyn’s tenure, would want to rejoin.A Canadian asset management company has abandoned the sale of one of the UK’s biggest ports operators that is embroiled in a legal battle with a close ally of Boris Johnson. The Toronto-based Brookfield Asset Management had put PD Ports up for sale in the summer, but said it had decided to call off the auction. The company owns 12 ports and distribution sites across the UK, including Teesport in north-east England. The South Tees Development Corporation (STDC), which is run by the Tees Valley combined authority and headed by the authority’s Conservative mayor, Ben Houchen, had been bidding for the ports company, and had recruited a number of backers, including the UK’s Pension Insurance Corporation. The decision to call off the sale is a blow to Houchen’s regeneration plans. He wanted to take control of PD Ports’ Teesport site, which is part of a plan for a government-backed freeport under Johnson’s “levelling up” agenda. STDC, which owns the land around the adjacent Teesworks site, has sued PD Ports in an attempt to stop it using two of three access routes into Teesport. The port company in May accused the STDC of using the lawsuit “to extract a ransom discount” to enable it to buy the business at a lower price. Houchen and STDC have denied this. The auction had also reportedly attracted interest from Peel Ports, another large UK port operator, which is controlled by the billionaire John Whittaker, and the Australian investment bank Macquarie. Brookfield has owned PD Ports for 12 years. The news of the aborted sale was first reported by the Financial Times. A Brookfield spokesperson said: “PD Ports is a great business that has performed very well under Brookfield’s ownership and continues to have exceptional long-term growth prospects. “The recent process has strengthened our conviction in the business, and we have made the decision to remain invested in PD Ports rather than sell the asset. We look forward to continued partnership with the management team as they execute the growth strategy for the business.” Brookfield had reportedly hoped to get as much as £2bn for PD Ports, but offers of £1.1bn to £1.4bn were more likely, after the trading performance of the ports operator worsened. Teesport is the fifth largest port in Britain by tonnage and considered the gateway to northern England. It is next to the Teesworks redevelopment site, which has been given low-tax freeport status after the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, unveiled further “levelling up” plans in the March budget designed to improve the economic prospects of communities across the UK. Houchen, who was re-elected mayor of Tees Valley in May, and is a key ally of the prime minister, has pledged to create thousands of jobs by demolishing the SSI steelworks – which went bust in October 2015 – and transforming the area into a green energy hub. A successful bid for Teesport would have advanced his plans.For four days this week Karwan Tahir shared a tent in the woods around Dunkirk with a young man named Karim. In the early hours of Wednesday morning Karim set off for the UK – a journey in darkness to the nearby beach, and from there into the vast and uncertain Channel in a flimsy dinghy. “I don’t know if he made it or if he drowned,” Tahir said on Friday, showing off the living space he and Karim had briefly shared. “He didn’t come back. I only knew he came from [Iraqi] Kurdistan, like me. We met at the camp. He knew I spoke English and so he invited me to share his tent. “Now it’s mine,” he added. Karim’s last known location was a sprawling encampment of shelters on the outskirts of Grande-Synthe, next to a bridge and a canal. The camp is home to several hundred people, almost all Kurds from Iraq. Most probably the 27 people who died in the icy waters on Wednesday had lived and slept here before they set off on their final journey. Precise information, however, is hard to come by. In this makeshift community, people look out for each other, but apart from family or buddy groups, relations are temporary and transient. Although everybody has a mobile phone to be in touch with family and friends, firm information about the dead is hard to come by. Grieving relatives will probably be back at home. It does not pay to ask too many questions. The atmosphere changes after dark, when deals are struck and the Kurdish mafia who run smuggling operations are present. According to local aid workers, a 23-year-old Iraqi Kurd was shot twice in the leg on Wednesday after an argument, and was taken by ambulance to hospital. A smuggler is said to have opened fire after the man refused to get on a boat, hours after news spread that 29 people had died. He had paid £1,500 – half his fee – with the other £1,500 promised once he had landed in the UK. It is not clear if Karim was among the 17 men who drowned, together with seven women – one of them pregnant – and three children, or if he made it to Dover. Tahir showed off the lifejacket he had bought in anticipation of his own crossing – “it cost me €35 [about £30]”, he said – as well as a cuddly tiger left by a newly departed family. Tahir described the tortuous journey that had taken him to the north coast of France. He said he had left the Kurdish city of Sulaymaniyah a month ago and then flew from Dubai to the Belarus capital, Minsk. He reached the EU border with help from Belarusian border guards who showed him where to cross, he said. From Poland he travelled by car to northern France. The trip so far had cost £12,000, he said, including £3,000 paid to smugglers upfront for his forthcoming boat trip. Most of those camping out in the rain and mud are young, unaccompanied men but there are a few families, too. One small boy, Muhammad, was playing with a plastic helicopter under a tarpaulin, next to an open log fire built by his father, Adil. Adil’s wife, Sarah, and baby son, Malik, sheltered in a tent. The camp is grim and rubbish-strewn, with no toilets or running water. Charities provide clothes and food. Despite Wednesday’s tragedy, many of those camping here said they were still determined to reach the UK. Sokar Mawlud, 20, from the Iraqi city of Kirkuk, admitted the bad weather made the journey even more perilous and he was “stuck”. He was intending to go to London with his brother Sarhand, 13, and their mother, Shawbo, 42. Mawlud’s odyssey has been a long one. He said he left Iraq in 2015 and spent six years in the German city of Nuremberg, going to school, before he was forced to leave and put on a flight to Turkey. From there he tracked back to France. Why the UK? “My sister lives there. She’s a hairdresser,” he said. He thought he knew one of the people who had drowned, but was not sure. On Thursday Mawlud and his family headed for Loon-Plage, the beach west of Dunkirk from where the 29 victims are believed to have set off. A boat was waiting. They turned back, Mawlud said, after spotting a French police patrol on the sands. “It’s dangerous, actually. The smugglers buy a dinghy meant for 20 people and then cram 50 people on board.” On Loon-Plage there were haunting signs of the migrants who had left. A collapsed dinghy lay amid the dunes; further along, against a backdrop of Dunkirk’s busy port with its cranes and smoke, was another abandoned dinghy, made by the German firm MaRe Boote. Nearby was a red lifejacket and a left shoe, half filled with sand. Its owner’s fate was unknown. Most of those camped around Calais and Dunkirk have some family connection with Britain – uncles, siblings, friends. Others said they had learned from social media that it was easy to get a job. Tahir said he had lived in Bury St Edmunds for seven years, working in Pizza Express, and had gone home to Iraq in 2006, thinking his country was safe. “A mistake,” he said. Nationalities tend to clump together in different camps along the Nord-Pas de Calais coast. Akhmed Wikky, 21, was one of a handful of Afghans who had ended up in Grande-Synthe, a suburb of Dunkirk. He said he left Afghanistan five months ago on foot from his home in the city of Mazar-i-Sharif. By the time he reached Turkey in August, the Taliban had seized his hometown and the capital, Kabul. What would he do now? “My brother lives in Luton. I’ll try and join him there. If I can’t, my plan B is to stay and learn French,” he said. The bigger politics of the migrant crisis, he said, had passed him by. “I’m not a drug dealer, or a terrorist, or a bad man. I just want my human rights,” he said. “My ambition is to study in the UK. I would like to be a town planner”.Well, that was exciting, wasn’t it! That’s all from today’s blog. Thanks for reading and enjoy the weekend. Wales v Scotland head-to-heads: Again, completely riding cavalier over the chances of Austria and Ukraine, this is how Wales and Scotland have fared in recent(ish) meetings. 2013 Scotland 1-2 Wales (Fifa World Cup) 2012 Wales 2-1 Scotland (Fifa World Cup) 2011 Wales 1-3 Scotland (Nations Cup) 2009 Wales 3-0 Scotland (Friendly) 2004 Wales 4-0 Scotland (Friendly) 1997 Scotland 0-1 Wales (Friendly) So, Wales have won five of the last six! Then again, when they play in 2022 it will be nine years since their previous meeting. Here’s our story of the 2022 play-off draw with a nice picture of the World Cup trophy and a hot graphic. World Cup play-off draw: A reminder of the spoilsports who could ruin the Wales v Scotland showdown. Wales v Austria Austria finished third behind Scotland in Group F but qualified for the play-offs through the Nations League. Austria drew 2-2 at Hampden before a Lyndon Dykes penalty was enough to earn Scotland victory in Vienna in September. Wales enjoyed identical results against Austria in the 2018 World Cup qualifiers. The Austrians, captained by Real Madrid’s David Alaba, took Italy to extra-time in the last 16 of Euro 2020. Scotland v Ukraine Ukraine reached the Euro 2020 quarter-finals before running out of steam against England after an epic victory over Sweden at Hampden. They finished a point above Finland in the qualifiers to seal runners-up spot behind France, going through the group undefeated after winning twice and drawing six times. Andriy Shevchenko left his job as head coach after the Euros to go to Genoa – acting head coach Oleksandr Petrakov has a decade of experience in coaching international youth football with his country. 2022 World Cup play-off draw dates: Plenty of Wales and Scotland fans are no doubt checking their diaries for the final. Then again, so will respective opponents Austria and Ukraine. All four will surely be delighted to have avoided Italy and Portugal. An extra spring in the step for Welsh fans knowing that they’ll have home advantage if reaching the final. Semi-finals: Thursday, March 24 Finals: Tuesday, March 29 Home advantage draw made... Path A Wales/Austria v Scotland/Ukraine Path B Russia/Poland v Sweden/Czech Republic Path C Portugal/Turkey v Italy/North Macedonia So, Italy are up against it. If they do come through their semi, they’d have to play the final away, most likely in Portugal. If it goes wrong, they’d miss out on the finals for the second World Cup running. Unthinkable really! A final key note from the draw... If Wales and Scotland do meet in the Path A final, Robert Page’s men would have home advantage! That could be massive. World Cup draw: Of course, Portugal being drawn against Euro 2020 champions Italy in Path C guarantees a big player won’t make it to the 2022 finals. In fact, both could miss out if failing to come through their semi-finals. Wales v Scotland! This may get a few airings over the next few months. Full World Cup play-off draw... Let’s fill in the opponents: Path A Semi-final 1: Scotland v Ukraine Semi-final 2: Wales v Austria Path B Semi-final 3: Russia v Poland Semi-final 4: Sweden v Czech Republic Path C Semi-final 5: Italy v North Macedonia Semi-final 6: Portugal v Turkey World Cup play-off draw... Path A Semi-final 1: Scotland v ? Semi-final 2: Wales v ? Path B Semi-final 3: Russia v ? Semi-final 4: Sweden v ? Path C Semi-final 5: Italy v ? Semi-final 6: Portugal v ? Wowzers. Scotland and Wales are drawn in the same Path so will meet if both win their semis against still to be determined opponents. Rod Stewart overlooked so the draw is being made by Thiago, Lothar Matthaus and Christian Karembeu. World Cup play-off draw: It’s the usual long, drawn out build-up. What the heck, I may as well put up some Alan while we wait. World Cup play-off opponents: A quick guide from the PA Media, showing the six teams Scotland and Wales could face: Austria: Finished third behind Scotland in Group F but qualified for the play-offs through the Nations League. Austria drew 2-2 at Hampden before a Lyndon Dykes penalty was enough to earn Scotland victory in Vienna in September. Wales enjoyed identical results against Austria in the 2018 World Cup qualifiers. The Austrians, captained by Real Madrid’s David Alaba, took Italy to extra-time in the last 16 of Euro 2020. Czech Republic: Familiar foes for both home nations, the Czechs finished third in Wales’ qualifying group, again after a 2-2 draw and a 1-0 victory for Rob Page’s team. They qualified via the Nations League after pipping Scotland to top spot in Group B2 after Steve Clarke’s men lost their final two matches. Although Scotland beat them home and away in that section, the Czechs won 2-0 at Hampden in the Euros. North Macedonia: Possibly the favoured opponents for Scotland and Wales fans on first glance, but they beat Romania to second place in their group after beating Germany 2-1 in Duisburg in March. It was Germany’s first World Cup qualifying defeat since their 5-1 thrashing by England 20 years earlier. Coached by Igor Angelovski for six years, North Macedonia lost all three games at Euro 2020 but their only defeat in seven qualifiers this season came against Germany in Skopje and they sealed their play-off spot with a 3-1 win over Iceland. Poland: Held England to a draw in Warsaw in finishing behind Gareth Southgate’s men in the qualifiers, before defeat in their final game against Hungary cost them a potential seeded spot. With eight goals, Robert Lewandowski is only behind Harry Kane and Memphis Depay in the European qualifying goalscoring charts. The Poles held Spain to a draw in the European Championship finals either side of defeats to Slovakia and Sweden. Turkey: Lost 2-0 to Wales in the Euro 2020 finals and conceded seven goals in all while going down to Italy and Switzerland as well. They finished above Norway in Group G thanks to a flying start which saw them net a total of seven goals in opening wins over the Netherlands and the Norwegians. They fell to a 6-1 defeat in Amsterdam in September but played with 10 men for half of the match. Ukraine: Reached the Euro 2020 quarter-finals before running out of steam against England after an epic victory over Sweden at Hampden. They finished a point above Finland in the qualifiers to seal runners-up spot behind France, going through the group undefeated after winning twice and drawing six times. Andriy Shevchenko left his job as head coach after the Euros to go to Genoa – acting head coach Oleksandr Petrakov has a decade of experience in coaching international youth football with his country. World Cup play-off dates: So, when does all this take place? A little while yet. Semi-finals: Thursday, March 24 Finals: Tuesday, March 29 World Cup play-off draw: We’re getting nearer! Pot 1: Italy, Portugal, Russia, Scotland, Sweden, Wales Pot 2: Austria, Czech Republic, North Macedonia, Poland, Turkey, Ukraine The six Pot 1 teams will be drawn at home against a Pot 2 rival in the play-off semi-finals. Then, it goes a little Alan Partridge 1994 World Cup draw. Semi-finals 1 and 2 make up play-off Path A Semi-finals 3 and 4 make up play-off Path B Semi-finals 5 and 6 make up play-off Path C To determine which semi-final winner will play at home in the final, an additional draw will be held for each path. So, with a bit of luck, Scotland and Wales get a home draw in the final too! From email: Peter Oh has a tongue twister. “The caption beneath the photo of the embracing Belgium and Portugal stars (14:55) should spark the inspiration for a screenplay. Yes, a Rom-Ron-com! Better yet - if the story involves a heist - a Rom-Ron-con-com. And, action! Good thinking Peter! Perhaps we can adapt this for the opening title sequence... Liverpool v Southampton. Time for a match preview. Read it and then watch Thiago’s goal on a loop for 20 minutes. Does it touch the ground? I’m in the ‘no’ camp with the cool kids. In my mind, Bryan Robson is taller than both Wayne Rooney and Sir Alex. Maybe not. Manchester City v West Ham: Hammers boss David Moyes hopes Michail Antonio can give City plenty to think about in Sunday’s clash at the Etihad. The Jamaican striker was rested against Rapid Vienna on Thursday but will return to action for the trip to Manchester. City go into the game having beaten a PSG side containing Lionel Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappe in midweek. Moyes said: “Mich will probably cause them different problems than Messi would do, but I think Manchester City have shown exactly what they are. “Everybody is trying to aspire to play like Man City, be at their level, but that takes time, you cannot do that immediately. “Even Manchester City have not done it immediately, they have taken a long period over it, but they have got a great team and great manager as well.” “We have challenged the top teams. We got a result against Liverpool, so I want to see if we can compete against them and make things difficult for the big sides.” Opta: West Ham are averaging 5.1 shots on target per game in the Premier League this season, their most in a single campaign in the competition since 2000-01 (5.3). World Cup play-off draw: Less than an hour away until we find out who Wales and Scotland will play in the semi-finals. Pot 1: Italy, Portugal, Russia, Scotland, Sweden, Wales Pot 2: Austria, Czech Republic, North Macedonia, Poland, Turkey, Ukraine The six Pot 1 teams will be drawn at home against a Pot 2 rival. More on this later, folks. Serie A: Some news from Italy where Milan head coach Stefano Pioli has signed a contract extension until June 2023. (From PA Media): The 56-year-old former Inter and Lazio boss, whose appointment was fiercely opposed by Rossoneri fans in October 2019, has reinvigorated the ailing club. Pioli has returned Milan to the Champions League and they are currently level on points with Napoli at the top of Serie A. The Italian told the club website: “I want to thank the club for having given me the chance to coach a competitive team and one that is replete with great values, which must never go missing and which make AC Milan special. “I’m proud of the work we’ve done until now, with the good relationship I have with the management, with the growth of my players and with the passion displayed by everyone working at this incredible club. “Our fans are extraordinary and I hope to return their affection by making AC Milan more and more competitive.” Crystal Palace v Aston Villa: A low-key fixture last season has some extra gloss with Patrick Vieira and Steven Gerrard now the two opposing managers. They met nine times in the Premier League as players (Gerrard four wins, Vieira two wins and two draws you’re counting) but how will they fare when the duel moves to the dugout? Here’s Viera going down memory lane: “I think we really enjoyed playing against each other. Every single game we played against Liverpool was a tough challenge because of Steven Gerrard. “He was a real leader, a real captain and was one of the best players in that position. He was part of those players who changed the role of the holding midfielder. “Every game against Liverpool, I remember some like the (2001) final in the FA Cup that we lost but we had some games where we got the result so some good games.” Palace head into the game unbeaten in seven Premier League matches and yet to taste defeat at home. Vice-captain James McArthur remains unavailable due to a hamstring injury. Striking stats: Talking of Lukaku and Chelsea v Manchester United, here are some some surprising revelations from the Opta stats gang. Cristiano Ronaldo scored in the 2008 Champions League final against Chelsea while who can forget Lukaku’s hat-trick for West Brom against Man Utd in that bonkers 5-5 draw? Well, file both under outliers. Lukaku has only scored in one of his 11 Premier League appearances against Manchester United, netting a hat-trick as a substitute for West Brom in Sir Alex Ferguson’s final game in charge of the Red Devils in May 2013. In all competitions, Man Utd’s Cristiano Ronaldo has scored just one goal in 15 appearances against Chelsea, doing so in the 2008 Champions League final. The Blues are the side he’s faced the most without ever scoring against in top-flight football (10 games). Chelsea v Manchester United: Some home team news for Sunday’s ‘big one’. With Ben Chilwell out, Marcos Alonso looks set to come in at left wing-back although Callum Hudson-Odoi has impressed in wide roles. N’Golo Kante is likely to miss out through a minor knee issue. Tuchel explained: “N’Golo twisted his knee a little bit against Juventus, and feels quite better since the game but seems like he will be out for some days. It’s a matter of days, one week maybe. “We still have a little bit of hopes but it will be almost a miracle if he makes it, so we think about a week.” And Romelu Lukaku? Tuchel has some doubts. “Romelu is in training, and if you ask the player he will say ‘yes I can start for sure’. But there is a bit of difference between ready for training and ready for games, then there’s a difference between being ready for games and ready for Premier League games. “The possibility that he starts is not very high, because we can’t be sure what happens in between matches. “We have to find the balance between giving him minutes and being absolutely competitive with the guys who start.” Pep on Raheem Sterling: The Manchester City boss also has some nice words for Raheem Sterling, who has taken advantage of a return to the team by scoring in three of City’s last four games. Guardiola said: “I’m so glad for him, he’s helped us for sure. He will fight to be better and better. “It is important for strikers and wingers to score and make assists. He was decisive and this is the first step for him to come back.” Here’s a fun Opta stat which suggests Sterling has a decent case to start against West Ham: Raheem Sterling has been involved in 11 goals in his last eight Premier League games against West Ham (6 goals, 5 assists) Manchester City v West Ham: Next on stage is Pep Guardiola and he brings some hot team news for Sunday’s home game. The good news: Jack Grealish and Phil Foden are set to return. “They are getting better but we will train tomorrow and see how they feel.” The bad news: Kevin De Bruyne remains unavailable as he continues to isolate following a positive Covid-19 test. Pep: “He’s a little tired, had no (sense of) taste, the symptoms you have (with coronavirus). “Now he’s done six or seven days (isolation), so in a few more days he will do a PCR test and if negative he will come back.” As for Ralf Rangnick being the new boss at neighbours United, Guardiola batted that one away. “It’s not confirmed, it’s speculation,” he said. “He did an incredible job at Red Bull Leipzig and Salzburg. He has experience in Germany that is well known but I have never met him.” Ben Chilwell: There were fears that the Chelsea and England left-back could miss the rest of the season after suffering a knee injury in the 4-0 win over Juventus. But Blues boss Thomas Tuchel says he believes surgery can be avoided and that could mean a return for Chilwell in just six weeks. “Ben has a partial injury of his ACL and the decision is to treat it conservatively,” said Tuchel. “And the next six weeks will tell the story actually if he makes it and if he will be fully available after the six weeks, or if he needs surgery after that. “Right now I only care about the six weeks, we are very positive because the first redaction of his body is very positive. “Hopefully it stays like this so now the full focus of everybody is on the next six weeks, to try to bring him back to play. “It’s a very responsible decision, so there’s no rush, no pressure.” Leicester v Watford: It’s the ‘Claudio Ranieri’ derby on Sunday as the Foxes’ title-winning boss returns to the club with his latest act, Watford. Then again, his counterpart may view this as the ‘Brendan Rodgers’ derby given that he was previously manager at Watford. Anyway, here’s Brendan paying respect to the man who somehow pulled off at 5,000/1 coup. “As well as winning the Premier League it would be the feeling, the feeling the team gave not only Leicester supporters but those around the world,” said Rodgers. “What that gave was the hope that it can be done and it’s possible to do it. That gave belief not just to Leicester but to every club. “To see him win his first title as a manager was special as well. He will always be held in the highest regard here. “Just watching the whole story and the joy it gave people, it was a special, iconic, season. In any sport it is probably one of the greatest that ever was. “That story is iconic and his association with Leicester, they have a bond forever. “The supporters will always be eternally thankful to him and everything he did that season. That experience in isolation was incredible, I don’t think anyone expected Leicester to win the league.” Rodgers is also wary of the current threat. “With Claudio’s teams they are always organised and he is an incredibly experienced manager but they will know taking a team here will be a difficult game. “They have good players, especially on counter attack, and from what I have seen they have been pretty direct and look to be organised when they haven’t got the ball.” As for Leicester team news, Jamie Vardy returns after being rested for Thursday’s 3-1 Europa League win over Legia Warsaw which lifted them to the top of Group C. Rodgers hopes defender Jonny Evans will be fit after pulling out of the game when suffering a thigh issue in the warm-up. More from Carrick: Further updates from the Manchester United press conference and here’s Carrick on the confidence gleaned from their 2-0 win at Villarreal on Tuesday. “It was a big boost and a much-needed win for lots of reasons. First and foremost for the players to have that feeling again, there’s a bit of confidence, a bit of belief that I’m sure they lost. “It’s another massive game for us. These are the ones you’ve got to enjoy, you’ve got to embrace, testing yourself against a team that’s playing very well.” And here he is on whether the current squad could adapt to a new style; that’s relevant with Rangnick credited with influencing the pressing tactics adopted by fellow Germans Klopp and Tuchel. “I think you can get ideas across quite quickly. History shows that. Sometimes it’s not just about ideas, it’s just a different voice, a freshness, and history proves that for whatever reason. Sometimes it works really well, sometimes not so well. “That’s the nature of life and we’ll see what happens in the days to come. “There are lots of different styles in football. We’ve got a good group of players. Whoever comes in I’m sure they can adapt. There’s real talent and good people, good human beings in the squad so we’ll look forward to what’s ahead.” Chelsea v Man Utd: Michael Carrick plays a stout forward defensive when the press bowl some Ralf Rangnick at him. Quick aside: have we ever seen the managerial baton pass from one ‘ick’ to another? One for The Knowledge maybe. Anyway, here’s Carrick on Rangnick: “From my point of view there’s a lot of speculation and reports, but as I’m sitting here now I’m preparing the team for the game (against Chelsea on Sunday). “My head’s in the game. I haven’t got any more news to share with you on that front. I’m just looking forward to getting down to London to play against Chelsea.” Thanks Barry. I’ll open my set with some Michael Carrick stuff. That’s all from me. David Tindall is taking up the cudgels for the rerst of the afternoon, with Wales and Scotland due to find out who they’ll be meeting in the World Cup play-off semi-finals at 4pm (GMT). Thanks for your time and have a great weekend. Liverpool v Southampton: Andy Robertson and Kostas Tsimikas have been duking it out for first dibs on the Liverpool left-back position this season, with the 25-year-old Greek having impressed whenever he has been given a chance. “People constantly forget how good Robbo is just because Kostas is good as well - thank god he’s good as well,” said Klopp. “It’s much better than it was before when we had no real solution and Milly [James Milner] had to play there. Now we have different solutions, which is good. “We have many prospects but I don’t down Robbo. We shared the intensity between the games between the two of them and really happy about the development. Really happy. “But Robbo is Robbo. An outstanding player. If he has had drops in performance, it hasn’t changed my mind because you cannot trust people today and then not trust them the next days.” Liverpool v Southampton: Jurgen Klopp and “the Austrian Jurgen Klopp” will be in adjacent dug-outs when Liverpool host Southampton tomorrow afternoon. The German version of himself has been talking to the press about his former mentor Ralf Rangnick and Thiago Alcantar’s midweek purler against Porto, among other things ... On Manchester United’s soon-to-be-appointed new interim manager, Ralf Rangnick: “I know him - but usually we don’t talk about things that are not confirmed yet,” he said. “If you tell me that will happen, I might believe you. Yeah... another good German is coming to England, so that’s how it is. “He’s a really experienced manager and built, famously, two clubs from nowhere into proper threats in German. He’s done a lot of different jobs but his first concern was always being a coach, actually. He’s very well regarded in Germany - and rightly so.” On Thiago: “Thiago is an outstanding player,” he said. “We have found solutions when he was not available, it’s not about one player out or in. The quality of team, when the midfielders are fit, we have an incredible choice. Thiago has a very specific skill set, absolutely. It’s very helpful on the pitch when he has rhythm, so we have to make sure he gains rhythm but not over do it.” On the threat of Southampton: “Ralph [Hasenhuttl] is obviously doing well, building a proper team there for each game and especially when they expect not to have the majority of possession,” he said. “They are really well organised, I have to say. Very well drilled team and you have to be creative to break them down. They don’t concede a lot of goals, a lot of shots on target. So, that’s one of the issues we have to find solutions for. It’s a home and I hope we really use that, enjoy that because that will be essential.” The Paris Saint-Germain sporting director, Leonardo, has insisted that the club have not met with Zinedine Zidane and remain behind the manager, Mauricio Pochettino. Our chief football correspondent David Hytner reports ... Brentford v Everton: Thomas Frank has been singing the praises of his Everton counterpart Rafael Benitez ahead of the meeting between their two sides in West London on Sunday afternoon. Everton travel to the capital hoping to end a erun of poor form that has seen them take just two points from the past 18 available. Brentford have endured troubles of their own following a bright start to the season, taking a point last weekend against Newcastle to halt a run of four consecutive defeats. “Any manager that manages more than 1000 games is a great manager,” said Frank. “When you’ve done it in several different countries with top clubs across the world, that speaks for itself. He is a brilliant manager and one of the best in the world. “They will see this as an opportunity to get three points; that’s what every manager should think going into the next game. I am more focused on what we can do. It is very important that our approach is front-footed, aggressive and brave. “We just do what we do; we train well, we prepare well, and we take the next opponent. It is important to be pretty level and consistent; we don’t speak it up or down too much.” Brighton v Leeds United: Leeds travel to the Amex Stadium for tomorrow’s evening kick-off and Marcelo Bielsa has been talking to the press before his team’s journey south. Asked if he is considering repurposing Kalvin Phillips as a central defender following his excellent performance against Tottenham last weekend, Bielsa insisted that the England international is most effective as a deep-lying midfielder in front of his defenders. “At Leeds, his natural position will be at defensive midfielder,” he said. “That’s the place where you most see Kalvin’s qualities. Of course, I will try to ensure he plays the majority of his minutes in that position.” Bielsa said he employed Phillips as one of three centre-backs, alongside Liam Cooper and Diego Llorente, to specifically deal with the threat posed by Kane and Tottenham strike partner Son Heung-min. “Our best player in the game against Tottenham,” said Bielsa. “He was our best player in the moments that corresponded with him playing alongside Cooper and Llorente, following Kane when he dropped deep. “We had talked about thinking who could adapt best to Kane dropping deep and it was Phillips. It’s a method that’s very clear in Tottenham. Kane drops and does the diagonal [pass] from the left to the centre. “We resolved that with Phillips and Llorente paired up with those two players [Kane and Son Heung-min] and with Cooper waiting as the free man. That worked very well. From my point of view, the best of Phillips, you will find it when he plays in the middle of the pitch. With respect to his position in the national team, it doesn’t correspond for me to have an opinion.” Bielsa has been unable to play his strongest line-up for most of this season due to injuries, but is boosted by the return of Raphinha and Rodrigo for Saturday’s evening kick-off at Brighton. Two points above the relegation zone, Leeds will still be without striker Patrick Bamford as they chase just their third Premier League win of the season, but Jamie Shackleton is also back in contention. Defenders Luke Ayling (knee) and Robin Koch (pelvis) continue to work their way back following surgery. Bielsa added: “The injuries are not one of the reasons why we are there and of course it worries me, the position we occupy in the table. “I’m in charge of a group of footballers to warrant, to deserve to be in a higher position. The club has trusted in me and one of the aspects that shows this confidence is what they pay me to do this job. Of course, these results I am offering are not what’s expected.” Arsenal v Newcastle United: Arsenal boss Mikel Arteta has no new selection issues ahead of Saturday’s Premier League clash. The Spaniard has also been boosted by the news that midfielder Granit Xhaka could return before the end of the year after making good progress in his recovery from a knee ligament injury. However, Bosnia and Herzegovina defender Sead Kolasinac remains sidelined with an ankle problem picked up on international duty earlier this month. Newcastle striker Dwight Gayle is a doubt for the trip to the Emirates Stadium with a hamstring injury. Gayle will be assessed after resuming light training on Thursday, but could join defender Paul Dummett (calf) on the sidelines. As reported earlier, head coach Eddie Howe will be in the dugout after returning a negative Covid-19 test, and he faces a decision over whether to restore keeper Martin Dubravka to the starting line-up following his return from a foot problem in place of Karl Darlow, who endured a difficult afternoon in last Saturday’s 3-3 draw with Brentford. Crystal Palace v Aston Villa: “He certainly hasn’t surprised me, I was a huge fan from afar,” said Steve Gerrard of Ollie Watkins, who scored a beauty in Villa’s win over Brighton last weekend. “It was no surprise to me he got a big move to Aston Villa. In the ten days that we have worked together his standards and application have been top. He’s asking questions which I like because he wants to make sure he’s doing the right thing.” On tomorrow’s opponents: ““They have been very creative and a lot of variety in their forward play,” he said. “They have recruited very well and Selhurst Park is always a hard place to go. This game is about us and we go there with confidence and belief that we can take something from the game.” Premier League clubs will come together between between 27 November and 2 December to celebrate the latest Rainbow Laces campaign and show support for all LGBT+ people in football and beyond. Steven Gerrard was asked about the scheme during his press conference earlier today. “I think the message is very important,” he said. “The club works extremely hard in the background to support a lot of campaigns, I know they work very closely with Villa &amp; Proud [LGBTQ+ Supporters’ Network]. “I know they do fantastic work and in the coming weeks and months I’m going to be sitting down with a lot of people and educating myself on all the good work that goes on here.” Manchester United: The club’s new interim manager, a mentor to Jurgen Klopp and Thomas Tuchel, honed his coaching philosophy on his rise from Germany’s sixth tier to the Champions League Norwich City v Wolves: With Norwich City seeking an unlikely third win on the bounce, Dean Smith was in upbeat mood ahead of tomorrow’s game at Carrow Road. “There’s a growing belief in the group after back-to-back wins,” he said. “Wolves are in good form, it will be a tough game for us. We’re at home again and if the second half atmosphere last Saturday is anything to go by, Carrow Road will be a tough place to come. “It’s a very welcoming place for myself and Craig [Shakespeare], from board level all the way throughout the club. It’s been a really nice start to what I hope will be a long career here.” On what attracted him to the job so quickly after his departure from Aston Villa: “I wanted to know there was stability at the club before coming here,” he said. “I’m looking forward to enhancing the relationship I’ve got with Stuart [Webber, Norwich CEO] already.” On tomorrow’s game: “Bruno is a really good coach. They lost the first three games but I looked at the statistics because I’m a bit of a geek with data, and their data was really good. It was only a matter of time before they turned results around.” Leicester v Legia Warsaw: Leicestershire Police have confirmed eight officers were injured and the same number of people were arrested during disorder at last night’s Europa League match at the King Power Stadium. Police clashed with travelling fans during the game, which Leicester City won 3-1 to leave them a point away from qualification for the knockout stages. Arsenal v Newcastle: Eddie Howe has been cleared to travel to the Emirates with Newcastle tomorrow after a spell in quarantine but his assistant coach Jason Tindall was in charge of talking to the media this morning ahead of the squad’s trip to the Big Smoke. “In terms of training, the lads have worked extremely hard, and there has been a constant dialogue with the manager,” he told reporters. “You want your leader and manager here with you, so we’ve missed him as staff and I’m sure the players have missed him on the grass and on the sidelines. We are certainly looking forward to having him back and I’m sure the fans will want him on the touchline.” Asked how Newcastle will set up against Arsenal following their front-foot performance against Brentford, Tindall didn’t give much away. “Every game in the Premier League presents a different challenge in terms of the style of play, level of player, different tactics we need to be prepared for,” he said. “We are aware of the strengths Arsenal have and you need to get the balance right; we will go to Arsenal and nullify their strengths but look to score goals.” The club’s head coach Eddie Howe will be in the dugout for the first time at Arsenal on Saturday after returning a negative Covid-19 test. Howe was forced to miss his first game in charge against Brentford at St James’ Park last week after testing positive for coronavirus. Still in search of their first win of the season, Newcastle take on Arsenal at the Emirates in tomorrowe’s lunchtime kick-off. Europa League: Celtic’s hopes of progressing to the knockout stages were dashed as a late fightback from their hosts denied them a famous victory in Germany. Europa League: Rangers booked their place in the knockout stages with a win over limited opposition in Giovanni van Bronkhorst’s first match in charge of the Scottish champions. Europa League: Andriy Yarmolenko and Mark Noble wrapped up top spot in Group H for David Moyes’ side in an empty Allianz Stadion. Europa League: Leicester City remain on course for the knockout stages but their win over Legia Warsaw was marred by trouble between visiting fans and police at the King Power Stadium. Europa Conference League: Antonio Conte says he is not a “magician” and now understands the size of the job on his hands at Tottenham after they suffered one of the most embarrassing nights in their history at the hands of the lowesty ranked side in European football’s third tier competition last night. This weekend’s Premier League fixtures Arsenal v Newcastle United (Saturday 12.30pm) Liverpool v Southampton (3pm) Norwich City v Wolves (3pm) Crystal Palace v Aston Villa (3pm) Brighton v Leeds United (5.30pm) Brentford v Everton (Sunday 2pm) Manchester City v West Ham (2pm) Leicester City v Watford (2pm) Burnley v Tottenham Hotspur (2pm) Chelsea v Manchester United (4.30pm) View the Premier League table Wales, Scotland and a host of other teams will discover who they’ll be playing in their Quatar World Cup 2022 play-off semi-finals at 4pm (GMT) tonight. Both countries are seeded (along with Portugal, Italy, Russia and Sweden) and will have home advantage in their one-leg semis and will face one of Austria, North Macedonia, Turkey, Poland, Ukraine or Czech Republic. The draw for the play-off finals will also be made, with all games to be played from March 24 to 29 next year. Ahead of another few days’ piping hot football action, the imminent arrival of Ralf Rangnick as interim manager at Manchester United remains top of the news agenda. It’s good news for Tottenham, who won’t mind their shocking performance in Slovenia being overshadowed and important enough for Sky Sports News to have posted a reporter outside United’s training ground. Ben Ransom, their man standing on the roadside in the cold, says the man they call The Professor has agreed personal terms and is waiting for Manchester United to negotiate the terms of his release from his current job at Lokomotiv Moscow. As well as all the latest news from Carrington, we’ll be dropping in on press conferences the length and breadth of the UK as assorted managers get their chat on ahead of the weekend’s action. An interesting weekend of top flight action is topped and tailed by Arsenal v Newcastle at lunchtime tomorrow and Chelsea v Manchester United on Sunday. Michael Carrick will be in the technical area for that one before Rangnick takes charge.Quitting social media is hard to do, even when it doesn’t cost you anything. So when Lush’s chief executive, Mark Constantine, shut its thousands of Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and TikTok accounts on Friday, the biggest shopping day of the year, he knew dropping off millions of customers’ screens would damage his business. Its Facebook and Instagram accounts alone had 10.6 million followers and the void will result in an estimated £10m hit to sales but Constantine, one of the business’s co-founders, said it had “no choice” after whistleblowers called attention to the negative impact social media sites such as Instagram are having on teenagers’ mental health. “We’ve tightened up over the Covid period, it won’t destroy us,” says Constantine of the financial fallout from the decision. He was disturbed by leaked Facebook research that suggested its Instagram app made body image issues worse for teenage girls. “I just thought ‘That’s their own research and they’re ignoring it and we are attracting people to their platform.’ We had no choice whatsoever. Lush attracts an awful lot of girls of that age.” The 69-year-old businessman has been trying to run an ethical beauty empire since starting the Poole-based company in 1995 with five others, including his wife, Mo. Over the years the bath bomb purveyor has taken a stand on all manner of issues, from the scourge of single-use plastic to fox hunting and the targeting of activists by undercover police officers. Constantine is speaking from his home in the Dorset seaside town where Lush is the biggest private sector employer. It has nine manufacturing sites and several offices including one overlooking the harbour, where the expansive glass windows in his office provide the keen birdwatcher with a superb view of the water. Like many Britons Lush has tried to quit social media before. It said it would no longer be posting back in 2019 only to creep back as the pandemic closed its stores and the web became the only way to communicate with shoppers. It has not deleted its accounts but signed off with a post that encouraged its followers to “stop scrolling and be somewhere else instead”. While Constantine’s son Jack, the company’s chief digital officer, has been behind the plan from day one because of his concerns about algorithms that “generate addictive, mindless scrolling”, other managers did not agree, and some still don’t, which perhaps explains why the first attempt failed. Will the same thing happen this time? “I hope not, I’d be a laughing stock,” says Constantine. “We haven’t done it as a PR stunt, we have done it for genuine reasons.” He offers up the excuse that social media is as addictive to companies as individuals. “This is us making a real effort to get off it.” This time he is even closing his personal Facebook account though he enjoyed running a “little newspaper of my own” on it. Above all else, Constantine says Lush, which gives an average of £8m a year to charity, puts “caring for people” first and could not ignore links made between social media use and suicidal thoughts and wants the platforms to have stronger best practice guidelines to protect users. “We’re talking about suicide here, not spots or whether someone should dye their hair blonde,” he says. “How could we possibly suggest we’re a caring business if we look at that and don’t care?” With 400 company-owned stores around the world and sales of £438m in 2020 (the business is twice that size if other partnerships are included) Lush survived the pandemic albeit with some scars. Lockdowns lopped a fifth off its turnover and it finished the year £45m in the red, although Constantine says sales have rebounded and it is now financially “stronger than it has ever been” after putting the company through what it calls, perhaps fittingly for a company with a large haircare business, the “Covid rinse”. But the fallout from the pandemic has not just been financial with the businessman alarmed by the number of colleagues now struggling with their mental health. “It has never been a more serious issue for us,” he says. “I spend at least a third of my time discussing different mental health issues with colleagues … it’s never been worse. People who have never had anxiety have got anxiety.” Facebook is facing fresh scrutiny after thousands of internal documents were leaked by Frances Haugen, a former product manager at the social media company. Among the most damaging was the allegation that it knew its products were damaging teenagers’ mental health. The company has mounted a vigorous defence, stating: “To suggest we encourage bad content and do nothing is just not true.” Lush’s desire to run hard-hitting campaigns on the issues it cares about should make it a natural for the social media age and Constantine insists it is not running scared by not pulling back from some sites (it is staying on Twitter and YouTube). No single issue has come close to creating the turmoil spawned by its 2018 Spycops advertising campaign which addressed the scandal – revealed by the Guardian – of undercover police officers forming relationships with the women they were employed to spy on, he says. Staff faced intimidation while police supporters called for a boycott and the then home secretary Sajid Javid accused it of attacking “hardworking police”. If that is the case shouldn’t Lush stay social and provide a positive voice for young fans who get an ego boost from environmentally friendly shampoos and makeup? “Yes, but I’m not willing to do it at the risk of someone’s life,” he says.That’s all for day one. Thanks as always for following along with us. Be sure to read Sean Ingle’s report and the move-by-move replay of today’s fighting draw. “I guess I can’t say much,” Nepomniachtchi says when asked about his feeling of competing in his first world championship game. “I was white and normally we want to try to win but a draw is also somewhat a result. Just a fine game from Magnus. I don’t feel something specific.” Says Carlsen of Friday’s game: “The result was solid. I do feel like I was a little bit shaky at times. Certainly things that I could have done better but overall I think the result was fair enough.” Nepomniachtchi says he was “slightly optimistic during the whole game” when asked how he felt about his chances of winning today’s opener. “Actually, I was very slightly optimistic during the whole game because this was quite a curious line from black,” he says. “It was very, very fine compensation. He was down a pawn in the endgame and it’s very hard to win something for white. So I knew that. I thought maybe I can slowly build up something in the center. “But [this bishop exchange] idea was logical but it doesn’t work for some positional and tactical reasons, so basically after I let those exchanges happen (at 22. ... Bxf3 23. gxf3 Bxf4 24. Nxf4), it was never something I could really hope for more than a draw. Basically after b4, probably I would have to bring my king to c2 and sacrificing the pawn back and accept the draw.” Asked the same question, Carlsen strikes a similar tone. “I wouldn’t say I was ever particularly optimistic in the sense of winning the game,” the champion says. “I was a little bit worried, kind of echoing Ian’s sentiment of being a little bit optimistic, but I was happy to find this idea with b4, but I knew that if he remained prudent there and just brought his king over I thought his chances of winning the game were not realistic.” “I made of a bit of a blunder when I played [40. ... Rd7],” Carlsen says. “I should have played Nf4. That was a bit poor. I thought that at the end maybe he could try and play but I think realistically it was pretty far from winning.” The world champion is asked about his form and shape, which is often best assessed after the first game of these matches. “I’m feeling OK,” he says. “I think we’ll be better, but at least I’m happy to start the match with a decent result.” Nepomniachtchi accepts the de facto draw offer with 42. Ne5. From there, 42. ... Rd6 43. Nc4 Rc6 44. Ne5 Rd6 45. Nc4 leads to a draw by repetition. White thinks for a touch over nine minutes before advancing his knight with 41. Nc4. Carlsen then spends three minutes before answering with 41. ... Re7, which amounts to the offer of a draw. Specifically, Nepomniachtchi can force a draw by playing Ne5. Both players can breathe a sigh of relief after reaching the time control with their 40th moves (39. Ree1 Kf6 40. Ne3 Rd7). Under the rules of the classical format, they each will have an hour added to their clocks. Both players have left the table and we could be in for a bit of a wait. The position looks drawish, still, though Carlsen still has winning chances with black, mostly owing to white’s weak pawns on d3, f3 and h4. The players trade pawns before Carlsen captures Nepomniachtchi’s b-pawn with his rook (35. Kd2 bxc3+ 36. bxc3 Rxb3 37. Kc2 Rb7). The Norwegian supercomputer Sesse evaluates the position as dead even after 38. h4 Kf7 39. Ree1, but it’s clear that it’s the challenger who is fighting for the draw right now. Nepomniachtchi settles on 34. Ke2 and Carlsen responds with 34. ... Rb8. The champion has finally gained back the time advantage. As we’ve seen him do so many times before, Carlsen has worked his way into a slight endgame advantage that augurs a taxing fight for his opponent. Black is slightly better after a series of correct moves (31. Re4 f5 32. Re3 Ne6 33. Ng2). The computer likes 33. ... b4 for Carlsen, which switches play to the queenside and keeps the advantage, and that’s what he plays. The challenger opts for 30. Ne1, Carlsen answers with 30. ... Ng7 and we appear on course for a draw. Meanwhile, in case you’ve been wondering why Nepomniachtchi isn’t competing under the Russian flag, our Sean Ingle reports on today’s last-minute scramble behind the scenes. Carlsen goes with 27. ... Kf8 as we move into the endgame. The engines now think Nepomniachtchi has the better position. The challenger responds with 28. Ng2. Carlsen thinks on this position for six minutes before choosing 28. ... Nf5. After 29. Re5 g6, Carlsen is more than 11 minutes behind on time (with 11 moves to go until the time control). Carlsen plays 26. ... Nh4 after a more than 12-minute think. The position is looking drawish barring any inaccuracies. Nepomniachtchi responds with 27. Re3 in an effort to protect his f-pawn and maintain the material advantage. The engines don’t love it. If Carlsen plays g6 here, there could be a path to victory. Carlsen and Nepomniachtchi trade a few more moves (24. ... Rc6 25. Re1 Nf5). The challenger responds with the engines’ best option (26. c3) ... and Sesse now evaluates the position as dead even. Nepomniachtchi inspects the position for more than 16 minutes before settling on 22. Bf4. Exchanges of knights then rooks follow (22. ... Bxf3 23. gxf3 Bxf4 24. Nxf4). Notably, the Norwegian supercomputer Sesse evaluates the position in Carlsen’s favor for the first time today after 22. Bf4. Nepomniachtchi goes with 21. Be3. Carlsen thinks for nearly nine minutes before responding with 21. ... Ne7. He’s spent more than 24 minutes on his last three moves and has fallen behind the challenger on time for the first time today. Carlsen is back on the clock again after 18. Nc3 Nb4 19. Rec1 Rac8 20. Ne2. The best responses appear to be Be7 or g6 ... so naturally the world champion goes with 20. ... Nc6 after nearly 10 minutes. The super-powerful engines continue to favor white, but it’s unclear how Nepomniachtchi will get his pieces to useful squares in the short term. Carlsen goes with 17. ... Rd8 after more than 20 minutes. (A bug on the automatic board is recording this move as 17. ... Rc8 on all of the telecasts and streams. It’s incorrect!) The world championship match doesn’t officially start until Carlsen’s first lengthy think of the match. That’s what’s happening right now: more than 20 minutes! Nothing short of incredible that it’s taken both players this long to get out of their opening preparation. The game has been raised. A long think for Nepomniachtchi. After more than 16 minutes of contemplation, he finally goes with 17. Nf3. Here’s a look at the live position after 15. Qxd5 Nxd5 16. Bd2 c5. Carlsen is down a pawn but not without advantages (the bishop pair and superior development). He also enjoys a more than 20-minute advantage on the clock. Some extraordinary prep for Nepomniachtchi continues through 10. axb3 Bb7 11. d3 d5 12. exd5 Qxd5 13. Qf3 Bd6 14. Kf1. Carsen responds with 14. ... Rfb8 as we move toward a queenless middlegame. (A technical glitch in which the automatic board recorded the move as the far inferior 14. ... Rfc8 briefly had the chess cognoscenti in a titter.) Both players leave the board after 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b 7. Bb3 O-O 8. h3. Magnus returns and plays a new move with 8. ... Na5! Nepomniachtchi takes nearly two minutes to assess before responding with 9. Nxe5 and inviting the exchange with 9. ... Nxb3. The opening is an an anti-Marshall Ruy Lopez. Nepomniachtchi playing with the white pieces opens lets his ceremonial move of 1. e4 stand while Carlsen replies with 1. ... e5. No double bongcloud this year, alas. The players have made their way into the sound-proof studio ahead of the opening game. Nepomniachtchi was first to arrive as he took his seat behind the white pieces. Carlsen, perhaps in a spot of gamesmanship, made his opponent wait for a couple of minutes before entering the room and taking his chair with three minutes to go. Carlsen and Nepomniachtchi faced off one last time at Wednesday’s final press conference, which you can watch below. It was a mostly conciliatory affair, as these things tend to be, and there is a very real mutual respect between the contestants. Pressed on his prediction for the match, Carlsen was to the point. “I predict that the person who scores the most points over the next three weeks is going to be the winner, and hopefully that’s going to be me,” he said. “And if I do win it will probably be because I made a lot of good moves and good decisions under pressure.” Our Sean Ingle spoke with Carlsen for his final newspaper interview ahead of the match earlier this week. Good afternoon from Dubai, where we are less than 15 minutes away from the start of game one. Outside the arena, where half a dozen chess sets are laid out, there has been a growing buzz with spectators congregating, chatting and playing games against each other. The press room, however, is a lot less hectic than it was in London in 2018 where so many journalists turned up there was scrum for tables as well as the free crisps and cans of Coke. However the demand for tickets has caught some fans by surprise. I spoke to a mother and her seven-year-old boy, who were told two weeks ago they could just show up and get a ticket. But when they arrived two hour before the start, they received the news that day one was a sellout. Incidentally I am told that the first move will be made by the Fide president Arkady Dvorkovich and a senior member of the ruling family here in the UAE. Our Leonard Barden has filed his final dispatch ahead of today’s opening game. Barden, who’s written the Guardian’s chess column every week since September 1955, says that Carlsen plans a fast start in the opening three rounds against Ian Nepomniachtchi on Friday, Saturday and Sunday. Carlsen will push for an early lead. “As a reigning champion you have a good chance to strike at the start,” he said. “That’s definitely something I am going to try.” Previous cases of first-time challengers who froze include Tigran Petrosian’s disastrous game one in 1963 against Mikhail Botvinnik and Bobby Fischer’s poisoned pawn capture against Boris Spassky in 1972. In the 2018 match, Fabiano Caruana was shaky in the marathon first game and should have lost at move 38. Carlsen himself, in his second game against Vishy Anand in 2013, planned the Caro-Kann 1 e4 c6 but nervously knocked over his c7 pawn. However, there are also examples like 1927 and 2000 where the challenger scored early and went on to win the match. India’s Vishy Anand, who lost two title matches to Carlsen, believes that the challenger’s best chance is finding complex and difficult positions where his months of preparation using the Zhores supercomputer will give him chances. “I feel that Magnus is vulnerable under these circumstances,” he said. “It’s already his fifth title match, so the fire isn’t burning so hard inside.” Here’s a look at the format for the world championship match. It will consist of 14 classical games with each player awarded one point for a win and a half-point for a draw. Whoever reaches seven and a half points first will be declared the champion. The time control for each game is 120 minutes for the first 40 moves, 60 minutes for the next 20 moves and then 15 minutes for the rest of the game plus an additional 30 seconds per move starting from move 61. If the match is tied after 14 games, tie-breaks will be played on the final day in the following order: • Best of four rapid games with 25 minutes for each player with an increment of 10 seconds after each move. • If still tied, they will play up to five mini-matches of two blitz games (five minutes for each player with a three-second increment). • If all five mini-matches are drawn, one sudden-death ‘Armageddon’ match will be played where White receives five minutes and Black receives four minutes. Both players will receive a three-second increment after the 60th move. In the case of a draw, Black will be declared the winner. Hello and welcome to Dubai for day one of the World Chess Championship. We’ve got a cracker of a tie ahead as Norway’s Magnus Carlsen defends the title he’s held for the past eight years against Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi. The best-of-14-games match is scheduled to take place at the Dubai Exhibition Centre over the next 20 days, with the winner earning a 60% share of the €2m ($2.26m) prize fund if the match ends in regulation (or 55% if it’s decided by tie-break games). Carlsen, 30, has been ranked No 1 for 10 straight years and was considered the world’s best player even before he defeated Viswanathan Anand for the title in 2013. Nepomniachtchi, 31, is ranked No 5, having earned his place at the table by winning the eight-man candidates tournament in April with a round to spare – an event that spanned more than 13 months due to the Covid-19 pandemic. We’re a little more than a half hour away from the ceremonial first move. Plenty more to come. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s Sean Ingle’s lookahead to the next three weeks.Black Friday and pre-Christmas spending sprees will create an e-waste mountain as 5m unwanted electrical items are binned or put in storage in Britain, a campaign group has warned. The end-of-November sales event triggers the commercial run-up to Christmas and is followed days later by the Cyber Monday e-commerce frenzy, with retailers offering cut-price deals on a range of goods from mobile phones to laptops and smart speakers. Research by campaign group Material Focus estimates that 5m unwanted electrical items will be thrown away or hoarded after being supplanted by purchases made between Black Friday and Christmas. Material Focus, which runs the Recycle Your Electricals campaign, said any tech sidelined by new purchases should be donated or recycled. “With so many people experiencing financial hardship or in need of more tech, we all need to consider donating or recycling our old electrical items,” said Scott Butler, executive director of Material Focus. “They are worth almost £160m to those in need. “If your old electricals are truly at the end of their life do not throw them away, as they will end up in landfill, please instead recycle them as a minimum.” The estimates, based on a survey of 2,000 adults, point to at least 2.7m older unwanted electrical items being sent to landfill and a further 2.2m being hoarded at home. The most popular electrical purchases in the run-up to Christmas include smartphones, headphones, tablets, laptops and speakers. Britain’s e-waste problem is likely to be replicated worldwide, with analysts estimating that millions of new mobile phones will be bought in the wake of Black Friday, spurred by the latest iPhone launch. Apple will sell 40m iPhones globally between this weekend and Christmas, according to US investment firm Wedbush Securities, despite a chip supply shortage that has hampered production. Last year an investigation by the environmental audit committee found the UK is trailing behind other countries in tackling e-waste. The UK creates the second highest levels of electronic waste in the world, after Norway, with about 40% of the waste sent abroad. “For all their protestations of claimed sustainability, major online retailers and marketplaces such as Amazon have so far avoided playing their part in the circular economy by not collecting or recycling electronics in the way other organisations have to,” the MPs said. On Amazon’s UK website, recommendations for dealing with unwanted electrical goods include taking them to a charity or recycling them at a local authority-owned facility. Earlier this year ITV News filmed Amazon destroying scores of unwanted electrical products at a warehouse in Dunfermline. Amazon said none of the items went to landfill. The value of recyclable material abandoned within dumped electronics runs into billions of dollars, according to estimates. Thrown-away computers, smartphones, tablets and other electronic waste have a potential value of $62.5bn (£47bn) each year in large part due to the precious metals they contain, which include gold, silver, copper and platinum.Thomas Tuchel was in his element when Chelsea smashed Juventus 4-0 on Tuesday. Forced to improvise after losing Kai Havertz to a hamstring injury, Tuchel seized the chance to think outside the box, his tactical mind whirring as he looked at his options in attack and decided that the best way to hurt Matthijs de Ligt and Leonardo Bonucci was essentially to give them nobody to mark. It was a night for the little guys. There was an unfamiliar central role for Christian Pulisic, who made up for his lack of impact in possession by contributing in other areas, his energy off the ball a feature of Chelsea’s high press. There was a fine playmaking display from the slender Hakim Ziyech and on the left there was maturity and skill from Callum Hudson-Odoi, who made it 3-0 when he finished off a flowing move in the 58th minute. This, it seemed, was Tuchelball in all its glory, the tempo relentless, the movement bewildering, the threats coming from all angles as the blue wave overwhelmed Juventus. Strikers? Who needs them? Chelsea were fine without one against Juventus, just as they were when they demolished Leicester last weekend, and the quality of their football in the past week means that Tuchel does not have to shift gear against Manchester United on Sunday, even though Romelu Lukaku is available again and no doubt desperate to play against his old team. The Lukaku issue is a fascinating one for Tuchel to solve. The striker’s recovery from the ankle injury he sustained against Malmö on 20 October is welcome, but he is not returning as a saviour. Lukaku, who is 28, was an unused substitute against Juventus and, given that Chelsea have responded to his injury by rattling in 23 goals in seven and a half games, Tuchel is under no pressure to start him against Unitedtomorrow. There is no need to rush. Havertz is fit, Pulisic could start again, Mason Mount could return and Timo Werner scored after coming on against Juventus. Whichever way you spin it, the league leaders are in a luxurious position. The goals are flying in from every angle, with defenders stepping forward and the wing-backs playing more like No 10s. The reliance on a No 9 is minimal. Reece James, the right wing-back, is Chelsea’s top scorer with five goals and Marcos Alonso will be an able deputy on the left for Ben Chilwell, who must wait six weeks before finding out whether he needs surgery after sustaining anterior cruciate ligament damage against Juventus. Chilwell has been a key part of Chelsea’s versatile attacking. In total there have been 16 goals from defenders and, for the time being, the challenge for Lukaku simply has to be proving that he deserves to be the main man up front. It has not been easy for the striker since his £97.5m move from Internazionale, although Tuchel is not panicking yet. He accepted that signing Lukaku would make Chelsea’s attack less mobile. Tuchel wanted more variety after winning the Champions League in counterpunching style last season and Lukaku, who had fired Inter to the Serie A title, seemed the perfect fit. He arrived as the final piece in the jigsaw and scored four goals in his first four games. Since then, however, the doubts have grown. Lukaku had not scored in six games before facing Malmö and Chelsea had become a slightly static attacking force, the fluidity returning only once they were back to playing without a traditional target man. There was more unpredictability with Havertz leading the line. The German’s height makes him a useful recipient of crosses, but he is also comfortable dropping deep and he is a better presser than Lukaku, who wants the ball to feet, to assert himself by pinning his marker before spinning or bringing others into play. Chelsea are yet to tap into those strengths. Yet Tuchel is not worried. He loves Lukaku’s leadership and he can point out that Chelsea missed the 28-year-old’s ruthlessness when they chucked away two points against Burnley this month. Perhaps patience is required. Lukaku can relax. He can bide his time before showing United that they were wrong to sell him.Carney Chukwuemeka will not sign a new contract at Aston Villa, putting England’s biggest clubs on alert, including Manchester City, Manchester United and Liverpool. The 18-year-old midfielder, rated as one of England’s most promising talents, has decided his future does not lie with Villa, having grown frustrated at his lack of first-team opportunity. Chukwuemeka made his debut as a 17-year-old at the end of last season, coming on as an 89th-minute substitute in the Premier League match at Tottenham. He then got on in the 73rd minute of the final game, against Chelsea. This time out, he has started twice – in the Carabao Cup against Barrow and the league against Brentford. He has made a further substitute appearance against Chelsea in the Carabao Cup and Villa believe they have shown a pathway to a player who also has a host of admirers in mainland Europe, including Bayern Munich and Borussia Dortmund. Chukwuemeka does not see it. He has no issue with Villa’s new manager, Steven Gerrard, who replaced Dean Smith this month. Rather, he has come to fear that the club will most likely rely on established players or signings at the expense of promoting youngsters. Chukwuemeka, an England Under-19s international, signed a three-year contract after he turned 17 on 20 October 2020 – the maximum permitted at that age – and Villa were desperate to tie him down for longer upon his 18th birthday. Instead, they face having to cash in on him – perhaps next summer – because thereafter he would be able to sign a pre-contract with an overseas club in January 2023 before becoming a free agent in the summer of that year. Were Chukwuemeka to leave Villa under freedom of contract, they would receive a compensation fee set at a tribunal. The panels have the reputation for conservative valuations.Honesty is a difficult business. There are people with an innate inability to lie, left with their own reality shaken if they try to misinform someone else’s. Safe to say they’re a minority. The impulse comes early, the way kids lie extravagantly, faces smeared in chocolate while denying any knowledge of a stolen block. Some of us never consistently grow out of that – this writer included. We feel trouble coming and our impulse is to hide. As adults, we’re not scared of being punished, we’re scared of being unloved. We’re scared of others seeing the things that we feel ashamed of and casting us out. His dishonesty may have been by omission rather than commission, but you can understand why Tim Paine, by this point the Australian men’s cricket captain, never wanted to put the story of his dodgy text messages in the open. As well as the personal humiliation in front of a potential audience of millions, it would involve visiting that humiliation on his wife and kids, and the fear of being diminished for both reasons in the eyes of everyone he cares about. The anticipated shame of all of those things would be intense, as is the shame we have all internalised about our sexual wants and actions. No surprise, then, that after a week of the story leading news outlets across the world he has announced a break from cricket. This presumably means missing the Ashes, and the end of an international career. He could still make a return, but choosing to stand in that spotlight would not be enticing in the state he must be in. Paine is a solitary human against a literal world of attention, going through an experience of a kind that few people could understand. Spare many thoughts too for the woman he sent the messages to, who as best we know has been pulled into this story against her will. Thus Paine will not play in Brisbane of his own accord, when a week ago it seemed a fair chance that Cricket Australia would remove him from the team. Instead, they came around to join Cricket Tasmania in publicly backing him. Both say that this is a personal issue, and that their investigations in 2018 found no wrongdoing. But by including a work colleague, this is by definition a professional issue. The much-cited “exoneration” and the assessment of the exchange as “consensual” are absurd given that, it seems, Paine’s copies of the messages were never recovered and the recipient was not involved in the investigation. You can feel for Paine, but he is not an innocent. He made his decisions to send the messages at a time when he knew he was about to resume life as a Test cricketer in 2017, and referred in the conversation itself to how damaging it could be. Even in a two-way exchange, his messages appear to have been a sudden escalation. We can’t be sure that the sending of an explicit image was indeed “consensual”. (A tip for young players: sending explicit images can be a healthy means of sexual expression, but you should be just as explicit with finding out beforehand if these would be welcomed by the recipient. Otherwise it’s no less of an affront than in person.) Most importantly, Paine decided to join with the boards in pretending nothing had happened, while accepting laurels as the face of decency who would restore Australia’s reputation – all of which was based on the hope and hope alone that the story would never break. Honesty is difficult. Answering a question truthfully is one thing, but volunteering something when nobody might otherwise find out is the hardest. There it lives, the cognitive dissonance of people who lie: over and over, finding that others are angriest on discovering they have been misled. Lying forestalls trouble, but creates a debt where the interest compounds daily. Some of those debts may not come due, but one alone can break the bank. So this is how Patrick Cummins enters the captaincy. Younger, fresher, as yet unblemished by either private or public utterance, there is some hope that Cummins can bring the integrity the position sorely needs. He will feel Paine’s absence – they would understand one another, one having spent six years out of the team with injury, the other seven years. Cummins returned in 2017 only a few months before Paine, and they have played most of their careers together since, 29 of 31 Tests. For all the concerns about a fast bowler’s durability as captain, Cummins has only missed two. It is also not the way that Cummins, a famously pleasant person, would want to take over the job, during the trials endured by a friend. But captains rarely have great exits. Bill Lawry was backstabbed, Graham Yallop dispensed with, Kim Hughes bullied and breaking, Steve Waugh with the selectors looming, Ricky Ponting on his knees to a Jacques Kallis inswinger, Michael Clarke after 60 all out, Steve Smith in a phalanx of security guards at Johannesburg airport. Add this one to the list. You can feel for Tim Paine the person. You should feel for all of the other people involved as well. We’re all of us liable to bad choices, across a vast spectrum of damage. But when we create our own misery, we have to accept responsibility for it. That is the kind of honesty that can’t be avoided, when the deception is done.President Emmanuel Macron has told Boris Johnson to “get serious” or remain locked out of discussions over how to curb the flow of people escaping war and poverty across the Channel. Here is my colleague Jon Henley’s analysis of the row. And here is an excerpt. It is Johnson’s final proposal, a bilateral returns agreement with France plus talks to establish a UK-EU returns agreement, that seems to have sparked the fiercest reaction. Since Britain left the EU, it is no longer able to use the bloc’s Dublin system for returning migrants to the first member state they entered. It has not so far negotiated any bilateral deals. Macron has repeatedly stated the French view that France is merely a transit country for the very small percentage – roughly 3% – of migrants who enter the EU with the UK as their preferred final destination, and that the only long-term solution is greater Europe-wide cooperation to tackle a European – indeed, global – issue. French fishing crews have mounted “symbolic” protests at the Channel tunnel and three ports in northern France in a day of action against the British government over the ongoing dispute about access of French boats in the Channel. The failure of the world to get vaccines to the developing world is “coming back to haunt us”, Gordon Brown has warned, as experts said the emergence of variants such as B.1.1.529 could have been avoided if jabs had been more fairly distributed. Thousands of Britons in South Africa and many more with bookings to travel have had their plans thrown into disarray as flights were suspended on Friday. Stock markets around the world plunged on Friday as investors sold shares, commodities and even cryptocurrency amid concerns that a new coronavirus variant, described as potentially the worst so far identified, could usher in a fresh wave of global pandemic restrictions. As Mark Sweney and Rob Davies report, the FTSE 100 fell 3% in early trading and failed to regain any lost ground during the day, while on Wall Street the Dow Jones Industrial Average shed more than 2.5%. Boris Johnson’s proposal for a bridge or tunnel linking Scotland to Northern Ireland has been rejected by a feasibility study as vastly expensive – £335bn for the bridge or £209bn for the tunnel – and fraught with potential difficulties. Jeremy Corbyn’s supporters expect him to stand as an independent in Islington North at the next general election if he is not allowed to represent the Labour party – and believe he would have a good chance of winning. Only rather limited progress has been made in the latest talks with the EU over the Northern Ireland protocol, Lord Frost, the Brexit minister, has indicated. Following a meeting with his EU counterpart, Maroš Šefčovič, Frost said: [Šefčovič] and I met today in London to take stock of discussions on the Northern Ireland protocol. We discussed the full range of issues causing difficulties in Northern Ireland. We would still like to find a negotiated solution. But the gap between our positions is still significant and we are ready to use article 16 to protect the Belfast (Good Friday) agreement if other solutions cannot be found. Technical discussions will continue next week and we will meet again next Friday. Government sources said that the two sides made “some further progress” on medicines, and that there were “constructive” discussions on the trade in goods between Britain and Northern Ireland. But trade, governance and subsidy control are still areas where the two sides are in dispute. And this is what Šefčovič tweeted after the meeting. Keith Brown, the Scottish National party’s deputy leader (or depute leader - the party uses the Scots word), has claimed that Boris Johnson’s U-turn over Owen Paterson shows he is liable to cave in under pressure. Brown made the argument in the context of Scottish independence, where Johnson insists he will not grant permission for a second referendum on Scottish independence, despite the SNP government demanding one. Brown told the SNP’s online conference: Coupled with the cast-iron mandate delivered in May – and another thumping triumph in the council elections this coming May – we will continue to pile the pressure on the UK government over our legitimate demand for a referendum. The Johnsons and the Goves of Westminster know they can’t stand in the way of the democratic will of Scotland. And what we know is that Boris Johnson always bows to pressure – just look at the scandalous Owen Paterson affair. The prime minister’s actions speak far louder than words. When the prime minister had to choose between protecting the integrity of elected office or protecting his friend, he chose to change the rules to protect a colleague. And when the pressure came on, he caved in and U-turned again. Mujtaba Rahman, the Brexit specialist at the Eurasia consultancy, has posted an interesting thread on Twitter on the Johnson/Macron row over the Channel crossings. He thinks neither side emerges with much credit. Wales is now an “indy-curious nation”, Adam Price, the Plaid Cymru leader has claimed. In a speech to his party’s virtual conference, to be live-streamed at 6pm tonight, Price praises the cooperation agreement struck between Plaid and the Welsh Labour government in Cardiff and he claims it could hasten the journey towards independence. He says: I also believe that May’s election confirmed Wales’ status as an indy-curious nation. A curiosity that will give birth - sooner than many think - to an independent Wales. The cross-party constitutional commission [one of the 46 agreed policies in the cooperation agreement document] will take our national constitutional journey to the next stage. It is significant that, as its co-chair Prof Laura McAllister put it, the commission will look at the fullest range of potential constitutional futures for Wales ... It will be the first time that an official body established by the Welsh government will undertake substantive research on Welsh independence. Price also claims the cooperation agreement is an important constitutional innovation. [The agreement] entails Plaid Cymru transforming itself from a traditional opposition party in the Westminster sense to something new and refreshingly different, a co-opposition party, co-operating where possible, while continuing to oppose, and to scutinise and criticise where necessary. There is no precedent for what we are about to embark upon in the politics of these islands. It is a unique Welsh departure from the British constitution – a downpayment if you like on independence - though similar arrangements have happened elsewhere – notably in Scandinavian countries such as Sweden, Denmark, and Norway; and in Commonwealth countries such as New Zealand. Small nations all breaking the mould of politics-as-usual. What we have crafted in this agreement is an approach entirely new in the political culture we have grown up with and are used to ... But however you describe it, and whatever you call it, it is not oppositionism for opposition’s sake. There are some attractions to oppositionism, but the deeper question in politics is not “Who or what we are against”, but “What are we really for”? At the heart of our politics, in this party above all else, lies the idea of a Welsh Demos, a Welsh political nationhood, which transcends party, which embodies values more enduring, and more important, than anything that divides us. For Wales to be free, we must first be united. And, that is what this co-operation agreement sets out to achieve. It launches us on a pathway to a united Wales, one that, sooner than we perhaps think, will find it both comfortable and natural, indeed essential, to join the world community of normal, independent nations. Nick Thomas-Symonds, the shadow home secretary, has described the French decision to exclude Priti Patel, the home secretary, from a meeting about the Channel crisis is humiliating for Boris Johnson. He said: This is a humiliation for a prime minister and home secretary who have completely lost control of the situation in the Channel. At the very moment when the prime minister needed to be a statesman, what we have seen is a grave error of judgement in putting this sensitive letter on Twitter - causing our government to be excluded from these vital talks. The French and British governments must show leadership, sit down together and urgently find solutions. This continued blame game is not getting us anywhere. Tony Blair, the former prime minister, has said Labour should “emphatically reject the ‘wokeism’ of a small though vocal minority”. He made the argument today in the foreword to a report published by his thinktank exploring voters’ attitudes to the party, and what it could do to win the next election. Blair argues that Labour’s plight is relatively straightforward. After the 2019 defeat and a decade or more moving in the direction of the traditional left, Labour has a cultural problem with many working-class voters, a credibility problem with the middle ground, and is seen as being for everyone other than the hard-working families who feel their taxes aren’t spent on their priorities. To win, Blair argues that Labour needs to abandon caution and adopt four stratagies: marginalise the far left, develop future-oriented policies, select “the best and the brightest from the younger generation” as candidates, and reject “wokeism”. He says: We should openly embrace liberal, tolerant but common-sense positions on the “culture” issues, and emphatically reject the “wokeism” of a small though vocal minority. The main report, written by the pollster Peter Kellner and featuring specially commissioner polling, says Labour faces a massive challenge because, to win a majority, it needs a larger swing than the party achieved in 1997. However Kellner identifies reasons for hope for the party. On the face of it, Labour’s problem seems almost impossible to solve. The old coalition, between manual workers and metropolitan liberals, appears to have disintegrated. There does not seem to be a way to appeal to one without further alienating the other. Yet our research suggests a more optimistic conclusion. There is much common ground across all social and political groups that suggests the priorities for the government – any government – should be pensioners, the poor and “ordinary working people”. Kellner says even cultural issues like Brexit and immigration could work in favour of Labour, not the right. He explains: As long as they are framed as cultural battles, the Conservatives will have more powerful weapons. But if Labour can reframe these issues as economic and social challenges, in which current government policies damage people’s everyday lives, then Labour has the opportunity to develop policies that are both progressive and popular. This is especially true for the “red-wall” seats, which independent economists say will suffer most from Brexit. This is from Gérard Araud, a former French ambassador to the US. Alan Travis, who for many years was the Guardian’s home affairs editor, has welcomed the French proposal for British officials to consider asylum claims on French soil, before people try crossing the Channel. (See 2.15pm.) Liam Fox’s Down syndrome private member’s bill (see 10.38am) was given an unopposed second reading in the Commons. Gillian Keegan, the health minister, who has a nephew with the condition, told the Commons: People with Down’s syndrome should have the opportunity to enjoy all aspects of our society and to have access to the services and support that will enable them throughout their lifetime. I wholeheartedly support the Down syndrome bill. I know that today people with Down’s syndrome are struggling to access the services they need and I’ve seen this with my own family. It is not right, it must change and we will change it. Here is a briefing paper (pdf) from the Commons library on what the bill will do. And this is what Fox said summing up the aims of the bill. My aim is to deal with three main areas. The first is to de-stigmatise Down syndrome and to re-educate both the public and professionals about the advances, including in life expectancy, that have occurred in recent decades. The second is to ensure that current provision of services is improved, whether provided by health, education or local services, by ensuring that providers give due consideration to those with Down syndrome when designing service provision. The third is to look ahead and deal with future issues, such as long-term care, in an era where, for the first time, many of those with Down syndrome will outlive their parents. By giving due thought to the issues today we can prevent avoidable human tragedies in the future. Bruno Bonnell, an MP representing President Macron’s En Marche! political party in France, said Boris Johnson’s decision to publish his letter to about proposals for addressing the Channel crisis was “irritating”. The politician, who denied that Paris had overreacted to Mr Johnson’s tweet, told Radio 4’s World At One programme: When you want to open a negotiation, you don’t start by putting in writing publicly. A negotiation needs to be discreet, to be respectful on both sides and finally to reach conclusions that you publish together. So that’s why it is irritating. The French authorities were really keen to find ways, and once more Mr Johnson has been trying to take advantage of this dramatic situation to make his point ... We need to sit down quietly, in good faith, in full trust, and not show signs of ... [using it] for your own public opinion, where you try to say, ‘Look, as they don’t know what to do, we’re going to teach the French what to do’, which is not acceptable. The French embassy in the UK has tweeted out more quotes from President Macron. Here is the story from my colleagues Jon Henley and Rajeev Syal on President Macron’s response to the PM’s letter about the Channel crisis. And here is an extract from the story, with more from the French government’s briefing. The French government’s official spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, added to criticism of Johnson’s letter on French television, calling it “mediocre in terms of the content, and wholly inappropriate as regards the form”. Attal told BFM TV the letter was “mediocre because it does not respect all the work that has been done by our coastguards, police, gendarmes and lifeboat crews … It basically proposes a ‘relocation’ agreement, which is clearly not what’s needed to solve this problem. “We’re sick and tired of this double talk and outsourcing of problems.” Attal continued: “What we need is for the British to send immigration officers to France to examine here, on French territory, demands for asylum in Britain.” He added that the tone of the letter “did not in the least reflect the exchanges Emmanuel Macron had with Boris Johnson … It’s as if Boris Johnson was regretting leaving Europe, because as soon as he has a problem he considers that it is Europe’s responsibility to solve it. It doesn’t work like that – it works through cooperation.” At Downing Street they have been installing a Christmas tree this morning. That seems to explain why a no entry sign also appeared for a while on the most famous front door in Britain. In his interview with Nick Robinson for the BBC’s Political Thinking podcast (see 12.08pm), Keir Starmer also explained what was behind an emotional reference to his sister in an exchange with Boris Johnson in the Commons earlier this year. Starmer says very little in public about his siblings, who do not like media attention. But, when Boris Johnson made the Commons announcement about the health and social care levy (the £12bn tax rise social care), Starmer told him at one point: “My sister is a poorly paid care worker, prime minister, so I know this at first hand.” He was responding after Johnson scoffed at Starmer at how the levy would disadvantage low-paid care workers. Starmer told Robinson that he had not intended to mention his sister, but that he had a flash of anger. He said: [Johnson] frustrated me because he just didn’t get it. What it’s like to actually work as an insecure care worker and my sister is a an insecure care worker, and I was angry because he was shaking his head dismissively and I do know first-hand what it feels like. Starmer also said that during the pandemic his sister had also missed out on proper holiday because she had to use all her time off for isolating, or for when she was ill. He said: She works in the care home. She’s on very low pay. She works overnight shifts of 12 hours at a time. It’s tough, hard work for which she gets very little reward. And the bit that I suppose needled me or angered me in the last 18 months is that like everybody else, she’s had to self-isolate if she’s ill or because the rules of family members are ill. And because she hasn’t got a sick pay provision in a contract of employment, she’s had to use all her holiday in order to just get through isolation or periods of illness, so she’s got no holiday left This is what it’s like to be on an insecure contract, prime minister. You end up with no holiday because you’ve had to take all of it in order to get through self-isolation or just ordinary illness. Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, has admitted that civil servants do not have enough experience of science and industry. He made the comment in a letter to the Times (paywall) in which he said he agreed with Dame Kate Bingham, who was head of the government’s vaccine taskforce and who made this argument herself. Case says: Dame Kate Bingham is correct in her assessment of the lack of skills and experience in science, industry and manufacturing across government. Her criticism is also one that the civil service has recognised itself. Improving our technical and specialist knowledge is at the heart of implementing our post-pandemic reform plans. In his letter Case also says the civil service is addressing the problem through reform plans introduced in the summer. At the Downing Street lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesperson also defended Boris Johnson’s decision to post a summary of his letter to the French president on Twitter, and said Johnson had no regrets about making the letter public, the Mail’s John Stevens reports. Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, has tested positive for Covid. That meant he was not in the Commons to respond to Sajid Javid’s statement. Alex Norris, a shadow health minister, spoke for Labour instead. You can read the exchanges on our Covid live blog. Boris Johnson has said the UK will stand “shoulder to shoulder” with Poland against those who would “try to provoke a migrant crisis” on its borders. Welcoming the Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, to Downing Street, Johnson said: I think this is an important occasion – and we are very, very grateful to you for visiting us, for coming to No 10, to London, because this is a moment where we can reaffirm our commitment to the relationship but also to standing shoulder to shoulder with Poland against those who would try to provoke a migrant crisis, for instance, on Polish borders. Downing Street has insisted that the letter sent by Boris Johnson to Emmanuel Macron, the French president, yesterday was written in a “spirit of partnership and cooperation”. Although Macron has reacted angrily to Johnson’s decision to make the letter public, and to tweet about it (see 10.12am), the prime minister’s spokesman said that Johnson was serious about wanting better cooperation with France over the Channel crossings. The spokesman told the lobby breifing: This is about deepening our existing cooperation and the work that is already being done between our two countries. We want to work closely with international partners, obviously including France, on what is a shared issue so that we can find shared solutions. We have seen the tragedy that happened earlier this week. As the PM said we need to do more and he has outlined areas in his letter where he believes we can do more to work together. Keir Starmer has said that Jeremy Corbyn may not be able to stand as a Labour candidate at the next election. Corbyn currently sits as an independent MP because he has had the Labour whip withdrawn in parliament. He is still a member of the party, but he is suspended from the PLP (parliamentary Labour party) because he has not given given what the party considers a sufficient retraction and apology for comments he made last year, when the Equality and Human Rights Commission report was published, saying the extent of antisemitism in the party had been exaggerated. Starmer told the BBC’s Political Thinking podcast with Nick Robinson: [Corbyn] knows what he must do in order to move this forward. He’s not chosen to do so – that’s his choice. Asked whether it was likely that Corbyn would be banned from standing as a Labour candidate at the next election (which is what the rules would say, if at that point the whip was still suspended from Corbyn), Starmer replied: I don’t know, but at the moment that may be the case. The situation has not changed, and Starmer was just restating what has been his position for some time. But in the past, when asked about the prospect of Corbyn not being allowed to stand for Labour at the next election, Starmer has sometimes sidestepped the question on the grounds it’s hypothetical. Now he is admitting it’s a possibility. The government has finally buried plans for one of Boris Johnson’s cherished infrastructure ambitions – a bridge or a tunnel linking Great Britain to Northern Ireland. Despite masssive scepticism from experts and colleagues - Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief aide, dubbed it “the world’s most stupid tunnel” - Johnson ordered a feasibility study. It has been published today, alongside the report of the union connectivity review, which recommends how UK transport links could be strenghened. The main report (pdf) and the tunnel/bridge feasibility study (pdf) were both produced by Sir Peter Hendy, chairman of Network Rail and a former head of Transport for London. On the fixed link with Northern Ireland, he writes: This in-depth, evidence-based assessment has concluded that cutting-edge, twenty-first century civil engineering technology would make it possible to construct either a bridge or a tunnel between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. A bridge crossing, however, would be the longest span bridge built to date. A tunnel would be the longest undersea tunnel ever built given the limited gradients on which trains can operate, the route it would need to take and the depths it would need to reach. In addition, based on today’s technology and safety considerations, a tunnel crossing could only be constructed for railway use ... The consequence of these parameters for either a tunnel or a bridge is that they are expensive. The indicative cost estimate for the full route, including optimism bias (at P95), is £335bn for a bridge crossing and £209bn for a tunnel crossing. The bridge or tunnel, and the associated very significant works on either side for a railway and possibly for roads would take a very long time. Planning, design, parliamentary and legal processes, and construction would take nearly 30 years before the crossing could become operational, even given a smooth passage of funding and authority to proceed. Whilst the economic and social effects would be transformational, the costs would be impossible to justify, given the government’s already very significant commitment to long term transport infrastructure improvement for levelling up, and the further likely significant expenditure which would result from the further studies I am suggesting in my main UCR report. And here is the news release about the union connectivity review. It includes a plan, which the government is accepting, for a UKNET, “a strategic transport network spanning the entire United Kingdom”. The Department for Transport says: “UKNET will assess and map out for the first time the key points across the length and breadth of the United Kingdom that are essential to stronger, more direct transport connections.” In the Commons Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is about to make a statement about Covid, and the risk posed by the new variant found in South Africa. My colleague Lucy Campbell will be covering that separately on our Covid live blog. It’s here. Michel Barnier, the EU chief Brexit negotiator who is now running to be the presidential candidate for Les Républicains, the French centre-right party, has also criticised Boris Johnson over the open letter he released last night. As the Express reports, Barnier said in an interview this morning: This is obviously an additional provocation from Boris Johnson, who is in a state of mind of confrontation on all subjects with the European Union ... I find this is frankly absolutely inadmissible. What you don’t need is confrontation, it’s to sit down at the table and find solutions. The French government has accused Boris Johnson of “double speak”. In a briefing, the French government spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, said that the proposal in Johnson’s letter to Emmanuel Macron for France to take back people who successfully cross the Channel on small boats was “clearly not what we need to solve this problem”. According to PA Media, Attal also said that the letter doesn’t correspond at all” with the discussions Johnson and Macron had when they spoke on Wednesday. Atta went on: “We are sick of double speak.” It would be a “stain on our country” to see people with Down’s syndrome whose parents have died being placed in “inappropriate institutions”, MPs have been told. Opening the Commons debate on his Down’s syndrome private member’s bill, which has government backing, Liam Fox, the Conservative former international trade secretary, said: What would be completely unacceptable, a stain on our country and a scandal would be to see in future those whose parents have died being placed in inappropriate institutions, in elderly care homes or mental health institutions. That would be something that I think would bring shame to our country as well as an utterly inappropriate lifestyle for those to whom we should be giving the best possible care. Fox said his bill would lead to the health secretary “giving instructions to local health authorities, CCGs [Clinical Commissioning Groups], to local education authorities, and to local authorities in charge of long-term care to ensure that they make provision for persons with Down’s syndrome in the words of the bill”. He went on: This is not a bill about a condition, it is not about dealing with Down’s syndrome, it is about people who deserve the same ability to demand the best health, education and care as the rest of our society. It is not on our part an act of charity, it is an act of empowerment and the recognition that all members of our society must have a right to respect, independence and dignity. That is why I brought this bill forward. And this is from Sophie Pedder, the Economist’s bureau chief in Paris, making the same point. She has also published a book on Macron. These are from Adam Plowright, a journalist who has written a biography of Emmanuel Macron, on why the French president has responded so negatively to Boris Johnson’s letter. Newsnight’s Lewis Goodall has more on what the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said about Boris Johnson at his press conference this morning. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has reprimanded Boris Johnson for trying to negotiate with him about about stopping people crossing the Channel in public, via Twitter. He said he was “surprised” by Johnson’s decision to communicate with him in this way, because it was “not serious”. He explained: “We don’t communicate by tweets.” This is from the BBC’s Paris correspondent, Lucy Williamson. Earlier Williamson posted this on Twitter. In interviews this morning Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, said he hoped the French would reconsider their decision to disinvite Priti Patel, the home secretary, from a meeting planned for Sunday to discuss the Channel crossings. He told BBC Breakfast: Quite simply no nation can tackle this alone, I hope that the French will reconsider, it’s in our interests, it’s in their interests and it’s certainly in the interests of people being trafficked to the UK. These tragic scenes we’re seeing of people losing their lives, we absolutely need to work together and that’s the right thing to do. Let’s see what happens, friends and neighbours need to work together, there’s no other way to address the problem apart from working together. I hope that isn’t the end state of it because how can we resolve these problems if we do not work together? Tim Loughton, a Conservative former minister and a member of the home affairs committee, has accused the French of “turning a blind eye” to the problem at the Channel in the light of Paris’s reaction to the PM’s letter. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, will make a Commons statement on Covid at 11am, the Commons authorities have announced. He will be talking about the risk posed by the new coronavirus variant found in South Africa. As we reported last night, the government banned flights from southern Africa late yesterday, adding six countries to the travel red list, after scientists raised the alarm over what is feared to be the worst Covid-19 variant yet identified. Good morning. Last night Boris Johnson released the text of an open letter (pdf) sent to the French president, Emmanuel Macron, suggesting various measures France could take to help stop people crossing the Channel on small boats. One of his proposals was that France should just simply take people back after they have arrived in Britain. As he explained it in a Twitter thread, this could serve as a massive deterrent, he argued. The letter has gone down very badly in Paris. As my colleague Rajeev Syal reports, the French have now told Priti Patel, the home secretary, she is no longer invited to a meeting being held on Sunday to discuss the situation. If the Johnson letter was intended to further cooperation with the French, it has clearly backfired very badly. But because of Johnson’s decision to make it public, there are suspicions that it was written primarily for a domestic audience, rather than for the Élysée Palace, and that the PM just wants to ensure that British voters blame France, not his government, for the ongoing crossings. On the Today programme this morning Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, insisted that Johnson had acted “in good faith” and that the letter was not “inflammatory”. He told the programme: I think it is really important that we work hand-in-glove with the French. I don’t think there is anything inflammatory to ask for close cooperation with our nearest neighbours. The proposal was made in good faith. I can assure our French friends of that and I hope that they will reconsider meeting up to discuss it. Here is the agenda for the day 9.30am: MPs debate the second reading of Liam Fox’s private member’s Down syndrome bill. 9.30am: The ONS publishes provisional excess death figures for last winter. 11am: French fishers plan to block the port of Calais in protest over post-Brexit fishing licences. Later they plan to block the Channel tunnel. 11.30am: Downing Street holds its lobby briefing. 12pm: The ONS publishes its latest weekly Covid infection survey. 12pm: David Frost, the Brexit minister, meets his EU counterpart, Maroš Šefčovič, in London in the latest round of talks on the Northern Irish protocol. 2pm: Keith Brown, the SNP deputy leader (or depute leader, as the SNP calls the post, using the Scottish spelling), gives a speech at the SNP’s online conference. Afternoon: Adam Price, the Plaid Cymru leader, will be speaking at his party conference. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comEddie Howe makes a belated first appearance in Newcastle’s technical area and will hope for an improvement on the Magpies’ usual offerings at the Emirates. They have avoided defeat at Arsenal’s home only twice across 16 visits and have lost the last 10; the omens stack up even less promisingly given the improved form Mikel Arteta’s side have shown, notwithstanding last weekend’s humbling by Liverpool. Arteta hopes a post-match inquest among his players at Anfield will set them back on course but must be wary of a sting from Joe Willock, whose sale to Newcastle he sanctioned in the summer. Nick Ames Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue Emirates Stadium Last season Arsenal 3 Newcastle 0 Referee Stuart Attwell This season G8 Y25 R0 3.13 cards/game Odds H 1-2 A 6-1 D 4-1 ARSENAL Subs from Leno, Hein, Okonkwo, Chambers, Marí, Holding, Soares, Tavares, Elneny, Maitland-Niles, Ødegaard, Pépé, Balogun, Martinelli, Nketia Doubtful None Injured Xhaka, (knee, 26 Dec), Kolasinac (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y17 R1 Form DDWWWL Leading scorers Aubameyang, Smith Rowe 4 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Lewis, Hayden, Krafth, Manquillo, Fernández, Longstaff, Fraser, Almirón, Anderson Doubtful None Injured Dummett (calf, unknown), Gayle (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y33 R1 Form LLDLDD Leading scorer Wilson 4Stock markets around the world plunged on Friday as investors sold off shares, commodities and cryptocurrencies amid concerns that a new coronavirus variant, described as potentially the worst so far identified, could usher in a fresh wave of global pandemic restrictions. The FTSE 100 suffered its biggest one-day fall since June last year when the pandemic was still in its first phase, closing down 3.6% – knocking £72bn off the value of companies on the index of blue-chip stocks. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones industrial average dropped 2.5% by the close. The threat of stricter travel restrictions meant aviation and tourism stocks were among the worst hit, while Brent crude oil tumbled by 10% to $73.45 per barrel. Among the largest London-listed stocks, the British Airways owner, IAG, was the day’s biggest faller, losing nearly 15% of its value, while Rolls-Royce fell by 11%. Travel-related companies also fared badly on the FTSE 250, with the cruise operator Carnival losing 16% and easyJet falling by 11%. The new B.1.1.529 variant, identified on Tuesday, is feared to be more transmissible, posing a threat to current vaccines. It prompted the UK government to put six southern African countries back on England’s travel red list on Thursday night. “Markets are clearly speculating that a rapid spread of a more brutal Covid strain could once again derail the global economy,” said Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell. Travel and aviation suffered the biggest falls on the news that flights from South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho and Eswatini are to be suspended from midday on Friday. Officials are also reviewing a number of travel measures, including whether there should be a limited reintroduction of the use of PCR tests for arrivals. However, the sell-off extended to other sectors and US stock markets followed their European counterparts down, with the Dow Jones industrial average registering a fall of 2.5% by mid-morning on Wall Street. Even alternative assets such as digital currencies suffered significant declines, with bitcoin down 7% and ethereum, the world’s second-largest cryptocurrency, down 9%. “Fear has gripped the financial markets, with the travel industry flying into another violent storm after the discovery of a new Covid strain which could be far more contagious and may render vaccines less effective,” said Susannah Streeter, a senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the British government and scientists were “deeply concerned” about the B.1.1.529 variant, which is differentiated from the original strain by more than 50 mutations. “That would suggest that it may well be more transmissible and the current vaccines that we have may well be less effective,” Javid said. While only 59 cases have been identified so far, and none in the UK, one scientist described the new variant as “the worst we’ve seen so far”. Fears that the B.1.1.529 variant could hit the global recovery sent the oil price plunging, too. Brent crude fell 4.5% to $78.31 (£58.75) a barrel. Last week, almost £2bn was wiped off the value of UK airlines and travel-related companies after Austria’s decision to order a national lockdown stoked fears of the introduction of new pandemic restrictions across Europe.I think the Welsh curlews must have moved to North Yorkshire (New initiative aims to save curlew from extinction in Wales, 22 November). I live at the northern edge of the North York Moors and noted an increase in their numbers on my daily dog walks this year. Dr John Davies Kirkby-in-Cleveland, North Yorkshire • Here in Scotland, our curlews are still many and noisy. The highlight of my walk each morning (with Dougal) is the whaup of the curlews beside the River Dee. Keith Langton Kirkcudbright, Dumfries &amp; Galloway • Here in Huddersfield, Royal Mail is excellent (Letters, 23 November). The post comes before 9.30am every day and, yes, my copy of Private Eye arrives like clockwork every other Wednesday. Jonathan Ryland Huddersfield, West Yorkshire • Since Boris Johnson reportedly talked throughout a performance of Macbeth (Boris Johnson accused of flouting request to wear mask at theatre, 24 November), he may have missed the good advice he was offered at act 3, scene 4, lines 118-19: “Stand not upon the order of your going, / But go at once.” Neil Powell Orford, Suffolk • I was delighted to read Felicity Cloake’s shortbread recipe (24 November). It is the same recipe that my Scottish great-grandmother gave my grandmother on her marriage in 1906. It has served our family well ever since. Elizabeth Green Blackheath, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Reading Tim Dowling (We are way past peak puppy – it’s time to end the great British dog obsession, 22 November) took me back to 1973, when I was launching a small local cable TV station, Bristol Channel. To grab some publicity, in the Sunday evening “God slot”, I launched Dog Slot, a programme for and by pets. My family’s border terrier, Jenny, was the inspiration: she was a TV addict. We attracted press coverage, and a research assistant of Umberto Eco wrote from Bologna to ask if we had any data on audience response. Barks and miaows had not been recorded, I answered, but humans reported considerable pet interest. Peter Lewis Kentish Town, London • Tim Dowling needs to read the pragmatist philosopher William James to understand why people love dogs. As we can’t be certain what dogs are thinking, we have a “right to believe” they are emotionally intelligent, offer support in difficult times, and like Dog TV. Since this belief is useful in the lives of those of us who love dogs, we have good reason to regard it as true. I shall be upgrading Molly’s phone for Christmas. Prof Michael C Jackson Beverley, Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.For years my grandmother had a wrapped Christmas pudding in her toy cupboard marked as being from the local Naafi kitchen and dated 1941 (Letters, 25 November). It was used variously as a doorstop, football, etc. I inherited it when she died, and continued to use it as a doorstop. It was still being used for this purpose in December 1981, when I and my student housemates realised that nobody had got a pudding for our Christmas dinner. As it was all that was available, we cooked the “doorstop”. It’s probably the best Christmas pudding that I have ever tasted. Sally Churchill Graigwen, Rhondda Cynon Taf • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your editorial (The Guardian view on deaths in the Channel: the tide of xenophobia, 25 November) rightly calls for an honest discussion about safe and legal routes to the UK. The Conservative government has no intention of doing so, and the Labour party doesn’t have the courage. The former makes vague reference to the existing resettlement schemes, which do not apply to asylum seekers camped on the French coast, and the latter merely deplores the inadequacy of the schemes. Neither explains how the schemes might be extended to prevent Channel crossing deaths. Worse, the call from churches and refugee agencies for humanitarian visas, which could at a stroke end the trade in human misery, is blanked by both parties. The government’s only concern is to push back asylum seekers, not to accommodate them, and the Labour leadership hasn’t the courage to have an honest discussion about safe, legal routes that might risk its standing with the electorate. The Labour party must find the courage to press for humanitarian visas. Anthony Whitston Trustee, Survivors of Torture Relief Fund • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Re Stella Creasy’s article (Here’s why my baby was banned from parliament – and why we must all fight this, 25 November), are we stuck in a never-ending time-wasting loop? Yes, dragging a horde of toddlers into the Commons would be mad, but why not allow a quiet breastfed baby, to enable a politician to sit in on an important meeting? Back in 1989, a year after I was elected as the first black woman on Newcastle city council, I took my baby in with me and breastfed her at committee meetings and in full council. When I had my second baby I did the same, once breastfeeding her while chairing an area housing committee meeting. The council members as a whole were far from a progressive bunch. I found much difficult as a young black woman serving with many who were old enough to be my grandparents. But the babies were accepted and I was never reproached for being a young working mother while representing my constituents. Amanda Baker Edinburgh • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I welcomed Polly Toynbee’s article giving us a positive picture of the 1970s (Are the 2020s really like living back in the 1970s? I wish …, 20 November). However, she omitted what is to me one of the most important and visible differences from now. I was a teenager in the 1970s and was shocked, when going to Italy for the first time, to see people begging on the street. Until the advent of Thatcher it was very rare to see anyone sleeping rough, except on the Embankment in London. It was only with Thatcher’s policies that this became commonplace. As somebody who remembers a world with high income tax and low poverty and homelessness, I consider it a duty to remind those who don’t that such a society is possible and existed not long ago. Rabbi Margaret Jacobi Birmingham • Oh, Polly Toynbee, take off those rose-tinted specs. Yes, university was free for our generation, but the majority finished school at 15 or 16. Jobs with pensions? Not for me, as a secretary, until a public sector job in 1989. Cheap houses? Maybe, but mortgage lenders only took a proportion of the wife’s income into account, assuming correctly that it would disappear once she started a family. Hindsight is not necessarily 20/20 vision. Rita Gallard Norwich • Polly Toynbee is correct when she writes “the 70s were a good time to be alive”, but she makes a very unfair reference to the Austin Allegro. I had one to succeed a much-liked Ford Escort. The Allegro was not only faster and more economical, it had better handing and was the best car in the snow I’ve driven in 45 years or so of motoring. If you need a car to be the epitome of things being bad, the Ford Pinto would be a good start. John Parkin Nuneaton, Warwickshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I was glad to read in Ian Jack’s article (The London to Edinburgh train ride was once a thing of wonder. Can it be again?, 19 November) that, on the trains operated by Lumo in the east coast mainline, “every part of the train is electric”. Even an exclusively diesel-powered train is better for the environment than flying, but a train with no onboard engine at all is the best of all. If only the same were true of the Azuma trains run by the line’s main operator, for it is not true of all of them. Those trains travelling through, to or from Aberdeen or Inverness – or turning off to places such as Hull – are “bi-modes”, which can take power either from electrification or from an onboard engine – a diesel one in this case, but a hydrogen or battery one would not be much better. A train engine is not like a stationary generator: being carried around means that it uses energy whether switched on or off. Carrying such an engine under the wires all the way from London to Edinburgh, for example, somewhat undermines the advantages of using electrification. The saddest thing is that when real railwaymen ran the railways, bi-modes were experimented with and ultimately abandoned because they were inefficient. Yet they are now being used on ever more lines – the Great Western lines are one example, thanks to the electrification scheme being left unfinished. If the government is serious about the environment, it needs to resume and complete electrification schemes, and encourage operators to strip out engines. Charles EL Gilman Mitcham, London • Thank you, Ian Jack, for reminding us of the little sightseeing booklets that railway companies used to produce. It’s sad that many train travellers now don’t even look out of the window, but instead spend their time stroking screens. I always took my Virgin Windowgazer Guides with me on long train journeys when they were available; they were also the only good thing I ever encountered that had Virgin in its name. Jim Grozier Brighton, East Sussex • Ian Jack’s article reminded me of travelling between King’s Cross and Aberdeen as a student in the early 1980s, and clocking the cathedrals along the way. But how strange that he omits to mention the ecclesiastical jewel of the route, which is surely the utterly beautiful lantern tower of St Nicholas in Newcastle upon Tyne, near Robert Stephenson’s resplendent High Level Bridge. Victoria Owens Long Ashton, Somerset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The latest potential policy responses to tackle the unprecedented backlog in elective care that built up during the pandemic (Plan to scrap tens of millions of NHS appointments ‘could put patients at risk’, 25 November) demonstrate how children and young people – particularly those who are vulnerable – are being overlooked in the government’s NHS recovery plans. This is despite the fact that children and young people experienced much greater decreases in planned hospital admissions than adults during the pandemic, and that these deficits in elective care were not distributed equally in society, with vulnerable groups disproportionately affected. For example, during the pandemic, the 21% of secondary school students receiving special educational needs support or children’s social care services bore 37% of the deficit in elective hospital admissions. During the pandemic, young people receiving special educational needs support or social care services were also less likely than their peers to attend virtual outpatient hospital appointments, possibly due to difficulties accessing or using digital devices. This means that the proposal to reduce standard follow-up care runs the risk of further disadvantaging vulnerable children in terms of accessing hospital care. Health professionals are also an important source of referrals to children’s social care services. Relying on parents and carers to opt in to follow-up care may mean missed opportunities to pick up on safeguarding concerns. Dr Louise Mc Grath-Lone Senior research fellow in public health data science, University College London • The government is planning to scrap “unnecessary” hospital outpatient appointments to allow doctors to do more operations and reduce waiting lists. This plan shows that Whitehall has a surprisingly poor understanding of why NHS waiting lists are so long. There are two main reasons for the long waits, other than the pandemic. The first is that patients cannot be admitted for surgery because hospitals are full of patients who cannot be discharged. My own hospital had 130 patients last week who were medically fit to go home but could not be discharged because there is such limited social care available. The government’s recent decision to require all carers to be double-jabbed has not helped. The second is that staffing levels have slowly imploded following the calamity of Brexit, as mainland Europeans have gradually left. David Hildick-Smith Professor of cardiology, University Hospitals Sussex • Reading what Polly Toynbee (The NHS is facing its hardest winter ever – but the Tories are still bent on destroying it, 22 November) and Siva Anandaciva (Here’s what the UK can learn from other countries’ responses to Covid-19, 24 November) have to say about the plight of the NHS brings to mind the travails of Britain’s railways. There were decades of underinvestment, revenue was fixed at low levels, connectivity of services was done away with, and modernisation programmes were slapdash. Despite this, the railways were remarkably well managed – at least, as well as was possible with scarce and antiquated resources. Nevertheless, diversionary and relief routes were closed, with the track ripped up and the land sold. Towns and cities deprived of a rail lifeline stagnated, and large areas of the country, including future urban expansion zones, were left with few or no connections. Congestion grew and grew on the roads, along with air pollution, accidents and oil consumption. In the 2020s, reversing these trends is something of a national priority, but it is proving to be challenging, slow, half-hearted and hideously expensive. In the era in which Ernest Marples was king of the road, we learned to do without many of our railways. We cannot do without a health service, and we do not wish to do without one that is run as a public service. Are the same painful lessons going to be learned the hard way? Prof David E Alexander Institute for Risk and Disaster Reduction, University College London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.My father-in-law, David Dymond, who has died aged 88, was a widely respected historian of East Anglia. He spent more than five decades researching, writing and teaching in the region, and inspired countless others with his passion for local history. David’s book Researching and Writing History: A Guide for Local Historians, first published in 1981 and in print continuously since, is regarded as the essential text on the subject. Other innovations include his Historical Atlas of Suffolk (1988, with Edward Martin) and his work advocating a multidisciplinary approach to history and archaeology. Ecclesiastical history was a core interest, with a decade of research resulting in the two-volume The Register of Thetford Priory (1995 and 1996, covering the years 1482 to 1540) for the British Academy. Born in Northampton to Winnie (nee Gloyn) and Percy, a journalist, latterly the London editor and parliamentary correspondent of the Belfast Telegraph, David spent much of his childhood in Exeter, where he went to Hele’s school; after the family moved to Croydon in 1949, David finished his schooling at Selhurst grammar. He took a degree in history at the University College of the South West (now the University of Exeter). Inspired by his father, a talented writer with an interest in Devon’s past, David began his career as an investigator with the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments in York in 1957. Here he met Mary Sands, also a historian, and the couple married in 1963 and moved to Suffolk, closer to Mary’s family. From 1965 to 1994 David lectured for the Cambridge University department of extramural studies, where he was resident tutor in Suffolk and then director of studies in local and regional history, teaching evening classes and residential courses to adults in Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex, Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire. Many of his students went on to do their own research, to publish or take doctorates. He was editor of The Local Historian from 1976 to 1983. In 2000 David was awarded a PhD from Cambridge University as well as an honorary doctorate from the University of East Anglia. In July last year he was presented with a Festschrift, a collection of writings by 17 colleagues in honour of his work. In his acceptance speech he articulated his lifelong aim to improve standards in local history, ensuring it is “written clearly and economically, yet with plenty of sparkle and plenty of bounce”. David was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and of the Royal Historical Society, but dedicated much of his time closer to home. He was well known in Bury St Edmunds, conveniently living next door to the local record office. As first chairman of the Bury Society, he was closely involved in campaigns to “Save St Johns Street” in the early 70s, and more recently to preserve Bradfield Woods. In 2017 the High Sheriff of Suffolk presented him with a “certificate of recognition” for service to the county. David is survived by Mary, who supported him throughout his career, three children, Catherine, Eleanor and Charles, my husband, and four grandchildren, Emma, Matthew, Ella and Toby.Adele has scored the highest opening week for an album in 2021, beating Abba’s recent blockbuster return. Her fourth album, 30, notched chart sales of 261,000, a figure derived from streaming, downloads and physical sales (including 16,700 copies shifted on vinyl). It’s the biggest first week sales figure since Ed Sheeran’s Divide in 2017, and beats Abba’s 204,000 figure for Voyage. Her previous three albums all reached No 1, meaning no other female act has had as many albums all go to No 1 in the UK. That back catalogue is well represented in this week’s chart with 19 at No 31, 21 at No 18, and 25 at No 15. 30’s lead single, Easy on Me, continues its reign at the top of the singles chart, earning its sixth week at No 1, making it Adele’s longest-running chart-topper. She missed out, though, on being the first woman to place at No 1, 2 and 3 on the singles chart – Oh My God is at No 2 but I Drink Wine reached No 4. In the US, Adele’s sales have been even more spectacular, and 30 became the biggest selling album of the year after just three days. In the UK, that title is still held by Olivia Rodrigo and her album Sour, which has 320,000 chart sales according to the last count by the Official Charts Company in October. Christmas has also arrived, at least in the UK charts: Mariah Carey’s All I Want for Christmas Is You is at No 24 and Wham!’s Last Christmas is at No 28. Michael Bublé’s perennially popular 2011 Christmas LP rejoins the album chart, at No 17. Chart-watchers are starting to eye the Christmas No 1 race, with a new, as yet unreleased festive song by Sheeran and Elton John expected to feature highly – one of three Christmas songs the pair have written together. LadBaby, the YouTube star who has had the last three Christmas No 1s, hasn’t announced if he will be attempting a fourth.After more than 150 years of struggle for justice, truth and reparation, the Moriori people of Rēkohu, or the Chatham Islands, can turn a new leaf on the history book that rewrote their story and taught generations of New Zealanders they were an inferior race that was now extinct. Moriori were the first settlers to the archipelago, 800 kilometres east of New Zealand, between 600 and 1,000 years ago and developed a distinct language, customs and culture before they were nearly wiped out. On Tuesday, the New Zealand government enshrined in law a treaty between Moriori and the Crown, which includes an NZ$18m (£9.3m) settlement, the return of land, and an apology acknowledging the wrongs Moriori have suffered since the arrival of Māori and Europeans to their shores. “It’s a celebration for me and there was definitely a buoyant feeling in the room … that it’s actually going to become the law of the land and pretty much set in stone – that’s a significant milestone in our history,” Moriori leader Maui Solomon said. “We’re a people that has vision, determination, and resilience. And by adhering to our own philosophy of peace and inclusivity, we’ll certainly stand up for our rights and not be pushed around and bullied any more.” Solomon’s ancestors began the fight for justice long before him, but he has been instrumental in moving a settlement forward. For nearly 40 years, he has led the fight for reparation, first filing a claim on behalf of the imi (tribe) in 1988, which culminated in this week’s bill being passed. “We’ve spent the last 20 or 30 years getting the hardware sorted out, the resources, and getting some land and assets back, but the real work now starts in developing the software and installing that into our people,” he said. The minister for Treaty of Waitangi negotiations, Andrew Little, said the law’s passing was a special moment for Moriori. “It’s a testament to the years of hard work by Moriori and dedication to negotiating a deed of settlement and a long awaited day of celebration.” Alongside the financial reparations and apology, the settlement includes an agreed account of the Moriori history, a necessary step in correcting the myths and narratives the Crown disseminated over many generations. Moriori had a pacifist philosophy which chief Nunuku-Whenua introduced to his people around the 16th century. The covenant of peace banned rank, violence and warfare. The imi lived undisturbed for many centuries until their first contact with European settlers in 1791, who arrived on the HMS Chatham, bringing with them diseases and the start of a new colonial era. “In late 1835, about 900 people of two mainland Māori tribes sailed on a British ship to Rēkohu … the newcomers were welcomed and fed by Moriori in accordance with tikane Moriori (Moriori custom). Some Moriori wanted to resist the invaders, but the elders…urged the people to obey Nunuku’s law of peace … Upon returning to their villages they were attacked, and many were killed. Māori accounts put the number of Moriori killed in 1835–36 at about 300, or about one-sixth of the population. Those Moriori who survived the invasion were enslaved and forced to do manual labour,” the official account of Moriori history states. By 1901, the Moriori population on Rēkohu had collapsed from a pre-contact population of about 2,000 to only 31. In the early 20th century, prominent ethnographers wrongly portrayed Moriori as extinct and racially distinct from, and inferior to, Māori. The Crown contributed to the dissemination of this myth through the publication of the School Journal, which taught generations of New Zealand schoolchildren that Moriori were an inferior race who had occupied New Zealand prior to the arrival of Māori and had been driven out to the Chatham Islands by the later migrants. These myths caused much damage to Moriori and is rhetoric that has been used to justify European colonisation. It’s estimated there are now between 3,000 and 6,000 people of Moriori descent. Rāhiri Edwards-Hammond, 20, recently completed her dissertation in contemporary Moriori identity, and says having the Crown finally acknowledge the history is important but is just the first step towards reconciliation. “The fact that our stories are coming to light, and people are showing interest is huge. The majority of our population don’t know the Moriori.” “The first thing for me, on a personal level, but also on a wider cultural level, it’s just getting to know ourselves again, relearning our history, sharing our history, it’s creating new things.” This includes revitalising culture and language, using modern technology. Recently, the first Moriori songs were uploaded to Spotify, and a new app called Ta Rē Moriori aims to teach people the basics of Moriori language. Many generations of Moriori have lost their connection to their culture, Edwards-Hammond said, and now is a time for the country to learn and evolve. “[This] is the opportunity for all of us to learn about the origins of this country, the colonial violence of this country, and the more that we come to accept all the parts of our history, I think the easier it’ll be for us to move forward and actually seek that reconciliation.”In the end, Judith Collins’s tenure at the top of the National Party ended on the same notes that have sounded throughout her political career: fighting words, a refusal to back down, and one last attempt at crushing a foe. The MP, nicknamed “Crusher” for a policy that physically crushed the cars of traffic-code-violating ‘boy racers’, was never one to walk away from a battle easily. As the dust settles from her latest, leadership-ending altercation, New Zealand’s opposition will be left scrambling for leadership for the fifth time in about as many years – and commentators say the party’s turmoil risks creating a vacuum at the right of the country’s political spectrum. ‘One last grenade’ Standing at the podium to formalise the latest implosion of opposition leadership on Thursday, National’s interim leader Shane Reti was quizzed about the scandal that had sent the party’s latest leader flaming out of the top job. He stolidly repeated to reporters the same lines: he wouldn’t be discussing private conversations with colleagues, or with caucus, or about the internal business of the party. His words were more aspirational than descriptive: New Zealand’s opposition has spent much of the last year struggling to stop discussing its own business, distracted again and again from policy by internal machinations. This week, Collins continued the trend, self-destructing in spectacular fashion after a sudden decision to strip one of her political rivals, Simon Bridges, of his portfolios for a historic complaint. Collins’s unilateral move on Wednesday night blindsided many of the party’s MPs, and exploded in her face the following morning. What the leader had characterised in a press release as “serious misconduct” and implied was “intimidation” and “harassment,” was revealed as a crude comment made at a function about five years earlier in a group discussing their wives and children. Bridges said on Thursday “I have two boys and I wanted a girl” and he had discussed “some old wives tales” about how he and his wife might have a girl. Bridges had been censured and apologised at the time – and Collins’ handling of the historic complaint was a final straw for the party, which rolled her as leader in the hours that followed. In the end, the traits seen as Collins’ possible leadership strengths – ruthlessness, hard-headed determination, a fondness for going on the offensive, fast and decisive action – reared up in her final incident as leader. “It drew together and amplified a lot of the common themes of Collins’ leadership as a whole,” says former National government staffer Ben Thomas. “Her natural proclivities for attack, directed internally at her own caucus rather than the government. Her lack of discipline, distracting from very significant failures by the government this week – and her unpredictability.” “Collins, who is a natural fighter and will never cede her ground voluntarily, threw one last grenade,” Thomas says. As a leader, Collins always had significant strengths and weaknesses, says former press secretary and longtime National staffer Janet Wilson, who worked with her through the last election. “On the plus side, what we got was an ability to be decisive and make decisions,” she says. “And even in the darkest days … she kept going, she kept her head high – she knew she had been given a hospital pass [as leader] and she carried on.” But those traits also infused the abrupt, catastrophic action that felled her. “Strengths become weaknesses,” Wilson says. Once employed to sell Collins as a prospective prime minister, the former press-secretary is now blunt about her frustrations, saying the leader’s actions “enraged caucus” and had damaged the party’s reputation. Her frustration has been echoed elsewhere: former National speaker David Carter told Stuff the leader had “attempted to lead by fear” and it was “wonderful news” that her tenure had ended. Collins’ office was approached for comment, but did not reply. Her current press secretary announced his resignation on Thursday. ‘Like an abattoir’ But even under new leadership, there are concerns for the health of New Zealand’s opposition – and whether, after a year in the polling doldrums, a vacuum is forming at the centre right. “Generally, I think it’s good for democracy when the opposition is a little bit more together than this,” says co-director of the Public Policy Institute and Auckland University lecturer Dr Lara Greaves. “Right now they don’t look like a credible opposition, they look like an abattoir,” Thomas says. The latest spill comes as Jacinda Ardern’s government is experiencing some of its worst polling since the pandemic began. While Labour is still well ahead of its competitors, its vote has slumped significantly in recent months – down to about 41%. But National has barely benefited from that drop, sitting in the low 20s, with votes instead redistributing to the libertarian Act and other small parties. National’s new leader, due to be chosen next Tuesday, will be its fifth in Ardern’s tenure as prime minister. Amid the turmoil, the Act party’s David Seymour has been a clear winner, rising to 12% in the preferred prime minister stakes – compared to Collins’ 6%. Act’s party vote has risen to 16%. Seymour presents one of the biggest challenges for the party’s future, Greaves says. “There’s David Seymour and his party sitting there on the right, and growing in popularity,” she says. “[He] seems to be able to speak to the public and be likable in a way that none of the national leaders have been.” “If national don’t arrest the decline? He [Seymour] could crest 20 points easily in the near future,” says Wilson. “I think there’s got to be wholesale governance change if this party is going to present a fresh face in the 21st century.” Out of leadership, Collins will continue for now as a force within the party: she has said she will stay on in her seat, and is unapologetic about the events that saw her exit the top job. Asked by a Stuff reporter on Thursday if she regretted the press release that had ended it, she responded with one word: “Never.”