Cosmetic surgery clinics are to be banned from targeting adverts for procedures such as breast enlargement, nose jobs and liposuction at under-18s, in a crackdown by the UK advertising watchdog. New rules will bar ads on all media – ranging from social media sites such as Facebook, TikTok and Instagram to billboards and posters, newspapers, magazines and radio as well as social influencer marketing – that are aimed at under-18s or likely to have a particular appeal to that age group. The changes come into force from May and follow a consultation by the Committee for Advertising Practice (Cap), which writes the codes that all UK advertisers have to follow. It launched the consultation, which investigated the potential harm such ads can have on young people’s mental health and the issue of body image pressure, after noting the “concerns expressed by senior NHS and public health figures”. While it is illegal to perform cosmetic procedures on under-18s, there have been no restrictions on advertising to them, unlike the controls that exist around the marketing of junk food products, alcohol and gambling. In 2018, the Advertising Standards Authority, which enforces the UK ad code, received complaints about a breast surgery ad run by MYA clinic that featured in the ad breaks on Love Island when watched on its ITV Hub streaming service. The clip, which featured women in bikinis partying around a swimming pool, on a beach and a boat, was widely criticised and was later banned by the ASA. Complainants included the Mental Health Foundation, which said the ad created an aspirational link between surgery, body confidence and happiness. “Because of the inherent risks of cosmetic intervention procedures, and the potential appeal of these services to young people struggling with body confidence issues, it is important we set the bar necessarily high in terms of marketing,” said Shahriar Coupal, the director of the Committee of Advertising Practice. “The new rules will ensure ads can’t be targeted at under-18s and, where children and young people do see them, our strict rules mean the ads can’t mislead or otherwise exploit the vulnerabilities of their audience.” The ban will not affect ads for cosmetics such as creams, makeup, lotions, face masks, tanning or hair products. Earlier this year, the ASA named and shamed social media stars including Jodie Marsh, Chloe Khan, Lucy Mecklenburgh and Chloe Ferry for repeatedly flouting rules requiring them to tell followers when they were being paid to promote a product or service in a post. In recent years the ASA has also cracked down on gender stereotyping in ads and abolished overt airbrushing, which has led to major beauty adverts featuring celebrities including Cara Delevingne, Natalie Portman and Julia Roberts being banned. The ASA has also banned ads featuring “unhealthily thin” models.One in 10 UK families – about 3m households – are facing a cost of living crunch this winter, unable to cover even basic bills such as food and heating, according to Citizens Advice. One in five of all adults had cut back on their food shop or turned off the heating, while one in 10 anticipated having to use food banks, a survey by the consumer charity found. Citizens Advice urged the government to bring forward its standard inflation-matching uprating of benefits from April to December, arguing this could make the average family on universal credit £30 a month better off. Without fresh government help it expected to see rising numbers of low-income families coming to its advisers for help over the next few months because of the “triple whammy” of the £20 a week universal credit cut, soaring energy bills and rising inflation. Dame Clare Moriarty, the chief executive of Citizens Advice, said: “The government has a crucial opportunity to intervene before things escalate even further. We’d urge them to act now and increase benefits in line with inflation this December.” The government on Wednesday brought into force adjustments to the universal credit taper rate for working claimants, which were announced in the October budget with the promise that nearly 2 million families would be £1,000 a year better off. But critics have pointed out that the majority of households on universal credit – about 3 million – would see no benefit from the move, including those who cannot work, such as carers, parents of very young children, and sick or disabled people. Analysis by Citizens Advice found that even when placed on a strict “minimal budget” – the financial plan used by the charity to support clients through a debt management process – more than 3m households were unable to meet basic living costs. A further 400,000 were left with just £50 a month once bills were paid. Citizens Advice said nearly three-quarters of its frontline advice staff had reported an increase in the number of people coming to them over the past three months unable to afford basics such as rent, food and energy. “I spoke to one man who said things are so bad he’s keeping warm at night by wearing three jumpers and lying on the sofa with his dog,” said Aasia Majid, an adviser at Citizens Advice Manchester. The charity cited the case of Gordon (not his real name), a former engineer in his 60s who had to give up work because of spinal cancer in 2019. He has been claiming universal credit as he cannot work and is now £20 a week worse off because of the recent cut. “I don’t buy the things I need to buy. I’m constantly looking at the bank account,” he said. “I put things off as I can’t afford the petrol to drive. I feel isolated and stressed, but what can I do?” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting people on low incomes and the changes we have made to universal credit will see nearly 2 million of the lowest paid better off by around £1,000 a year. The most vulnerable, including those who can’t work, can get additional help with essential costs available through our new £500m support fund.”The three white men who chased and killed Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old Black man, were found guilty of murder. Travis McMichael, who shot Arbery as he was running through a Georgia neighborhood, was found guilty of malice murder and several charges of felony murder. Greg McMichael and William Bryan, who took part in the pursuit in two separate vehicles, were found guilty on multiple charges of felony murder. They face minimum sentences of life imprisonment. A judge will decide at a later date if they will be eligible for parole. Arbery’s mother, Wanda Cooper-Jones, spoke outside court afterward. “It’s been a long fight, it’s been a hard fight,” she said.“To tell you the truth I never saw this day. Back in 2020 I never thought this day would come.” Joe Biden issued a statement following the guilty verdicts, saying: “Ahmaud Arbery’s killing – witnessed by the world on video – is a devastating reminder of how far we have to go in the fight for racial justice in this country.” He continued, “Nothing can bring Mr Arbery back to his family and to his community, but the verdict ensures that those who committed this horrible crime will be punished.” Jon Ossoff, the senator from Georgia, and others called for further investigation. Ossoff said: “Further investigation is necessary to determine how and why officials initially refused to pursue the case”. The Georgia senator Raphael Warnock reacted to the verdict, writing on Twitter: “I’m grateful to the jury for their service and for a verdict that says Ahmaud Arbery’s life mattered.” Relief, emotion and a sense of hope came flooding out in Brunswick, on social media, from the White House and across the US as the nation came to terms with the Ahmaud Arbery verdicts and their place in history. Outside the Georgia courthouse, a joyous, flag-waving crowd repeatedly chanted: “Ahmaud Arbery! Say his name!” as the Arbery family, surrounded by their attorneys, emerged to address them. “It’s been a long fight, it’s been a hard fight,” said Arbery’s mother, Wanda Cooper-Jones. “To tell you the truth I never saw this day. Back in 2020 I never thought this day would come … Thank you to those who marched, the ones who prayed, thank you.” Cooper-Jones said her son “will now rest in peace”. Arbery’s father, Marcus Arbery, thanked his son’s mother, and the activists and lawyers who helped draw attention to his son’s case. “God put us all together to make this happen,” he said. “We conquered that lynch mob. We got that lynch mob … Today is a good day.” Ben Crump, the civil rights attorney representing the Arbery family, said although the outcome of the case was welcome, Ahmaud Arbery’s parents were still grieving their son. “Even though this is not a celebration, it’s a reflection. The spirit of Ahmaud defeated the lynch mob,” he told the courthouse crowd. Read more: Dozens of supporters marched through Brunswick, following the verdict. Here are some images from the day. undefined Jon Ossoff, the senator from Georgia, said “further investigation is necessary to determine how and why officials initially refused to pursue the case”. In a statement, the senator wrote: Ahmaud Arbery’s murderers will be held accountable, but a historic civil rights mobilization was necessary for the killers to face prosecution at all. There was nearly impunity for this murder and further investigation is necessary to determine how and why officials initially refused to pursue the case. The circumstances of Ahmaud Arbery’s murder and the struggle required to secure a prosecution demonstrate profoundly the urgency of reforms to make equal justice real in America. • The three white men who chased and killed Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old Black man, were found guilty of murder. • Travis McMichael, who shot Arbery as he was running through a Georgia neighborhood, was found guilty of malice murder and several charges of felony murder. • Greg McMichael and William Bryan, who took part in the pursuit in two separate vehicles, were found guilty on multiple charges of felony murder. • The three men face minimum sentences of life imprisonment. A judge will decide at a later date if they will be eligible for parole. Here’s the moment Travis McMichael received his guilty verdict in court. McMichael was found guilty on all nine charges he faced, including malice murder and felony murder. He now faces life in prison for killing Ahmaud Arbery. Kamala Harris has issued a statement on today’s verdicts: Today, the jury rendered its verdicts and the three defendants were found guilty of murdering Ahmaud Arbery. Still, we feel the weight of grief. Ahmaud Arbery should be alive and nothing can take away the pain that his mother Wanda Cooper-Jones, his father Marcus Arbery, and the entire Arbery family and community feel today. I share in that pain. These verdicts send an important message, but the fact remains that we still have work to do. The defense counsel chose to set a tone that cast the attendance of ministers at the trial as intimidation and dehumanized a young Black man with racist tropes. The jury arrived at its verdicts despite these tactics. Ahmaud Arbery was a son. He was a brother. He was a friend. His life had meaning. We will not forget him. We honor him best by continuing the fight for justice. The trial “touched on race and racism in the US, often echoing America’s segregated past as well as modern day prejudice”, my colleague Maya Yang writes: “Arbery’s killing highlighted the dangers that Black Americans can face doing entirely ordinary things that white people can perceive as a threat. They can range from bird watching, to showing a house for sale to swimming. “Arbery, a former high school football standout, loved to run. On 23 February last year, he was unarmed and out jogging through his neighborhood in Brunswick, Georgia, when he was tracked by the McMichaels and Bryan before being gunned down. Relying on a defunct civil war-era law that deputizes citizens to police the movements of Black bodies and carry out citizen’s arrests of suspected criminals, the white men argued that they were acting in self-defense. And they believe they were legally justified in pursuing Arbery because they thought he matched the description of a burglary suspect. Arbery’s death has reaffirmed a concern among many Black runners that they will be racially profiled or attacked while running in the United States. The multitude of racist experiences of “running while Black” has prompted runners to take precautionary measures such as wearing bright colors to appear non-threatening and running during daylight hours. You can read Maya’s full piece here: Chris Carr, Georgia’s attorney general, has issued a statement: “The loss of Ahmaud Arbery was a tragedy that should have never occurred. Today’s verdict brings us one step closer to justice, healing and reconciliation for Ahmaud’s family, the community, the state and the nation.” Robert Rubin, attorney for Travis McMichael, has spoken outside court. Asked if he plans to appeal, Rubin said: “Yes, absolutely.” Jason Sheffield, another defense attorney for McMichael, said he wanted to thank “everyone who gathered here in front of the Glynn County courthouse”. “We understand, more than you know, how valuable it is to have people come together, peacefully assemble,” Sheffield said. “This is a very difficult day for Travis McMichael and Greg McMichael,” Sheffield said. The men “honestly believe” they were doing the right thing, he said. Page Pate, a Georgia-based attorney, told CNN just now that it is unlikely an appeal will be successful. “It is hard to win an appeal case in Georgia,” Pate said. Joe Biden has issued a statement following the guilty verdicts against Ahmaud Arbery’s killers. “Ahmaud Arbery’s killing – witnessed by the world on video – is a devastating reminder of how far we have to go in the fight for racial justice in this country,” Biden said. “Mr Arbery should be here today, celebrating the holidays with his mother, Wanda Cooper-Jones, and his father, Marcus Arbery. Nothing can bring Mr Arbery back to his family and to his community, but the verdict ensures that those who committed this horrible crime will be punished. “While the guilty verdicts reflect our justice system doing its job, that alone is not enough. Instead, we must recommit ourselves to building a future of unity and shared strength, where no one fears violence because of the color of their skin. “My administration will continue to do the hard work to ensure that equal justice under law is not just a phrase emblazoned in stone above the supreme court, but a reality for all Americans.” Here’s a breakdown from ABC News on the convictions of Travis McMichael, Gregory McMichael and William Bryan. All three face a minimum sentence of life imprisonment. The judge will decide at a later date whether they will ever be eligible for parole. Linda Dunikoski, the lead prosecutor in the trial, has been praised for her presentation of the case. Speaking outside court, she said it had been a “team effort”. “We really appreciate the support we had, the faith from Mr Arbery and Ms Cooper-Jones,” Dunikoski said, referring to Ahmaud Arbery’s father and mother. The verdict today was “based on the facts, based on the evidence”, Dunikoski said. Marcus Arbery, Ahmaud’s father, thanked his son’s mother and the activists and lawyers who helped draw attention to his son’s case. “God put us all together to make this happen,” Arbery said. “We conquered that lynch mob. We got that lynch mob.” Arbery said: “We don’t want to see nobody go through this.” He added: “Let’s keep fighting and making this world a better place for all human beings.” “All human beings need to be treated equally,” Arbery said. “Today is a good day.” Ahmaud Arbery’s mother, Wanda Cooper-Jones, has just spoken outside court. “It’s been a long fight, it’s been a hard fight,” Cooper-Jones said. “To tell you the truth I never saw this day. Back in 2020 I never thought this day would come.” Cooper-Jones added: “Thank you to those who marched, the ones who prayed, thank you.” Cooper-Jones said her son “will now rest in peace”. Al Sharpton, civil rights activist and founder of National Action Network, has just been speaking outside court. Arbery’s parents “lost a son”, Sharpton said: “But their son will go down in history as one that proved that if you hold on justice will come.” Sharpton said: “A jury of 11 whites and one black, in the Deep South, stood up in the courtroom and said that Black lives do matter.” More perspective, from Yamiche Alcindor, White House correspondent for PBS Newshour and a political contributor for NBC News. Jewel Wicker, editor-at-large at Capital B magazine in Atlanta, Georgia, writes: Mark Joseph Stern, a writer for Slate, has more on what it took to bring charges against Arbery’s killers. Bakari Sellers, attorney and political commentator, just told CNN: “Ahmaud Arbery being alive is justice,” but Sellers added that the verdicts added up to a measure of “accountability”. “We found out today that lynching is still illegal in the United States of America,” he said. Derrick Johnson, president &amp; CEO of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, writes: The McMichaels and Bryan still face hate-crime charges in federal court in February. The Department of Justice alleges the men “used force and threats of force to intimidate and interfere with Arbery’s right to use a public street because of his race”. None of the men found guilty of murdering Arbery were charged until eyewitness footage was made public months after the 25-year-old was killed, a point made by Keith Boykin, author of Race Against Time: The Politics of a Darkening America. The minimum penalty for malice murder, and for felony murder, is life in prison, Associated Press reported: It is up to the judge to decide whether that comes with or without the possibility of parole. Even if the possibility of parole is granted, a person convicted of murder must serve 30 years before becoming eligible. “The sentence for felony murder and malice murder is exactly the same,” Ron Carlson, a University of Georgia law professor, said. “It is a distinction without a difference in terms of punishment.” Murder can also be punishable by death in Georgia if the killing meets certain criteria and the prosecutor chooses to seek the death penalty. Prosecutors in this case did not. Travis McMichael, Greg McMichael and William Bryan have been found guilty of murdering Ahmaud Arbery. The three men pursued Arbery, a 25-year-old Black man, through their neighborhood on 23 February 2020, before Travis McMichael shot and killed him. Travis McMichael was found guilty of malice murder and felony murder. Greg McMichael, his father, was found not guilty of malice murder, but guilty of felony murder. Bryan was found not guilty of malice murder, but guilty of felony murder. The men were also found guilty on several other charges, including aggravated assault, false imprisonment, and criminal attempt to commit a felony. Under Georgia law malice murder is when a person “unlawfully and with malice aforethought, either express or implied, causes the death of another human being”. Felony murder applies when someone who has no plans to kill intentionally commits another felony and a person dies as a result. The person must be convicted of the underlying felony to be found guilty of felony murder. William Bryan is found not guilty of malice murder, but guilty of three charges of felony murder. Greg McMichael found not guilty of malice murder, guilty of felony murder. Travis McMichael is found guilty of murdering Ahmaud Arbery. The jury in the trial of three men in the killing of Ahmaud Arbery is returning to court, with a verdict imminent. Father and son Greg and Travis McMichael grabbed guns and pursued Arbery in a pickup truck after spotting the 25-year-old Black man running in their neighborhood on 23 February 2020. A neighbor, William “Roddie” Bryan, joined the chase and recorded Travis McMichael opening fire as Arbery threw punches and grabbed for his shotgun. Defense attorneys said the men suspected Arbery had burglarized a house under construction and intended to hold him until police arrived. Prosecutors said there was no evidence Arbery committed any crimes in the neighborhood and no evidence has been presented linking Arbery to any burglary. They said the men chased Arbery for five minutes and used their trucks to prevent him from fleeing before Travis McMichael shot him. All three men face charges of malice murder and felony murder as well as false imprisonment and criminal attempt to commit a felony. If convicted they could face life in prison. The jury in the case are nearly all white, and race has been a key theme in the case and the trial. We’ll follow developments here. Here’s a look at the case from before the trial began, by our southern bureau chief, Oliver Laughland:Mauricio Pochettino refused to blame the sideshow of his managerial future for Paris Saint-Germain’s 2-1 Champions League defeat at Manchester City. The Argentinian is wanted by Manchester United as the successor to Ole Gunnar Solskjær but his team were poor on the other side of town, falling to Gabriel Jesus’s 76th‑minute winner. Raheem Sterling had earlier cancelled out Kylian Mbappé’s opener. Pochettino had gone through his usual routine about rumours at the pre-match press conference on Tuesday, professing happiness in his current job while denying no reports and leaving ajar the door to United. He warmed to a similar theme here. PSG’s position at the moment is that Pochettino is going nowhere during the season. “The players know very well our situation,” Pochettino said, when asked whether he had needed to reassure them over his commitment to PSG. “We know their situation. We are living in a business that rumours are there, sometimes negative, sometimes positive. That is not a thing to talk about – the rumours.” Pep Guardiola saluted his players for the comeback win and the way they adjusted to the loss of Phil Foden through injury on the eve of the tie. Oleksandr Zinchenko came into the team in midfield as City got the result they needed to secure qualification to the last 16 as group winners. “It is a good lesson,” Guardiola said. “When you are losing you have to continue. We knew a draw was a good result for us but we won. “We are the last five or six years, reaching the last 16, so we are top of the group and I am more than satisfied. “Results can be random, it’s how you perform. The way we are performing is really good. People are enjoying watching us and hopefully we can sustain it as long as possible – get players back and we can do it.” Pochettino said of his team’s defeat: “We need to improve in all aspects, all the areas, although we have improved from the start of the season. The team are better than a month ago and they are much better than two months ago. Little by little, step by step.”The “exceptionally rare” case of a man charged with the murder of his 18-year-old daughter more than 15 years after he assaulted her raises “significant legal issues”, his lawyer says. Western Australia police say a 40-year-old Carnarvon man, Terrence John Bice, seriously assaulted his then two-year-old daughter, Teagan Jade Ferguson, in March 2005. Teagan suffered a traumatic brain injury and developed chronic health conditions that “directly impacted her quality of life”, WA police said on Wednesday. She was in palliative care from 2015 and died in Perth Children’s hospital in June 2020 aged 18. Police now allege that the injuries Teagan received during the assault led to her death. Bice has been charged with murder. Bice’s Perth barrister, Tom Percy QC, said that in his 40 years of practice as a criminal lawyer he could not recall a similar case. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “These types of cases are as rare as hen’s teeth,” Percy told Guardian Australia. “There are a multitude of legal issues which will undoubtedly play out as the matter moves forward.” The WA Criminal Lawyers’ Association president, Anthony Elliott, said the “year and a day rule” would likely be argued in this case. Historically, a death could only be legally attributed to an action if the victim dies within a year of the alleged assault. “What is crucial is whether the act in 2005 can be said to be the cause of her death,” he said. A Murray Chambers criminal barrister, Linda Black, said that charging someone almost 17 years after an event was relatively rare. Bice faced Carnarvon magistrates court on Tuesday. He is next due to face Stirling Gardens magistrates court on 19 January.Covid cases surge 23% in Americas, mostly in North America, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said. Germany’s next chancellor seeks targeted vaccine mandate. German Social Democrat Olaf Scholz called on Wednesday for vaccinations to be made compulsory for targeted groups. Scientists say a new Covid variant that carries an “extremely high number” of mutations may drive further waves of disease by evading the body’s defences. Italy has unveiled new Covid measures banning the unvaccinated from numerous venues, extending compulsory vaccination and expanding booster shots to all adults. Portugal’s health secretary today pledged to give Covid booster shots to a quarter of the population by the end of January to tackle the “pandemic storm that has not yet passed”. The World Health Organization director-general has declared that Europe is once again at the epicentre of the pandemic and warned that “no country or region is out of the woods”. Countries should consider implementing mandatory Covid vaccination, the director of World Health Organization (WHO) Europe said today. France is to announce new Covid measures tomorrow as infections surge across the country. Two lions at the Zagreb zoo have tested positive for Covid-19 after contracting the virus from their keeper, officials said on Wednesday. Laboratory tests on samples taken from the two animals after they had developed symptoms of the disease confirmed that they have Covid-19, Reuters reports. The big cats, who are undergoing medical treatment, caught the infection from their keeper who was also tested afterwards and was positive, head of the zoo Damir Skok said. “The zookeeper as well as (lions) Leo and Ayana are fine. They sneeze and cough occasionally” and are recovering, he told local media. New Covid-19 cases have jumped 23% in the Americas in the last week, mostly in North America. Both the United States and Canada are reporting increasing infection rates, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said on Wednesday, warning that the region might be facing a relapse as in Europe. German Social Democrat Olaf Scholz called on Wednesday for vaccinations to be made compulsory for targeted groups, saying that fighting the coronavirus pandemic will be his top priority as he prepares to take over as chancellor from Angela Merkel. Scholz, who is expected to replace Merkel early next month after his coalition deal with two other parties has been approved, said he would set up a crisis team at the chancellery to coordinate coronavirus policy between the federal and regional governments. Scientists have said a new Covid variant that carries an “extremely high number” of mutations may drive further waves of disease by evading the body’s defences. Only 10 cases in three countries have been confirmed by genomic sequencing, but the variant has sparked serious concern among some researchers because a number of the mutations may help the virus evade immunity. The B.1.1.529 variant has 32 mutations in the spike protein, the part of the virus that most vaccines use to prime the immune system against Covid. Mutations in the spike protein can affect the virus’s ability to infect cells and spread, but also make it harder for immune cells to attack the pathogen. The variant was first spotted in Botswana, where three cases have now been sequenced. Six more have been confirmed in South Africa, and one in Hong Kong in a traveller returning from South Africa. Read the full story here. Hello from a rainy morning over here in Sydney, Australia. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking over from colleague, Miranda Bryant, for the next short while. First up, some numbers out of Australia for you. NSW and Victoria have released their Covid reports with NSW reporting 276 cases and no deaths. Victoria recorded 1,254 new Covid cases and five deaths. A timber company in New Zealand is offering staff $3,000 (£1,450) to get double vaxxed, according to Radio New Zealand. The offer applies to about 400 people. Each worker will have to meet certain vaccination requirements to qualify for a $2,000 bonus in December while the final thousand will be paid out next year, the CEO of Red Stag Timber told RNZ. Some 69% of the total New Zealand population is has had two doses of the vaccine, 76% have had one dose. New Zealand will reopen its borders to vaccinated travellers next year. Two lions at the Zagreb zoo have tested positive for Covid-19 that they had contracted from their keeper, officials said on Wednesday. AFP reported that these are the first confirmed cases of the disease in zoo animals in Croatia, an agriculture ministry statement said. The animals and the keeper were reportedly well, but sneezing. From AFP: Laboratory tests on samples taken from the two animals after they had developed symptoms of the disease confirmed that they have Covid-19, it said. The big cats, who are undergoing medical treatment, caught the infection from their keeper who was also tested afterwards and was positive, head of the zoo Damir Skok said.” Brazil registered 273 new Covid-19 deaths and 12,930 additional confirmed cases of the coronavirus, Reuters reports, according to data released on Wednesday by the health ministry. In total, Brazil has reported 613,339 deaths due to Covid, the second highest in the world behind only the United States. Italy has unveiled new Covid measures banning the unvaccinated from numerous venues, extending compulsory vaccination and expanding booster shots to all adults. “We are seeing the situation in bordering countries is very serious and we also see that the situation in Italy is gradually but constantly getting worse,” the prime minister, Mario Draghi, said. Portugal’s health secretary today pledged to give Covid booster shots to a quarter of the population by the end of January to tackle the “pandemic storm that has not yet passed”. More than 850,000 people in Portugal have already received a booster shot. Antonio Sales said 2.5 million would get the additional dose by the end of January. Nearly three-quarters of local authorities in the UK experienced a week-on-week rise in Covid rates in the seven days to 20 November. According to an analysis by PA Media, 74% of Britain’s 377 local authority areas saw a rise, 25% a fall and the remainder were unchanged. The number of people testing positive for coronavirus is on the rise in the UK, with 43,676 new cases according to the latest figures. 149 more people have died. 303,071 people have tested positive for the virus in the past seven days - a rise of 11.1%. Dr Michael Ryan, the executive director of the World Health Organization’s health emergencies programme, said the UK had “led the world” on how to approach measurement of pandemics. The World Health Organization director-general has declared that Europe is once again at the epicentre of the pandemic and warned that “no country or region is out of the woods”. The Netherlands reported more than 23,700 new Covid cases – the highest since the start of the pandemic. The head of the EU’s disease control agency has warned that mandatory Covid vaccination is “not a magic wand” as she warned that European governments needed to take urgent action faced with a rising wave of infections. The Netherlands health minister has said the government will announce new Covid measures on Friday as hospitals struggle to cope with a surge in cases. “The infection rate is higher than ever before,” Hugo de Jonge said in a letter to parliament. “Hospital admissions keep exceeding expectations and we have not seen the worst yet.” France is to announce new Covid measures tomorrow as infections surge across the country. Spokesman Gabriel Attal said today that the government wants to strengthen social distancing and speed up vaccinations and said they are doing all they can to save the Christmas holiday season. Countries should consider implementing mandatory Covid vaccination, the director of World Health Organization (WHO) Europe said today. Robb Butler said that although “mandatory vaccine can, but does not always, increase uptake”, he suggested countries should start thinking about the issue. One in four adults in England who test positive for Covid are ignoring self-isolation rules, according to a survey by the Office for National Statistics (ONS). The research found just 75% of respondents fully followed isolation requirements for 10 days after testing positive. Politicians in Italy are considering new Covid measures that could see restrictions on unvaccinated people. Prime minister Mario Draghi’s government is today discussing the details of a “super green pass” for the vaccinated. Italy has unveiled new Covid measures, set to come into force on 6 December, that will ban unvaccinated people from entering venues including cinemas, restaurants and sports events (see also 15:17). “We are seeing the situation in bordering countries is very serious and we also see that the situation in Italy is gradually but constantly getting worse,” the prime minister, Mario Draghi, told reporters after the cabinet approved the new rules. “We want to be very prudent to try to safeguard what Italians have achieved in the last year.” From 15 December, mandatory vaccination will be extended to include all school staff, police and the military. Healthcare workers are already required to be vaccinated. Booster shots, currently available to people aged 40-plus, will be made available to all adults. British prime minister Boris Johnson has said he was “personally very disappointed” that Valneva’s Covid vaccine has not been approved in the UK, reports Reuters. It comes two months after the government cancelled a supply deal worth $1.57 billion with the French pharmaceutical company. Valneva said it hoped for approval by the end of the year and that it was working with the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). The MHRA said Valneva had initiated a rolling review, which was ongoing. A spokesperson told the news agency: “Due to commercial confidentiality we are unable to provide details of our review.” Johnson said he was “personally very disappointed when we couldn’t get approval for the Valneva vaccine in the way that we had hoped”. “What we are doing is investing massively in this country’s vaccine capability across the country so that we are prepared for the next pandemic and I very much hope that Valneva will be part of that,” he said. Valneva said in a statement: “We regret the decision made by HMG [the UK government] to end the UK Government’s supply contract with Valneva, and remain hopeful that HMG will seek an amicable resolution.” France reported 32,591 new Covid cases today. It was an increase on yesterday when 30,454 new cases were reported, marking the first time that the daily total had exceeded 30,000 since August. Portugal’s health secretary today pledged to give Covid booster shots to a quarter of the population by the end of January to tackle the “pandemic storm that has not yet passed”. More than 850,000 people in Portugal have already received a booster shot. Antonio Sales said 2.5 million would get the additional dose by the end of January. It comes as the country, one of the world’s most vaccinated, reported 3,773 cases, a four-month daily high. Around 87% of Portugal’s population of just over 10 million is vaccinated. But as Europe once again becomes the epicentre of the pandemic, the government is preparing to announce new rules tomorrow to limit the virus’ spread. The prime minister, Antonio Costa, said last week the government was unlikely to bring back a lockdown and that the measures would aim to “disturb people’s lives as little as possible.” Nearly three-quarters of local authorities in the UK experienced a week-on-week rise in Covid rates in the seven days to 20 November. According to an analysis by PA Media, 74% of Britain’s 377 local authority areas saw a rise, 25% a fall and the remainder were unchanged. Torridge in Devon continues to have the highest rate in the UK - with 1,030 new cases per 100,000 people - followed by Mid Sussex (849 per 100,000) and Gwynedd in Wales (848 per 100,000). Mid Ulster has the highest rate in Northern Ireland (837 per 100,000) and Falkirk the highest rate in Scotland (544 per 100,000). The five areas with the biggest rises in the UK were: Guildford, Eastbourne, Shetland Islands, East Hampshire and Newark &amp; Sherwood. Health workers from the US and the UK who have long Covid have spoken to the Atlantic about their shock at how rapidly their symptoms were dismissed by their peers. Clare Rayner, an occupational physician, is part of a Facebook group of around 1,400 British people with long Covid who work in healthcare. She said that for many the scepticism of other medical professionals has been “absolutely shattering”. “That people in their own profession would treat them like this has led to a massive breakdown in trust.” Senior doctors from Russia’s biggest hospitals have urged anti-vaccination figures to visit intensive care units and morgues to witness the deadly impact that Covid is having on the country. In a letter signed by chief physicians from leading hospitals including in Moscow, St Petersburg and Sochi, the group called on “opponents of vaccination” to see the severity of the situation for themselves, reports RFE/RL’s Russian Service. Russia has reported record Covid deaths in recent weeks as infections surge. Only around 37% of Russia’s population of 146 million people are vaccinated. The number of people testing positive for coronavirus is on the rise in the UK, with 43,676 new cases according to the latest figures. According to the 4pm update of the UK government’s coronavirus dashboard, 303,071 people have tested positive for the virus in the past seven days - a rise of 11.1%. There were 149 more deaths 28 days after a positive test for coronavirus, according to the update. Overall the number of people dying over the past seven days was trending down, with the 926 total deaths 9.4% down on the previous figure. The number of patients admitted to hospital also fell, down 11.6% over the past seven days, with 722 new admissions reported in the most recent data. A total of 112,627,026 doses of coronavirus vaccine have now been administered, the data show. Of those, 50,827,554 have been first doses, 46,208,81 have been second doses, and 16,004,629 have been third or booster doses. Uptake of coronavirus vaccines has been high in the UK compared to some other European countries, with 80.4% of people aged over 12 in the country having completed their two-dose course of Covid vaccinations. Police in London trained the laser sights on their Tasers on workers at a juice bar which they had raided over suspicions of a lockdown rule-breaking party, a court has heard. Workers at Joe and Juice in Soho were discovered by police having the after-hours party when police arrived at the premises at 3am on 7 March, according to London paper the Evening Standard. PC Michael Trype was quoted as telling Westminster magistrates court that officers who gained entry through the front door saw a man and a woman enter from the toilets. “Officers were equipped with Tasers and both male and female was red-dotted,” he was quoted as saying. One worker, Isabelle Von-Erbach-Schonbery, 21, was fined £200 for breaking lockdown rules. She admitted to to police that they were “having a work gathering at the venue”, but did not pay the fine. A magistrate subsequently dismissed the charge. The government in Slovakia has approved a two-week lockdown, amid a record rise in cases of coronavirus, according to reports. There was speculation earlier that a lockdown would be announced after the country reported a record 10,315 new cases. Slovakian media cited the economy minister, Richard Sulík, as saying the lockdown would be imposed, according to Reuters. There were no details on when it will come into force. Officials had been debating whether to impose restrictions for both vaccinated and unvaccinated Slovaks after Austria implemented similar measures this week. This is Damien Gayle taking the helm on the live blog for the next hour or so while Miranda has a break. Dr Michael Ryan, the executive director of the World Health Organization’s health emergencies programme, said the UK had “led the world” on how to approach measurement of pandemics. He told the WHO media briefing (see also 15:07): “The UK has really led the world in how to look at data, how to do excellent analytics, how to give context and get insights for disease control.” He said that governments need to move away from “blunt percentages” to “individuals” that have been missed in terms of targeting who needs to be vaccinated. More on Italy’s “super green pass” from Angela Giuffrida in Rome: Asked about his view on the UK’s Covid situation, Dr Michael Ryan, executive director of the World Health Organization’s health emergencies programme, told the WHO media briefing (see also 14:58) that there is “intense transmission” throughout Europe and the UK. He said: “The reality is that increased transmission ... even in the context of high vaccination is going to put pressure on the system.” He said that “to their credit”, the UK has achieved high vaccination levels, which he said “keeps pressure off the NHS”. He also praised the country’s virus surveillance. However, he warned that there were “long term consequences” of contracting Covid, regardless of age, and that the public should “avoid exposure to the virus”. Europe, he said, is “back at pre-pandemic levels of social mixing” – despite huge pressure on health systems and high levels of transmission. The World Health Organization director-general has declared that Europe is once again at the epicentre of the pandemic and warned that “no country or region is out of the woods”. Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a WHO media briefing: He also warned that while vaccines save lives, they do not fully prevent Covid transmission, and in the case of Delta, vaccines reduce transmission by just 40%. He said many countries have a “false sense of security” that vaccines have ended the pandemic and a belief that vaccinated people do not need to take precautions. He said: “We cannot say this clearly enough: even if you are vaccinated, continue to take precautions to prevent becoming infected yourself, and to [prevent] infecting someone else who could die.” The Netherlands (see also 14:28) has reported more than 23,700 new Covid cases – the highest since the start of the pandemic, reports Reuters. More on plans for additional Covid measures in the Netherlands (see also 13:46). Reuters reports: [Health minister Hugo de Jonge] said the government’s panel of health experts would provide fresh policy advice by Thursday and that a decision would follow on Friday. The head of the EU’s disease control agency has issued a note of caution about a move to mandatory Covid vaccines, as she warned that European governments needed to take urgent action faced with a rising wave of infections. Dr Andrea Ammon, the head of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), said mandatory vaccines could raise uptake, but risked intensifying rejection of vaccines. [Mandatory vaccination] is not a magic wand. It can be effective, it can raise the vaccination rate, but it can also polarise. And among those that are right now not vaccinated, not everybody is against vaccines, but many people want this to be their own decision and not being imposed on. So it could drive people even more into rejecting vaccines. She was speaking after the ECDC changed its guidance booster jabs for all adults, prioritising the over-40s. The new guidance is part of the ECDC’s threefold recommendation to tackle rising caseloads: increase vaccines, offer booster doses to all adults and more non-medical measures, such as wearing masks, hand hygiene, working from home and limiting contacts. Ammon said Europe was not in a situation where there was a choice between vaccines and other measures. So far, nearly two-thirds of the population (65.4%) and more than three-quarters of adults (76.5%) in the European Economic Area have been vaccinated. Russia today unveiled new Sputnik vaccines - including a Covid nasal spray that president Vladimir Putin said he had taken as his booster dose. In televised comments, Putin said that he had received his booster as an injection followed by a powder nasal spray and exercised afterwards, reports Reuters. “That was all - I didn’t feel anything. Nothing. Today, after these two procedures, I already did some sport in the morning,” he said. Russia developed its Sputnik V vaccine last year but the Kremlin has blamed a recent surge in cases on public reluctance to get vaccinated. October was Russia’s deadliest month so far of the pandemic. More from the Netherlands (see 13:20) where the health minister has said the government will announce new Covid measures on Friday, reports Reuters, as hospitals struggle to cope with a surge in cases. “The infection rate is higher than ever before,” Hugo de Jonge said in a letter to parliament. “Hospital admissions keep exceeding expectations and we have not seen the worst yet.” Countries should prioritise sharing vaccine doses with Covax before vaccinating children, the World Health Organisation said today: As many parts of the world face extreme vaccine shortages, countries with high coverage in at-risk populations should prioritise global sharing of Covid-19 vaccines before vaccinating children, adolescents. As social distancing once again became mandatory today in the Netherlands amid soaring Covid infections, the country’s leading intensive care physician called for even tougher measures. The country entered a partial lockdown on 13 November, under which bars, restaurants and supermarkets have to close at 8pm and people were urged to work from home. From today, 1.5 metre social distancing was made compulsory for all adults in locations where Covid passes are not required. Diederik Gommers, the head of the national association of intensive care units, last night urged the government to implement a tough lockdown. He said the country’s hospitals are just 10 days away from being so overloaded that intensive care doctors will have to make tough decisions about which patients get care, reports the Associated Press. The country last week recorded a 39% rise in infections. There are currently approximately 500 Covid patients in Dutch ICUs, which reportedly have a capacity of 1,066. He said the only way to ease pressure on ICUs is “to ensure that the admissions go down very fast. And the fastest way of reducing (admissions) is tough measures and I think that means a strict lockdown. And that includes schools because I think if you don’t close schools you don’t stop infections.” France is to announce new Covid measures tomorrow as infections surge across the country. Spokesman Gabriel Attal said today that the government wants to strengthen social distancing and speed up vaccinations and said they are doing all they can to save the Christmas holiday season. They also plan to tighten regulations on using the country’s health pass. Despite this, he said the situation is likely to worsen in the coming days. The incidence rate (infections per week per 100,000 people) is expected to rise above 200 this week. Russia is to register a new Sputnik M vaccine for use for 12- to 17-year-olds later today, the deputy prime minister, Tatiana Golikova, has said. The vaccine is expected to be available at the end of December, Reuters reports. It comes as Russia has suffered a surge in Covid infections and deaths in recent weeks. Canada has given full approval to the single-dose Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine, the company has said. The vaccine has been approved for those aged 18-plus, reports Reuters. The number of Covid-related deaths in Scotland has declined for the third week in succession, confirming the most recent surge in cases, which peaked at more than 3,800 new cases a day, is tailing off. National Records of Scotland, a government statistics agency, said there were 94 deaths last week where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate, compared with 115 the previous week. Weekly fatalities data peaked during the latest wave at 167 in one week in mid-September. Countries should consider implementing mandatory Covid vaccination, the director of World Health Organization (WHO) Europe said today. Robb Butler said that although “mandatory vaccine can, but does not always, increase uptake”, he suggested countries should start thinking about the issue. It comes after Germany’s tourism commissioner, Thomas Bareiss, said he expected vaccination to become mandatory in the country. Austria plans to make it compulsory from February. Butler told Sky News that mandates could come at the “expense of trust and social inclusion”. But, he added: We believe it’s time to have that conversation from both an individual and a population-based perspective. It’s a healthy debate to have. One in four adults in England who test positive for Covid are ignoring self-isolation rules, according to a survey by the Office for National Statistics (ONS). The research found just 75% of respondents fully followed isolation requirements for 10 days after testing positive. It marks a fall from September, when 78% said they adhered, and a significant drop since May, when the figure was 86%. The latest figures are based on responses collected from adults in England between 1 and 6 November. The ONS said the attitude change between May and November was “statistically significant”. Tim Gibbs, head of the ONS public services analysis team, said: The latest results show that although the majority of those testing positive for Covid-19 are following self-isolation requirements, there has been a decrease since earlier this year. It’s important that we continue to self-isolate when necessary in order to help keep everyone safe and stop the spread of the virus, especially as we are moving into the winter months. Politicians in Italy are considering new Covid measures that could see restrictions on unvaccinated people. Prime minister Mario Draghi’s government is today discussing the details of a “super green pass” for the vaccinated, reports Bloomberg. The measures, which are being debated today, would reportedly only permit those with proof of vaccination to get into venues including cinemas and theatres. But it is understood tthe rules would still allow unvaccinated people to go to workplaces after testing negative. Governments across Europe are considering new restrictions as cases surge across the continent. Meanwhile, Austria is bringing back a full lockdown. Italy has also reduced the time people must wait before getting a booster dose of the vaccine from six months to five. It comes after last month Italy introduced a digital “green pass”, required for all workers, prompting protests. Hi, I’m looking after the Covid blog for the next few hours. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.uk Slovakia reported its highest daily rise in new Covid-19 cases today, just ahead of a government meeting likely to agree a short-term lockdown to try to quell the surge. There were 10,315 new cases reported. Coronavirus infections in the Czech Republic have reached another new record high. The daily tally hit 25,864 on Tuesday, about 3,000 more than the previous record registered on Friday. Just over 58% of the Czech population has been fully vaccinated. Hungary also reported a record number of new daily Covid cases at 12,637 today. The seven-day average for the country stands at 9,435. That is up from 7,369 a week ago. The head of the European Union’s public health agency, Dr Andrea Ammon, has said that Covid-19 vaccine boosters should be considered for all adults, with priority for those aged 40 and older, in a major change to its guidance. Rob Butler, executive director of World Health Organization Europe, has made a strong appeal for people to continue to use face masks, saying: “The British Medical Journal last week showed a study where 53% of transmission was prevented by mask use. We only have 48% of the population in the European region using masks. The moment we see that go up, if we see this go up, we will see a reduction in cases and a reduction in deaths. If we saw 95% universal mask use, we can project that we would save about 160,000 lives.” Russia’s daily new Covid case numbers continue to be on a gradual decline, although deaths continue to hover around the near record 1,240-1,250 mark. Today’s official figures are 33,558 cases and 1,240 deaths. The health service in the UK is considering “radical ideas” to help tackle the backlog of care that has built-up over the last few years and been exacerbated by the Covid pandemic. That includes the idea of sending patients to different regions for treatment, the chief executive of NHS Providers has said. India’s health ministry has written to state governments raising concerns over falling levels of testing. South Korea has reported a new daily record of 4,116 new coronavirus cases as the country battles to contain a surge in serious cases requiring hospitalisation. In the US, the Biden administration plans to require all essential, nonresident travellers crossing its land borders, such as truck drivers, government and emergency response officials, to be fully vaccinated beginning on 22 January. South Africa has asked Johnson &amp; Johnson and Pfizer to delay delivery of Covid-19 vaccines because it now has too much stock, health ministry officials said, as vaccine hesitancy slows an inoculation campaign. That is all from me, Martin Belam, today. I will see you again tomorrow. Miranda Bryant will be here shortly to take you through the rest of the day’s UK and global coronavirus developments. Coronavirus infections in the Czech Republic have reached another record high. The daily tally hit 25,864 on Tuesday, about 3,000 more than the previous record registered on Friday. Just over 58% of the Czech population has been fully vaccinated. Associated Press report that the government has been considering mandatory vaccination for certain groups of people, including the elderly, medical and military personnel and police officers. Another proposal under consideration is shortening the time between a second shot and a booster from six to five months. The Czech Republic’s approach to the new surge is being hampered by the protracted changeover of government. Some of the proposals and measures imposed by the outgoing government of Andrej Babiš are opposed by a coalition of five parties that agreed to form a new government. The new coalition strictly rejects any mandatory vaccination. Vlastimil Válek, the candidate to be the new health minister, said on Wednesday that “it’s not a solution, it only further divides the society”. Some new restrictions targeting the unvaccinated took effect Monday, with only those with proof of vaccination able to access public events, go to bars and restaurants, visit hairdressers, museums and similar facilities or use hotels. The incoming coalition has said it wants to return to a system where negative tests would also act as a pass for those venues and activities. Here’s a reminder of the latest Covid data from the UK. Case numbers are up week-on-week by 8.7%. Deaths in the last seven days are down 5.5% on the week before, and hospital admissions are down 9.5% week-on-week. The UK government dashboard shows that there are 8,088 Covid patients in hospital, of whom 928 are in ventilation beds. The head of the European Union’s public health agency, Dr Andrea Ammon, has said that Covid-19 vaccine boosters should be considered for all adults, with priority for those aged 40 and older, in a major change to its guidance. Francesco Guarascio reports from Brussels for Reuters that in its previous guidance issued in September alongside the European Medicines Agency (EMA), the European Centre for Disease prevention and Control (ECDC) said there was no urgent need for the administration of booster doses to fully vaccinated individuals in the general population. It had suggested that additional doses should be considered for people with weakened immune systems and could be used as a precaution for older frail individuals. Recommendations issued by the ECDC are not binding on EU governments but are used to make health policy decisions. Eimear McGovern reports for the Belfast Telegraph this morning on criticism of Stormont’s first minister Paul Givan’s claim yesterday that Northern Ireland doesn’t have sufficient funding to go into another lockdown. Martin McKee, a professor of European public health at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, has told the BBC: The argument that we don’t have the money to protect against a pandemic disease is very strange because all of the evidence demonstrates that if you fail to protect against the spread of infection, in the long run the economy will suffer more. I and my colleagues have been arguing all along you do need to provide support to allow people to isolate. A vaccine only policy is not enough, there needs to be a vaccine-plus policy. We need to look at the totality of these things. In a new book, former Trump adviser Scott Atlas blames Deborah Birx and Anthony Fauci for “headline-dominating debacles” about quack cures for Covid-19 – but omits to mention the chief proponent of snake-oil treatments, including hydroxychloroquine and disinfectant, was the US president he loyally served. Atlas, a radiologist, is a fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, California, specialising in healthcare policy. He became a special adviser to Donald Trump in August 2020, five months into the pandemic, but resigned less than four months later after a controversial spell in the role. His book, A Plague Upon Our House: My Fight at the Trump White House to Stop Covid from Destroying America, will be published on 7 December. Its publisher is Bombardier Books, an imprint of Post Hill Press, a conservative outlet that will also publish a memoir by Kayleigh McEnany, Trump’s fourth press secretary. Speaking to Fox News, Atlas promised to “expose the unvarnished truth” about Trump’s Covid taskforce, including “a shocking lack of critical thinking about the science … a reckless abuse of public health and a moral failure in what should be expected from public health leaders”. Birx, an army physician, is a longtime leader in the fight against Aids. Fauci has served seven presidents as director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. Both were senior members of Trump’s Covid taskforce. Atlas’s book is replete with attacks on both. Read more of Martin Pengelly’s piece from New York here: Former Trump adviser claims to ‘expose unvarnished truth’ of Covid in new book Slovakia reported its highest daily rise in new Covid-19 cases today, just ahead of a government meeting likely to agree a short-term lockdown to try to quell the surge. There were 10,315 new cases reported. Jason Hovet reports for Reuters that ahead of a government meeting today, the defence minister, Jaroslav Nad, said no alternative existed. “If we want to be responsible, we have only one option, the rest is populism,” he was quoted as saying by the newspaper Dennik N, which earlier reported government parties had a preliminary agreement on a two-week lockdown. In Slovakia, which has the European Union’s third-lowest vaccination rate, the surge is putting new pressure on hospitals. The health ministry said the number of people hospitalised had reached a “critical point” at 3,200 and was approaching peaks of around 3,800 seen in the last wave of the pandemic. Most patients were unvaccinated, it said. Andrew Sparrow has kicked off our UK politics live blog for the day. There is PMQs and Peppa Pig on his plate, so I’ll be continuing with UK Covid lines here. Switzerland will vote on Sunday on the country’s Covid-19 laws, and Agence France-Presse has a despatch about the referendum campaign, which it characterises as having seen unprecedented levels of hostility. Police have upped security around a number of politicians, including the health minister, Alain Berset, who have faced a flood of insults and death threats. “We have seen an increase in threats since the start of the pandemic, with unprecedented virulence,” the federal police told AFP. Fences have also been erected around the government and parliament buildings in Bern to protect them during anti-vax demonstrations. Sunday will mark the second time in less than six months that the Swiss have been called upon to vote on the government’s response to the pandemic. In June, 60% of voters approved prolonging national measures. Opponents insisted a new vote was needed on amendments to the Covid law which, among other things, provides the legal basis for a Covid certificate indicating that a person has been vaccinated or has recovered from the disease. “This law is discriminatory. It will create a two-speed society,” said Agnes Aedo, spokeswoman for the Friends of the Constitution group that launched the referendum. The latest polls show a clear majority of eligible Swiss voters – around two-thirds – still support the law. South Africa has asked Johnson &amp; Johnson and Pfizer to delay delivery of Covid-19 vaccines because it now has too much stock, health ministry officials said, as vaccine hesitancy slows an inoculation campaign. About 35% of South Africans are vaccinated, higher than in most other African nations, but half the government’s year-end target. It has averaged 106,000 doses a day in the past 15 days in a nation of 60 million people. Earlier this year the programme was slowed by insufficient doses. Now deliveries have been delayed due to oversupply, making the country an outlier in the continent where most are still starved of vaccines. Nicholas Crisp, the deputy director general of the health department, told Reuters that South Africa had 16.8m doses in stock and said deliveries had been deferred. “We have 158 days’ stock in the country at current use,” a spokesman for the health ministry said. “We have deferred some deliveries.” Russia’s daily new Covid case numbers continue to be on a gradual decline, although deaths continue to hover around the near record 1,240-1,250 mark. Today’s official figures are 33,558 cases and 1,240 deaths. The seven-day average for new cases stands at 35,226. That is down from 37,704 a week ago. The health service in the UK is considering “radical ideas” to help tackle the backlog of care that has built-up over the last few years and been exacerbated by the Covid pandemic. That includes the idea of sending patients to different regions for treatment, the chief executive of NHS Providers has said. But Chris Hopson told Times Radio it is more likely that people will be asked to go to neighbouring hospitals rather than different parts of the country. PA Media quote him saying: Everybody across the NHS recognises that having patients wait for their care is not an acceptable situation. There is a moral obligation on trusts and their leaders to make sure that they do everything they can, no stone unturned, to get through those care backlogs as quickly as possible. What we’re working on at the moment is a really comprehensive plan to get through those backlogs as fast as possible. And some of it will be all the traditional things that we do, which is: we will expand temporary capacity; we will ensure that we use overtime as much as possible; we will ensure that we use the capacity that sits in the independent sector. But I think we recognise we need to go further and that’s why, some of those radical ideas, we are considering and looking at them. A quick snap from Reuters here that Hungary reported a record number of new daily Covid cases at 12,637 today. The seven-day average for the country stands at 9,435. That is up from 7,369 a week ago. Hungary’s vaccination rate is below the EU average, with 60% of the population having received one dose so far. Here’s an updated map showing the latest caseload incidence across Europe. “Nobody had the guts to take the lead and announce unpopular measures. This lack of leadership is the reason we are here now.” That is the verdict on the situation in Germany from Uwe Janssens, who heads the intensive care department at the St Antonius hospital in Eschweiler, west of Cologne. He was speaking to Associated Press. Doctors like Janssens are bracing for an influx of coronavirus patients as confirmed cases hit fresh daily highs that experts say is also being fueled by vaccine skeptics. Germany is set to mark 100,000 deaths from Covid this week. Resistance to getting the shot remains strong among a sizeable minority of the country. Vaccination rates have stalled at 68% of the population, far short of the 75% or higher that the government had aimed for. “We’ve increasingly got younger people in intensive care,” said Janssens. “The amount of time they’re treated is significantly longer and it blocks intensive care beds for a longer period.” Older people who got vaccinated early in 2021 are also seeing their immunity wear off, making them vulnerable to serious illness again, he said. AstraZeneca is to let more people take part in clinical trials from the comfort of their own homes in an attempt to increase the diversity of participants. Early trials of Covid vaccines were criticised for predominately involving white participants, despite the virus having a disproportionate effect on people of colour. A lack of diversity in clinical trials has also been cited by the nonprofit organisation breastcancer.org as one of the potential reasons Black women in the US have worse breast cancer outcomes than other groups. Now experts at AstraZeneca have said shifting data collection to the home may break down barriers to participation in clinical trials, potentially increasing diversity and the speed of research. Read more of our science correspondent Nicola Davis’ report here: AstraZeneca to run more clinical trials in people’s homes to improve diversity Yesterday we had news that India had seen its smallest rise in daily new Covid cases for 18 months, however, today Reuters have a report that the level of testing is causing a concern in the country. Krishna N Das writes that the federal health ministry, in a letter to state governments, has raised the prospect of an alarming fall in testing for Covid threatening to undermine India’s efforts to contain the pandemic. Testing has hovered around one million per day for the past few weeks, less than half the capacity. “In the absence of sustained levels of sufficient testing, it is very difficult to determine the true level of infection spread in a geography,” health secretary Rajesh Bhushan said in a letter sent to the northeastern state of Nagaland, which has reduced testing by more than a third in two months. “With a majority of countries seeing multiple surges in Covid cases in recent times and a few developed countries facing even fourth and fifth waves despite high levels of Covid vaccination, there is a need for continued vigil given the unpredictable and contagious nature of the disease.” The ministry delivered similar warnings to other states. India has so far administered 1.18bn vaccine doses - which equates to at least one dose in 82% of its 944 million adults, and two doses in 44%. Hello, it is Martin Belam taking on the live blog for the next few hours. Rob Butler, executive director of World Health Organization Europe, has been on Sky News in the UK this morning. He made a strong appeal for people to continue to use face masks, saying: We’re seeing waning immunity of vaccines, especially after the 30 week mark. We’ve got 45-47% of the entire population [of Europe] unvaccinated. Let me be absolutely clear, the majority of people in intensive care units today are the unvaccinated. But there are other compounding factors. Winter. There is a seasonality observation we’re making at the moment. People moving indoors. The need for masks and need for more ventilation. As you possibly saw, the British Medical Journal last week showed a study where 53% of transmission was prevented by mask use. We only have 48% of the population in the European region using masks. The moment we see that go up, if we see this go up, we will see a reduction in cases and a reduction in deaths. If we saw 95% universal mask use, we can project that we would save about 160,000 lives. So there’s a number of factors, plus the more transmissible Delta variants, which is accounting for about 99% of the cases in Europe today. As cases begin surging once more in the US, millions of people are expected to travel for the Thanksgiving holiday, and health workers and hospital systems are now preparing for an influx of Covid patients after having little time to recover from the summer surge. Last year, there was a major surge in cases around the holidays. But this year, new tools could blunt the spread – if they are taken up quickly. US scientific agencies on Friday recommended boosters for all adults six months after mRNA vaccination, and children over the age of five recently became eligible for vaccines. Existing treatments like monoclonal antibodies are highly effective if given early, while two promising antiviral medications from Merck and Pfizer may be authorized in coming weeks. But the new treatments may come against a backdrop of rising cases during the holiday season. “It is a race against time,” Kyle Enfield, the associate chief medical officer of critical care at University of Virginia Health, said. More than 92,000 Americans are now testing positive for Covid-19 each day, and more than 1,000 people are dying from the virus every day, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cases are rising in a majority of states, with hotspots in the midwest, north-east and parts of the south-west. Read more of Melody Schreiber’s report here: US hospitals prepare for influx of Covid patients as millions travel for Thanksgiving AstraZeneca is to let more people take part in clinical trials from the comfort of their own homes in an attempt to increase the diversity of participants. Recruiting volunteers to clinical trials can be difficult, but they are a crucial step in the development of new drugs, tests, devices and other interventions. Concerns have been raised that a lack of diversity among people participating in clinical trials means drugs and medical equipment may be less effective in certain groups. Read the full story here. US president Joe Biden will require essential, nonresident travellers crossing US land borders, such as truck drivers, government and emergency response officials, to be fully vaccinated beginning on 22 January, the administration planned to announce Tuesday, the Associated Press reports. A senior administration official said the requirement brings the rules for essential travellers in line with those that took effect earlier this month for leisure travellers, when the US reopened its borders to fully vaccinated individuals. Essential travellers entering by ferry will also be required to be fully vaccinated by the same date, the official said. The official spoke to The Associated Press on the condition of anonymity to preview the announcement. The rules pertain to non-US nationals. American citizens and permanent residents may still enter the US regardless of their vaccination status, but face additional testing hurdles. Hello I’m Samantha Lock and welcome back to our rolling coverage of the coronavirus crisis. Once again, the world is showing deep divisions in the virus’ spread, vaccination uptake and government response. South Korea has reported a new daily record of 4,116 new coronavirus cases as the country battles to contain a surge in serious cases requiring hospitalisation. The country recently switched to a “living with Covid-19” plan aimed at lifting rigid distancing rules and ultimately reopening after reaching vaccination goals last month. Over in the US, the Biden administration plans to require all essential, nonresident travellers crossing its land borders, such as truck drivers, government and emergency response officials, to be fully vaccinated beginning on 22 January. The requirement brings the rules for essential travellers in line with those that took effect earlier this month for leisure travellers. Spain seeks tighter Covid restrictions as Germany considers mandatory vaccinations. Europe reported an 11% increase in new weekly cases while the South-East Asia region reported a decrease of 11%, the latest World Health Organization weekly report reveals. The Biden administration seeks to reinstate workplace vaccine mandates after asking a federal appeals court on Tuesday to lift a court-ordered stay on a sweeping workplace Covid-19 vaccine rule that requires employees to be vaccinated or tested weekly. Delaying the rule would lead to thousands of hospitalisations and deaths, the administration said in a filing with the 6th US Circuit Court of Appeals. Kenya plans to deny government services to those who are unvaccinated. In a press briefing on 21 November, health minister Mutahi Kagwe said that from 21 December people seeking in-person government services should be fully vaccinated and should show proof of vaccination. The services include tax, immigration, port, and hospital services, he added. New Zealand to reopen borders to vaccinated visitors in the opening months of 2022, for the first time since a snap closure took effect in the first month of the pandemic. The country’s borders have been closed for more than a year and a half. Delays to England’s vaccination rollout may mean some 12- to 15-year-olds may not get their Covid jab until February next year – 15 weeks after the government’s original target for offering the jab to all eligible teenagers, according to Labour. Total Covid-19 deaths across Europe are likely to exceed 2 million by March next year, the World Health Organization (WHO) has said, adding that the pandemic had become the number one cause of death in the region. A third dose is likely needed to be fully vaccinated, Dr Anthony Fauci said, adding that the majority of Americans who have been vaccinated should receive the booster shot. Seven US doctors contracted Covid after attending an anti-vaccine summit in Florida. Justin Trudeau has said that his top priority for his new government is to get Covid-19 in Canada under control and get more people vaccinated as he pledged support to Canadian industries, which he said were still struggling due to the pandemic. According to an analysis of the Covid case rates across the UK, 75% of local authorities experienced a week-on-week rise in the seven days to 19 November. The UK reported a further 42,484 Covid-19 cases and 165 additional deaths, official data shows. The weekly tally was up by 9% to reach 297,658 who have tested positive. France announced that there were more than 30,000 Covid infections in the past 24 hours. On Monday, France reported 5,266 new cases. The Netherlands hit a new weekly record on Tuesday – with Covid cases rising by 39% – and intensive care unit admissions rising sharply. The figures show a 19% rise in hospital admissions over the last week and a 26% rise in intensive care unit admissions. Those in the UK were today urged to take a rapid Covid test before mixing in crowded indoor spaces, marking a change in government and NHS guidance. Previously, the guidance advised the public to use lateral flow tests twice a week. German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s husband blamed the nation’s poor vaccination rate in part on “a certain German laziness and complacency”. The Netherlands has started transporting coronavirus patients to Germany in a bid to ease pressure on hospitals struggling to cope with a surge in cases.Judith Collins, leader of New Zealand’s opposition National party, has been toppled after months of poor polling and a shock move to strip a political rival of his portfolios. MPs voted to end Collins’ leadership at a crisis caucus meeting on Thursday. The meeting was prompted after Collins demoted Simon Bridges, a former party leader and one of her rivals. Late on Wednesday night, she stripped Bridges of all of his portfolios, citing an inappropriate comment made by Bridges in 2017 in front of a female colleague– where Bridges says he discussed “old wives tales” about how he and his wife might produce a female child. Collins described the comment as “serious misconduct”. Collins confirmed her resignation via social media. “It’s been a privilege to take over the leadership of [the National party] during the worst of times and to do so for 16 months. It has taken huge stamina and resolve, &amp; has been particularly difficult because of a variety of factors,” she said in a statement. MP Dr Shane Reti will take the helm of the party as interim leader, with a replacement to be chosen next week. While the conflict with Bridges sparked Thursday’s vote, Collins’ leadership has been troubled for some time, and the last few months have brought a series of disastrous leadership polls. Known as the “Crusher” for both her tough style of politics and for her responsibility for a historic policy which saw the cars of boy racers physically crushed, Collins struggled to win over New Zealand voters. Support for the Jacinda Ardern-led Labour party has been dropping over several months, as the country grapples with a Covid outbreak – but Collins failed to capitalise on that, with many votes instead redistributing to the libertarian Act party. While support for Labour has slipped in recent months to around 41-47%, support for National has languished at 21-28%. In a 1 News Colmar Brunton poll released in November, Judith Collins was sitting at just 5% in the preferred prime minister stakes, compared to Ardern’s 39%. The difficulty for the party has been a lack of viable alternatives: no other National MPs surpassed Collins’ popularity, and Simon Bridges was sitting at just 1% in that poll. National’s stiffest competition has come from its right flank: David Seymour, leader of the right-wing libertarian party, typically a small player in New Zealand’s parliament, was at 11%. Chris Luxon, a former chief executive of Air New Zealand, will be in the mix as a possible Collins replacement, polling at 4%. But he has spent only one year as an MP and has not yet built a high public profile. Another possible candidate is Whangaparāoa MP Mark Mitchell. On Thursday afternoon, Bridges expanded on the nature of his comments. He said they had occurred at a function where a group were discussing their wives and children. “I have two boys and I wanted a girl and I engaged in some old wives tales about that and how to have a girl,” he said. He would not expand further on the phrasing he used. MP Jacqui Dean was present for the remark, and subsequently complained to leadership. Bridges apologised. “I entirely accept and am regretful of that day because I acknowledge that some of what I said was clearly inappropriate,” Bridges said. He said he had reiterated the apology, and would not rule out a run for the leadership on Tuesday. In a statement, Dean said, “About five years ago, Simon Bridges made remarks that upset me at the time. They were not about me, but they were inappropriate and not something I wanted to hear,” she said. “At the time there was an apology, but subsequently it has continued to play on my mind and with the recent reviews that have occurred in parliament the feelings have been brought back up. “What matters to me is that all of us have a clear understanding of what behaviour we should expect in a modern workplace environment. “Simon and I have spoken a number of times over the past few hours and he has reiterated his apology.” Collins said in her statement: “I knew when I was confided in by a female colleague regarding her allegation of serious misconduct against a senior colleague, that I would likely lose the leadership by taking the matter so seriously. If I hadn’t, then I felt that I wouldn’t deserve the role.” The late night Wednesday drama has brought rumblings of discontent within the party to the fore. Collins’ announcement of his demotion blindsided many National MPs, with a number complaining about how the situation had been handled. It came at a moment when the government is under increasing pressure for its Covid response – and prominent National supporters expressed irritation at the party once again becoming embroiled in internal politics rather than focusing on its policy platform.When I tell people I’m an escort, they sometimes react strangely. “Wow, I’ve never met someone like you,” they say. Then, before I can reply, they simply start talking. They tell me what they think about sex work, how I should do my job, what age I should retire, and how safe they believe my work is, without pause for breath. It’s often clear they don’t have the facts. I’d be happy to set them straight ... if only they’d ask. This month, the Victorian government is debating the sex work decriminalisation bill 2021 in parliament, and it seems everybody has an opinion. But if you want people like me to have safe working conditions, you need to listen to the real workplace health and safety experts – sex workers themselves. When it comes to sex work, fact is much less strange than fiction. Television, movies and the media suggest that the sex industry is rife with drama and misadventure. Anti-sex-work activists take advantage of society’s cultural discomfort around sex by describing scenes of degradation and abuse that evoke a sympathetic horror. But I’ve worked in this industry for 12 years, offering intimate and companionate services to people from all walks of life, and my experiences have shown me that sex work really is just another type of service-based business, if somewhat specialised. This mismatch between public perception and reality means that the people I meet in everyday life often don’t understand my job. But they feel uncomfortable admitting it, so they rehash those same negative tropes as they talk over me, wanting to appear knowledgeable and show that they care. They assume I’m in need of their expertise, not realising that I’m already an expert. In many ways, sex workers are the ultimate experts in workplace safety. Our health, wealth and happiness all rely on our ability to select the clients that are right for us, handle privacy and security, negotiate consent, and manage safer sex practices. All of this requires specialised skills – stuff that eludes even trained health professionals. Sex workers also excel at sharing support: we provide each other with the tools and information we need, both informally and via peer-run organisations (such as Victoria’s Vixen Collective). The key to workplace safety is allowing sex workers to make the choices that are right for them. To do this, we need full decriminalisation of the sex industry. This means the removal of all sex-work-specific criminal and licensing laws, and no special police powers that can be used to target sex workers. Under this approach, we follow the same rules and regulations as any other type of business. In Victoria, full decriminalisation would remove misguided laws that force us to act against our best interests. This means, for example, that I could choose to see clients at my home rather than having to travel to their house or hotel. It means I’d be able to communicate clearly in my advertisements, so that customers wouldn’t make assumptions about which services I offer. Under full decriminalisation, all kinds of sex workers – including those who are often judged and marginalised, such as street-based sex workers – would be able to make the individual choices that help keep them safe. The Victorian government’s current plans for reform are a step in the right direction, but not quite a home run. Although the bill decriminalises most kinds of sex work, it still leaves street-based workers behind, with laws in place that make them vulnerable to persecution by law enforcement and limit their ability to choose where and how they work. I love the fact that regular people I meet every day take an interest in my wellbeing. But guesswork isn’t the answer. If you really care, ask sex workers what they need. It’s OK to admit you don’t know, and there are plenty of professionals such as me who would be delighted to fill you in on the realities of this specialised kind of service. It’s time to recognise that sex workers are the ultimate experts – we understand what’s needed to stay happy and healthy on the job. • Georgie Wolf is a writer, sex educator and sex worker. She is the author of ethical dating guide The Art of the Hook Up and the founder of the Satisfaction ProjectAfter a long 18 months of Covid-19 lockdowns, shutdowns and losses, Belvoir St Theatre – the slice of Sydney that started out as a tomato sauce factory – has once again served something delicious to the Australian public: The Boomkak Panto. Set in a small and dusty fictional town in regional New South Wales (named, of course, Boomkak), the tiny community is under threat from a progress-obsessed property developer (Rob Johnson). At a council meeting, lovable romantic hero and town misfit Zoe (Zoe Terakes) makes a joke: they should put on a show to raise money and save the town. The crisis committee think that’s a great idea. In fact, they decide, they should stage a panto. The idea is championed by John (Toby Truslove), an F-list ex-actor who had a brief turn on the fake but wonderfully titled TV show Wizard Cops before seeking spiritual reinvention in Boomkak, and Pania (Deborah Galanos), who grew up watching visiting British troupes perform pantos in a refugee camp and who now assumes the role of town matriarch. Darren (Billy McPherson), the council “2IC” and a respected elder, adores Pania and jumps on board. But Alison (Virginia Gay) is an ex-panto stage manager and she’s horrified. Pantos are a nightmare, she warns. They make no sense! They invite chaos into everyone’s lives! Gay, who also wrote the show and co-directs with Richard Carroll, performs a critical role: she introduces Australian audiences, who may not be familiar, to the conventions of pantomime; she teaches us the call-and-response routines (“oh no you won’t”/“oh yes we will!”) and explains that we should boo at the villain to ensure that later, when the Big Developer creeps onstage with his fake moustache and evil laughter, we know what to do. As the show embraces the slapstick, song-and-dance and playfulness of panto, she ensures the audience isn’t left behind. We can all laugh together. As playwright, Gay also ushers in a heartwarming love story. Pania’s daughter Yasmin (Mary Soudi) is dating Butch (Rob Johnson), a laid-back country boy whose casual racism and sexism is played for the obvious villainy it is, stripped of its power and made laughable. Pania loves the boy and loves this relationship for Yasmin – but Yasmin and Zoe are undeniably drawn to each other. Pania doesn’t understand Zoe and is reluctant to adopt their pronouns (they/them), and Yasmin doesn’t want to cause her mother more discomfort than she has already experienced in her life. Plus, she’s seen how hard it is for Zoe to be an outsider; she doesn’t want to experience it for herself. Zoe doesn’t understand why Yasmin can’t embrace who she is and who she loves; they don’t want to be alone when love is right there, staring them in the face. But this is a panto, so we know the young lovers will find their happily-ever-after. Seeing a queer love story set in a small Australian town end in joy, not disaster, feels like a celebration in itself, but the whole show is a party. Even its signal of impending doom (the classic Oz rock number Horror Movie by Skyhooks, riffed and repeated) is a delight, especially when played by The Musician, Hamed Sadeghi. The show confidently and winkingly embraces the silliness of its adopted form, staging a show-within-a-show (meanwhile Sadeghi, who provides appropriate underscoring and joins in on the big group numbers, is always aware of the audience). Gay’s instincts for musical comedy have always been sharp, and she and Carroll make a good partnership: he has a taste for clarifying the laughter that comes from controlled chaos. Their production is scrappy and intentionally messy and largely well-judged. The laughs come thick and fast, and the hardest-hit targets are the most deserving: transphobia and queerphobia, white privilege and racism, gentrification and capitalism. Michael Hankin’s sets and costumes are smart and designed with tongue lodged firmly in cheek (the decorative spoons hanging on a wooden map-of-Australia rack in the Scout Hall feels like a personal attack to this country-town-raised critic), and Jasmine Rizk’s lights earn laughs on their own as they push us deeper in Alison’s panto breakdown, which rightfully earned applause on opening night. Zara Stanton’s music direction takes delight in subverting Australian classic rock hits and making them something new, though the sound (design by Kellie-Anne Kimber) was muddled and muffled on opening night – this will likely be corrected within the season. Every moment is a pleasure. There’s ribbon-dancing, Tina Arena, rock-eisteddfod-daggy levels of choreography (by Elle Evangelista), a couple of charming new songs by composer Eddie Perfect, meta jokes about Sydney theatre and the arts in general, a great recycling bin gag, water pistols aimed at the audience, a Bunnings sausage sizzle, and a laconic heartthrob you want to root for in Terakes. It’s crafted with clever precision to be gloriously stupid. What an absolute treat. • The Boomkak Panto is on at the Belvoir St Theatre until 23 DecemberTasmanian Liberal MP Bridget Archer has crossed the floor to support an independent bill for a federal integrity commission, after accusing the government of “inertia” over the issue. Telling parliament it was a “difficult decision” to second the motion by independent MP Helen Haines to suspend standing orders to allow her federal integrity commission bill to be debated, Archer said that the “time has gone on long enough” and progress on the issue was needed. “I don’t take this decision lightly at all. I take this decision very seriously to stand here. And it’s a difficult decision. This is one of the most important things that we come to this place to do,” Archer said. The MP for the marginal Tasmanian seat of Bass said she believed all sides of politics wanted to see a “robust” federal integrity commission, but the legislation had stalled because it was too politicised. “There is a place for politics, there’s a place for the partisan point-scoring, but on something as important as trust and confidence in elected officials, that is not it.” The move to suspend standing orders sparked confusion in the House of Representatives under the management of the newly-elected speaker, Andrew Wallace. As a result of changes made to Parliamentary procedure to prevent the spread of Covid, questions are framed in the negative so that MPs don’t have to unnecessarily cross the chamber. This meant the vote had to be taken a second time, but was lost because an absolute majority was required. Guardian Australia reported on Thursday that Archer was considering the dramatic move, criticising the coalition’s “inertia” over the legislation. Archer said she was “perplexed” at the Morrison government’s failure to release a revised bill to establish a commonwealth integrity commission, almost three years after it was promised before the last election. The government has been under pressure from within its ranks and from crossbench MPs to finalise the bill, with the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, undertaking consultations after a draft of the bill – released last November – was criticised for being too soft. “I really have a strong view that this is the most important thing we need to do,” Archer told Guardian Australia on Wednesday. “I am a bit perplexed at one level as to why we haven’t brought something forward, I accept there was a draft bill, there was extensive consultation, there were a number of submissions … and it would have been my expectation that some work would have been going on to draft it, given the feedback. “I am a bit offended, in a way, that we are prioritising – in a rush I might add – the religious discrimination bill over an integrity commission.” Archer had warned earlier she was “absolutely” prepared to cross the floor to support the legislation. “To be perfectly clear, I always reserve my right to cross the floor, that is one of the reasons I sit on this side [in the Liberal party],” Archer said. “It has certainly been my view that the government and the opposition ought to be working together constructively with Helen Haines on her bill. What’s in there that we think is good? What is in there that we could amend? “There is a real tribalism to politics at the moment and I think that is sometimes at the expense of governance, and what I think we end up with is inertia. That is probably why the government hasn’t brought it forward, because it is so politically contested now and it just creates a vacuum, and there is inertia.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Archer said that she believed the integrity commission bill should be “above politics”. She said without a multi-partisan approach to the development and implementation of such a body “no one is going to have trust in it anyway”. Archer’s call for the bill to be introduced to parliament swiftly was echoed by the Liberal MP for the seat of Curtin, Celia Hammond, who said the establishment of a federal integrity agency was an issue that had been raised by her constituents since she was first elected in 2019. “It is something I support and have advocated for over the past two years and I continue to do so,” Hammond told Guardian Australia. “I recognise there are many different bodies and models across Australia – and many different views on what should or should not be included and covered. “I know that the attorney general has undertaken significant consultation and work on this matter – with a goal of producing an appropriate model and legislation for the federal context. I appreciate that there may be further consultation required, but personally I would like to see the legislation introduced as soon as possible.” Haines has been lobbying MPs to support her bill, with the proposed model including “all of the robust features of an integrity commission with teeth, and safeguards that means we don’t see vexatious and frivolous referrals”. The legislation also includes an exoneration clause, that would see anyone whose reputation was unfairly tarnished by an Australian federal integrity commission hearing to be the subject of a report to parliament exonerating them. In question time on Wednesday, in response to a question from Haines, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, defended the delay in releasing the legislation for the integrity commission, saying the government was returning to “priority legislation” after being diverted by the pandemic response. “The attorney general has been working steadily away and been working with cabinet on our draft legislation for an integrity commission, and that also soon will be available for people to give their responses to, and we will see whether that has support,” Morrison said. Haines said that if the government “truly want to pass a bill” they would have written it, tabled it and brought it on for debate. “That’s what I have done, but you’ve shut down debate on my bill in the House, you’ve shut down debate in the Senate and you’ve muzzled the attorney general, who is missing in action on this,” Haines said. “Come clean with the Australian people. Prime minister, do you honestly expect Australians to believe you truly want a robust integrity commission?”The Catholic sector has welcomed enhanced powers to hire and fire teachers based on “ethos” as Scott Morrison moved to reassure that gay students would not be worse off under the government’s religious discrimination overhaul. Morrison on Thursday introduced the Coalition’s religious discrimination bill almost three years after it was first promised. The prime minister said the “soul and the spirit” of an individual needed to be protected like other personal attributes and the bill would be a foil to “cancel culture” by preventing marginalisation of people of faith. Staring down an internal revolt over stalled changes to protect gay students, also promised in 2018, Morrison told the parliament that “nothing in this bill allows for any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of their sexuality or gender identity”. The Equality Australia chief executive, Anna Brown, noted LGBTQ+ students can already be expelled under carve-outs in the sex discrimination act and the bill failed to remedy that. She warned the bill would “wind back hard-fought protections for women, people with disability, LGBTIQ+ people, and even people of faith” by licensing religious speech targeting those groups. The package will allow schools to discriminate on the grounds of religion in their hiring, provided they publish a public policy explaining their ethos. A new clause would allow the federal government to override a state law on educational institutions’ employment practices by regulation. A separate “consequential amendments” bill clarifies this section specifically targets mooted changes in Victoria that would limit discrimination in favour of religious people in schools’ hiring to instances where it is an “inherent requirement” of the role. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, told Senate question time the bill only deals with hiring and firing based on religious ethos, not other protected attributes such as sexuality. Earlier, the assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, told Radio National she would not “split hairs” over the claim gay students have been expelled and teachers fired for their sexuality. Asked if a Christian school could refuse to hire a gay teacher, Stoker said it would “depend a great deal upon what that school is prepared to be up front with the community about” in their public policy – suggesting “ethos” provisions could be used for that purpose. The head of the National Catholic Education Commission, Jacinta Collins, told Guardian Australia the federal override “highlights the problems and issues with the Victorian bill” and she would be “very pleased” if the federal changes passed. The Victorian opposition had received legal advice that Catholic schools could effectively be limited to giving preference to Catholics only in principal and deputy principal positions, not teachers, she said. Collins cited the Morrison government’s decision to tear up Victoria’s Belt and Road deal with China as evidence it was “not as unprecedented as [LGBTI lobby group] Equality Australia suggests” to override state law. Collins complained of “the problem of lawfare” whereby teachers may claim they are being discriminated against based on “inherent characteristics” such as sexuality “when it’s actually about something else such as exposure of pornography in class”. Asked how characteristics like sexuality could be protected in law if schools could sack teachers for being in a same-sex relationship, Collins replied she was not aware “of an example like that”. “We expect teachers to respect the religious ethos they’ve chosen to work within – if a teacher has a difficulty with religious ethos of a school, their choice is to work in other sectors. “We have a pluralist education sector, if they have an issue with ethos [they can work elsewhere] … The point of a Catholic school is to have a Catholic school.” Archbishop Peter Comensoli, from the Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, said Catholic institutions “want the freedom to hire people for the sake of our mission, just like other non-faith-based organisations”. “The value of religious organisations to people of faith and wider society is in their religious mission and their ability to embody and pursue that religious mission,” he said in a statement. “Operating religious organisations, such as religious schools, according to their mission includes recognising their ability to hire staff who want to teach and model the vision of the school.” Ahead of the release of the religious discrimination bill, Cash asked the Australian Law Reform Commission to prepare “detailed drafting” to ensure children are not discriminated against in faith-based schools. On Tuesday Liberal moderates including Andrew Bragg and Dave Sharma told the Coalition party room that protections for gay teachers and students should be considered at the same time, not 12 months after the religious discrimination legislation. On Thursday Morrison said in the age of “identity politics” people are often “identified by our gender, our age, our sexuality, our race, our ethnicity, or our level of physical or intellectual ability”. “These are known as protected attributes, and they should be,” Morrison told parliament. “We are rightly protected against discrimination in relation to any of these attributes, but … human beings are more than our physical selves. “As human beings, we are also soul and spirit. We are also, importantly, what we believe. For many, this can inform who they are more than anything else. The protection of what we choose to believe in a free society is essential to our freedom in a liberal democracy.” But Morrison warned “many people from various religious traditions are concerned about the lack of religious protection against the prevalence of ‘cancel culture’ in Australian life”. “It’s true, it’s there, it’s real. “The citizens of liberal democracies should never be fearful about what they believe, the lives they lead, or the God they follow, if indeed, they choose to follow one or acknowledge one at all. “Australians shouldn’t have to worry about looking over their shoulder, fearful of offending an anonymous person on Twitter, cowardly sitting there abusing and harassing them for their faith, or transgressing against political or social zeitgeists.” Morrison urged Australians to “veer away from the artificial, phoney conflicts, boycotts, controversies and cancelling created by anonymous and cowardly bots, bigots and bullies”. He said the “sensible and balanced” bill would protect people of faith from those “who seek to marginalise and coerce and silence people of faith” because they shared the same view of the world. “People should not be cancelled or persecuted or vilified because their beliefs are different from someone else’s in a free liberal democratic society like Australia.” In a statement the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, said Labor “supports the extension of the federal anti-discrimination framework to ensure that Australians are not discriminated against because of their religious beliefs”. He added Labor would be guided by three principles including that “any extension of the federal anti-discrimination framework should not remove protections that already exist in the law to protect Australians from other forms of discrimination”. Dreyfus called for a joint select inquiry, complaining that the government’s plan to pass the bill in the lower house before sending it to a Senate inquiry would force MPs to vote before proper consultation.Clive Palmer, the chair of the United Australia party, graced the airwaves this morning. He managed to stay on the line for 12 long minutes, without hanging up on ABC Radio National breakfast host Fran Kelly. Spare a thought for factcheckers everywhere, including here at Guardian Australia. We’ve spent the morning dissecting some of Palmer’s wilder claims. Claim: There is ‘no data’ to suggest hospitalisations and deaths are down due to vaccination Palmer said there was no data to support the notion that fewer people were getting sick or dying from Covid, due to vaccination. “There’s no data to support that in Australia,” he said. He also said vaccination “makes no difference from a public health context”. Both statements are patently untrue. The data clearly shows the dramatic impact vaccination has had in reducing hospitalisations and deaths. Let’s take NSW as an example. It was hit by huge increases to case numbers during the Delta outbreak. Data from NSW Health shows of the 8,660 cases hospitalised between 16 June to 7 October, only 5.7% (493) were fully vaccinated and just 3% (30) of the 1,015 cases who were admitted to ICU were fully vaccinated. Twenty-six of those 30 people had significant underlying health conditions. The ICU admissions in NSW peaked between 8 September to 21 September. During that two week period, unvaccinated individuals were more than 16 times more likely to be admitted to intensive care or die. Of course, a small number of people will still die even with both doses. The data suggests of the 412 people who died in NSW between 16 June and 7 October, about 47 people had received two doses. The average age of those 47 people was 82 years old. Claim: Most vaccinated nation on earth also has ‘highest amounts of Covid cases in the world’ At one point, Palmer pointed to the tiny nation of Gibraltar to argue his case against vaccination. “If you go to Gibraltar, for example, the most vaccinated country in the world with 118% vaccination … they have the highest amounts of Covid cases in the world at the moment per capita of persons [sic].” Leaving aside the problems with using Gibraltar, which has a population of 33,691, as an indicator of any sort, it will shock you to learn that what Palmer says is not true. Gibraltar does not have the highest number of Covid cases per capita, either in a cumulative sense or in terms of new cases. But the crucial measure when talking about vaccination is, of course, the number of deaths. On that measure, Gibraltar is performing well. Despite an ongoing outbreak, it has recorded just four deaths since March, when it hit its 80% full vaccination rate. Two people are currently in hospital. The vast majority of its 98 deaths from Covid occurred in January and early February, when its vaccination rates were still low. Claim: More people die on the road than from Covid-19 It’s a line used often by those seeking to minimise the seriousness of the Covid-19 pandemic. Palmer said more people die on the road than from Covid. That’s true, but the difference is negligible. Collating data from the monthly road death reports released by the infrastructure department shows that, between March 2020 to the end of October, Australia has had 1,863 road deaths. The number is almost precisely the same for Covid deaths. During the same period, there were 1,861 deaths from Covid. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It’s worth noting Australians accept limitations to their freedoms to reduce that road death figure. Road laws, driving tests, seatbelts, car safety standards, taxes, constant policing, speed cameras, alcohol interlocks, just to name a few. It’s also worth remembering that the mortality rate from Covid in other countries is far higher than Australia. In Peru, for example, the case-mortality rate is 9%. Claim: ‘Over 500,000 people marched in Melbourne’ Palmer suggested there were 500,000 people at the “freedom” rally in Melbourne on the weekend. “Over 500,000 people marched in Melbourne last weekend. 150,000 marched with Craig Kelly in Sydney and 45,000 people were with me in the at the botanical gardens week before,” Even the most favourable media report, an article in the Australian, suggested a crowd of 100,000 to 300,000. Most other outlets reported crowds in the tens of thousands. Palmer also accused the ABC of not covering the protests. It did. Online, on radio, and through its television channels. • This article was amended on 7 December 2021 to remove an erroneous statement describing Palmer’s view that more people die on the road than from Covid as a “significant exaggeration”.The front pages of Thursday’s papers are dominated by the deaths of 27 migrants in the Channel with the coverage veering from sombre reporting to accusations that the French authorities did not do enough to prevent the tragedy. The Times’ main headline says “Dozens of migrants drown in Channel dinghy tragedy” and features a photograph of migrants preparing to launch a boat from France on Wednesday. An editorial on the disaster calls for more co-operation between the UK and France to try to stop a repeat. “Without intensive cross-border co-operation to tackle people-smuggling gangs, little can stem the flow of dangerous crossings and prevent further fatalities,” it says. The Guardian front page headline, which went to print before the total death toll was revised down to 27, reads “Tragedy at sea claims 31 lives in deadliest day of refugee crisis” along with a picture of a woman arriving on the beach at Dungeness in Kent with a small child in her arms. It reports that a record 25,700 people have attempted the crossing this year, three times the total for the whole of 2020, according to official figures. The FT also carries the earlier figure in its headline with a similar angle to the Guardian noting the worst day so far in the migrant crisis. “More than 30 migrants drown in worst disaster of Channel surge”, it says. The Telegraph says “31 migrants die in Channel disaster” and reports that Boris Johnson has told the French government that it has to “step up” in order to prevent the small boats leaving its shores for the UK. Other titles are more explicit in reporting No 10’s finger-pointing at Emmanuel Macron’s government. The Mail uses what it says is the prime minister’s words to the French president as its front page headline – “You’re letting gangs get away with murder” – under the strapline reading “Tragedy in the Channel”. The Express takes a slightly different interpretation of Johnson’s words with “PM: Smugglers getting away with murder”. The Sun’s headline reads “Shameful” and asks “Now will leaders finally act?” to stop the stream of boats making the perilous crossing. The Mirror calls the deaths “A human tragedy” that occurred “under the noses of French cops”. The i hints at the wider causes of the disaster in its main headline “Horror in the Channel: 31 die in search of a better life”, while the Metro asks “Why didn’t France stop them?”. The Metro’s lead story begins “A French police patrol watches refugees set off for England yet does nothing …”.New Zealanders stranded overseas and desperate to return home have shed tears of relief they will soon be able to skip the country’s managed isolation system. But for many the news is bittersweet as they still face another summer separated from loved ones, amid anger that a decision did not come sooner. The country will reopen its borders to vaccinated visitors in the opening months of 2022, for the first time since the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, announced their snap closure in the first month of the Covid-19 pandemic. The country’s borders have been closed to unrestricted travel for more than a year and a half. The border will initially open to New Zealand citizens and visa holders coming from Australia, then from the rest of the world, and finally to all other vaccinated visitors from the end of April. They will still have to self-isolate at home for a week, but will no longer have to pass through the country’s expensive and space-limited managed isolation facilities. “As soon as I read the date of 13 Feb 2022 for no more [managed isolation] for Kiwis from ‘higher risk’ locations I began to bawl my eyes out,” Lara Iriarte said. Iriarte left New Zealand for what was supposed to be a short trip in February 2020, but became stuck in Panama City as the pandemic developed and New Zealand’s borders closed. She said she is still in Central America and has not seen her only son since January last year. Sherryl Clark, who is in Victoria, Australia said: “To hear that we will not have to do the seven days in [managed isolation] is such brilliant news. “We have been trying to move back to New Zealand for over 12 months, and it feels like our life has been on interminable hold. Not just with New Zealand restrictions on entry, but lockdowns in Victoria, which have meant selling our house and getting organised has been also held up for month after month.” Clark said she attempted to secure a spot in the managed isolation lottery six times, and eventually won a spot when the government changed the isolation requirements to seven days from 14 November. “Even so, the delays have meant realistically we had to choose a February date, so I have missed two funerals of loved ones, my sister’s 70th and of course my first Christmas with my family for more than 15 years,” Clark said. Lisa Stella said her husband, who works in Hong Kong, has been trying to get home since June and has made seven attempts at securing a spot in the managed isolation and quarantine (MIQ) system. “Nine minutes after hearing the news, my husband who works abroad had a ticket from Hong Kong to New Zealand.” But for many New Zealanders, the government’s strict border controls and challenging managed isolation system have permanently damaged its reputation. “For me [the announcement] is absolutely useless and I find the ongoing restrictions completely over the top. New Zealand will be 90% vaccinated, so is Australia. It’s time to move on and stop destroying the economy and keeping families apart, and denying New Zealand citizens their rights to return and leave their country,” Vanessa Freeman said. Freeman, a New Zealand citizen based in Melbourne, is desperate to get home and see family over summer. “We can’t go home over the holidays, when working people could conceivably have the time of work to do the seven days in isolation and still actually see their loved ones. “My son is very close to his cousins in New Zealand, my mum is elderly and not well, and I am pretty done in emotionally after the last two years. I want to spend Christmas with my loved ones, to recover and recharge.” Freeman said she had initially supported the government’s pandemic response and voted for Labour in the 2020 election, but said: “[Now] they have lost me, and my family.” For others the idea of New Zealand as “home” has been called into question. Ian Fenn, who is based in Austria, said he was shocked New Zealand could “so easily lock out its own citizens” and said of the border announcement: “I think it is well overdue but my trust in my home country and New Zealanders has forever been changed, for the worse.” Sharelle Govignon-Sweet said: “I didn’t even jump for joy. The damage has been done, with regards to my feelings toward ‘home’ and what that means to me now. “Simply put, our nation locked us out and the populace stayed quiet on that, which alludes to there being a tacit agreement between the two. Teamed with a lack of empathy or compassion for what those of us locked out went through, I have forever been changed by all this.”Less than a year into his dream job as an ABC sports presenter, former footballer Tony Armstrong has been chosen to host his own prime time show about his other passion: dogs. The 31-year-old rookie TV host, whose popularity continues to rise, is fronting A Dog’s World, a three-part series about our relationship with our canine companions which uses genetics, neuroscience, behavioural and physiological research to examine why the dog really is man’s best friend. A Dog’s World is one of several new programs for 2022, announced by the ABC as part of its annual “Upfronts” on Thursday. The story of an another pair of dogs – Johnny Depp and Amber Heard’s Pistol and Boo – is the subject of an intriguing episode of another new ABC show unveiled at the 2022 virtual programming launch, Stories from Oz, billed as a documentary you can dance to. When Barnaby Joyce said, “Mr Depp has to either take his dogs back to California or we are going to have to euthanise them”, a quintessentially Australian story was born. Six years on and the story has been turned into an “irreverent comedy documentary” complete with fresh revelations from the deputy prime minister. “It’s a story about our double-edged relationship to Hollywood celebrities,” co-creator Andrew Hansen says. “On the one hand, we love them; we adore them. On the other hand we don’t like them coming here and thinking they’re better than us.” In an interview with Hansen’s co-creator on Stories of Oz, Chris Taylor, Joyce opens up about how his actions at the time were not just about protecting Australia from catching rabies. There may have been politics involved, Hansen says, but no spoilers. Hansen and Taylor are longtime collaborators going back to when they worked together on the Chaser a decade ago. Hansen has a background in musical theatre and composed and performed the musical numbers at the end of the Chaser shows. He also played the memorable characters Crazy Warehouse Guy, the Surprise Spruiker, Clive the Slightly Too-Loud Commuter and Mr Ten Questions. Hansen says the show took four long years to develop but he is thrilled with the way it turned out, as the musical numbers have been given the “full cinematic treatment” and the young performers are dazzling. “We’ve nearly finished the end of post production and it’s the first time I’ve ever felt happy with something I’ve made,” he said. He does reveal however that the ABC “couldn’t afford musicians” and so all the music in the show is played by himself. The other Australian tales to get a musical makeover are the saga of Schapelle Corby; the unlikely triumph of Steven Bradbury unexpectedly winning gold at the Winter Olympics; the political showdown of the Tampa affair; Melbourne’s cursed ferris wheel and the fairytale of the young Tasmanian woman Mary Donaldson. The ABC’s head of factual and culture Jennifer Collins says Armstrong, like other ABC talent including Jimmy Rees (Giggle and Hoot), Marc Fennell (Stuff the British Stole) Dr Anne Jones (ABC Science) and Namila Benson (The Art Show on RN), has been encouraged to work across the ABC because he is “somebody who resonates with an ABC audience”. Earlier this year Armstrong was appointed as ABC News Breakfast’s sports presenter where he has quickly become a fan favourite. As a high-profile Indigenous man, is also frequently asked to speak on behalf of his community. “Tony is somebody we would love to work with again, he is an exceptional talent,” Collins said. “He’s just got that fantastic mix of authority and humour. “And that’s something that you know, we really look for in factual television, somebody that brings authenticity. He’s the world’s busiest man.” The ABC unveiled a slate of new and returning shows including Australian dramas Significant Others, Savage River, Barons, Troppo and another series of the smash hit Mystery Road: Origin. Despite the sudden resignation of host Hamish Macdonald, the ABC announced Q+A will be back next year and the role of host will rotate between David Speers, Stan Grant and Virginia Trioli. MacDonald will be back on ABC screens too, as co-host with Dr Anne Jones of Southern Ocean Live, a program which reveals the wildlife above and below the sea. The broadcaster is yet to announce who will host the Sydney Gay &amp; Lesbian Mardi Gras parade which will be broadcast on ABC Radio and ABC Television in a three-year deal. For the first time the public can watch the program launch on iview.Despite endless speculation from international press in recent weeks, there has been barely a mention of tennis star Peng Shuai’s bombshell allegation against Zhang Gaoli, the country’s former vice-premier, in domestic news coverage. Outside the country, the event was initially referred to by the editor of the official nationalist tabloid Global Times, Hu Xijin, only as “the thing people talked about”. “For some years now, China has responded to negative global attention either by giving an unconvincing explanation, or by stoically pretending the criticism isn’t there,” Zhang Ming, a retired professor of politics at Renmin University told Reuters this week. But after the initial reluctance, Beijing now appears to be taking a different approach. And the way it’s dealing with “the thing” provides a glimpse of how the narrative is set to develop both internally and externally, with international attention turned to the forthcoming Winter Olympics and China’s broader relationship with the west. When the French embassy in Beijing posted on its Weibo account about Peng early this week, censors did not take down the post. Instead, comments such as “mind your own business” were prioritised. Several commenters also reminded the French of the scandal of the 216,000 sexually abused children – mostly boys – in the French Catholic church since 1950. “Please, how do you [the French embassy] respond to this scandal?” one queried. The foreign ministry in Beijing is changing its line, too. After denying the knowledge of the incident multiple times, it adopted an unrepentant tone on Tuesday. It accused unnamed people of “malicious hyping” in the case. “I hope certain people will cease malicious hyping, let alone politicisation,” a spokesperson said at a regular press briefing. Having failed to convince the world of his take on “the thing”, Hu’s newspaper began to frame the disagreement as an ideological struggle between China and the west. It advocated a confrontational approach to the west. “China used to care about maintaining a harmonious atmosphere with the west and the way being regarded by the rest of the world, particularly by the west. This needs to be changed,” he wrote in an editorial on Tuesday. “But the so-called ‘harmonious atmosphere’ has long shifted, and some Chinese state media appear to deploy the by now familiar tactic of bypassing critiques or questions by underscoring western hypocrisy – a tactic also very frequently used by Russian state media,” said Maria Repnikova, director of the Center for Global Information Studies at Georgia State University. “This emphasis on the west and on ideological differences between China and the west in turn obfuscates the original allegations and arguably further politicises this issue as a battle of ‘us’ versus ‘them’.” But Repnikova noted that on the other hand, even the best propagandists would find it impossible to please both sides that are divided by China’s “great firewall” censorship system. “It is an extremely sensitive story to begin with. You cannot say anything negative, therefore you only highlight the positive side of the spin: that she is just fine.” Hence that tweet from CGTN, a Beijing-based news service, a fortnight ago. With a single stroke, the act opened a Pandora box that transformed a #MeToo case into high-stake international diplomacy. From Washington to Brussels, western governments now demand answers as to the genuine wellbeing of Peng. China hawks in major capitals felt their case for boycotting the Winter Games had become even stronger. “The Peng Shuai saga could happen in any country and in any system … [But for Beijing, it] can make her play any role, including putting up a show of being free,” tweeted Ho Pin, an exiled Chinese publisher in New York. “For Chinese officials in charge of crisis management, such control is routine. But for the free world, this is even more frightening than forced confessions.”The Morrison government’s decision to scrap plans to build a 2.7km concrete runway on Antarctica has opened a new round of Coalition divisions, with China hawks blasting the “retrograde” move. The Tasmanian Liberal party senator Eric Abetz criticised the decision, labelling it a “huge disappointment” as Australia risked loosening “our foothold” on Antarctica to China and Russia. The final parliamentary sitting fortnight of the year has been marked by government divisions, with a number of backbenchers either voicing dissent or crossing the floor on issues ranging from a strong integrity commission to vaccine mandates to religious discrimination. The latest flashpoint is Liberal environment minister Sussan Ley’s announcement the government would “protect Antarctica’s pristine wilderness by not proceeding with a decision to build a 2,700m concrete runway at Australia’s Davis research station”. Environmental scientists had argued the multi-billion-dollar plan was a waste of money, and could lead to a destructive construction race among territorial rivals. There were also concerns the new airport and runway would increase the human footprint in the world’s greatest wilderness by an estimated 40% and impact on penguin colonies. Ley said she had weighed up the costs, potential environmental impacts, and the complexity of a 20-year construction process “in an extreme and sensitive environment”. Ley portrayed her decision not to proceed as a signal to other countries about “Australia’s commitment to due process and robust environmental assessment” – and called on other countries to similarly respect the Antarctic environment. “All nations need to place the Antarctic environment at the absolute centre of decision making and respect the treaty system,” she said on Thursday morning. But within an hour of the announcement, Abetz said the “overwhelming strategic and capability support the runway would have provided has been regrettably lost”. “As it appears, this is a final decision – and a retrograde decision at that, the task is to ensure that the funding predicated for the runway is made fully available for other Antarctic capabilities,” Abetz said. “Tasmania’s world-renowned reputation as the gateway to the Antarctic will be questioned, as will our commitment unless there is a strong, unequivocal announcement of the preservation of the funding and the new focus of investment.” Abetz said Australia needed to “invest in other strategic and capability support infrastructure to ensure the international community cannot doubt our commitment to Antarctica”. “At a time when China and Russia are rapidly expanding their footprints on the ice continent, it is absolutely essential that we don’t loosen our foothold,” Abetz said. The NSW Liberal senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, another China hawk, said: “In the face of growing Chinese and Russian assertiveness in Antarctica, this is a backward step.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She added: “I agree with senator Abetz that we should not be loosening our foothold when these powers are expanding their footprints.” The comments come amid debate about how Australia should pursue concerns about China’s interest in resource exploration in the Antarctic. Claire Young, a former senior analyst with Australia’s Office of National Intelligence covering Antarctica, wrote in a recent policy brief that China “wants to benefit economically, and potentially militarily, from Antarctica”. Young’s paper, published by the Lowy Institute, said China was increasingly assertive in the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), primarily over fisheries access, and was active on the ice. She said the treaty required Antarctica be used only for peaceful, scientific purposes, and “freezes” challenges to Australia’s claim of the Australian Antarctic Territory – the largest of the seven claims, at about 42% of the continent. The scrapping of the runway project will not be the final word, according to Ley, who says the government is now looking at alternative options for expanding Australia’s wider Antarctic program capability. Ley said the government would make announcements in the “near future” about further investment “to bolster Australia’s scientific and environmental interests in Antarctica”. Last month Australia took delivery of its new Antarctic icebreaker from the Netherlands, the RSV Nuyina. The vessel, which is to be docked in Hobart, is capable of mapping the ocean floor to a depth of 11,000 metres and will act as a “floating laboratory” to monitor ocean and marine ecosystem health. Despite frosty relations between China and Australia, the two countries collaborated on a mission to medically evacuate an Australian expeditioner from Antarctica late last year, with help from the United States. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, has also suggested Australia and France could begin to repair their diplomatic rift by cooperating on shared interests such as Antarctica.Pakistan has ordered private offices and schools to remain closed on Mondays in Lahore in the hope that a three-day weekend will help reduce toxic levels of smog in the country’s second-largest city. The directive, issued by Punjab relief commissioner Babar Hayat Tarar, aimed to act “as a preventive and speedy remedy” during the winter smog season and will last until 15 January. Lahore was temporarily declared the most polluted city in the world by an air quality monitor earlier on Wednesday, as residents complain of shortness of breath, stinging eyes and nausea from thick, acrid pollution. Last week, the air quality index in the city of about 12 million people was ranked at 348, much above the hazardous level of 300, according to IQAir, the Swiss technology company that operates the AirVisual monitoring platform. Since then, Lahore has been overtaken by Delhi, India, which ranked at 422. The number is a calculation based on the level of several pollutants in the air. Pakistan has witnessed the worst air pollution in recent years from Karachi to Lahore, as a mixture of low-grade diesel fumes, smoke from seasonal crop burn off, and colder winter temperatures coalesce into stagnant clouds of smog. As air pollution got worse and the city felt unliveable, the desperate residents filed petitions in the courts in Lahore against the government to take action against the smog, which is a mix of smoke and fog. Abubaker Umer, a communication specialist and a resident in Lahore, said he stopped going for morning walks and sent his elderly parents to another town as they were very sensitive to air pollution. Umer says his skin allergy and throat irritation has gotten worse over a few weeks since the city has been engulfed in the smog. “When you open the window or step outside you see no sky. Smog is everywhere,” he said. “We are inhaling smog and toxic air pollution has become part of our lives and bodies. The government has to do more than closing educational institutes as Lahore has become an unlivable city.” He said that he is able to work from home but over a million people do not have this privilege. He added: “People don’t even wear masks and they don’t know how deadly the weather is. They lack awareness but this is the responsibility of the government to share awareness and find solutions.” Dr Aamir Iqbal, a private doctor who practises pulmonary medicine in Lahore has seen the symptoms of his patients getting worse. “The smog is making it very hard for the people to breathe and having issues in the throat, irritation in eyes and the weather is very dangerous for people who have lung issues and some other diseases. I have instructed some of my patients not to go out.” On average, Pakistanis are estimated to lose two years of their life due to air pollution. But Lahore suffers the worst, with the average resident losing 5.3 years of their lives, claims the report on air quality life index , produced by the Energy Policy Institute at the University of Chicago. The information minister, Fawad Chaudhry, has blamed previous authorities for smog in Lahore. “We see Lahore engulfed by fog every winter due to the past rulers of the city, who had cut trees for erecting a jungle of concrete there which badly affected the green cover of Lahore and its surroundings,” he said on Saturday. Rimmel Mohydin, a south Asia analyst at Amnesty International, said the smog crisis was a human rights issue, given that it impedes the right to health. “People should not be endangered by the air they breathe. If the expertise is available, if the consequences are dire, if the evidence of the damage is mounting, then the government must not waste time initiating smog protection protocol.” Malik Amin Aslam, climate change adviser to the prime minister, Imran Khan, said the government was working on the recommendations of the smog action committee. “We are doing everything possible,” he said. Aslam said that without regional efforts between India and Pakistan the issue of the smog cannot be tackled, as the crops are burned off on the other side of the border. “We have put this request for a dialogue between regional countries during Cop26 (climate summit). Hopefully, it will take place.” However, Rafay Alam, a lawyer and environmental activist said that while there was a need for dialogue with India and regional countries, the smog cannot be blamed on Pakistan’s neighbours. “There is no overnight solution to the problem. The government has to improve fuel quality and shift to renewable energy, and provide pollution control devices for the industries..”British and French leaders have traded accusations after at least 27 people died trying to cross the Channel in the deadliest incident since the current migration crisis began. In a phone call with Boris Johnson on Wednesday night, French president Emmanuel Macron stressed “the shared responsibility” of France and the UK, and told Johnson he expected full cooperation and that the situation would not be used “for political purposes”, the Élysée said. Thirty-four people were believed to be on the boat when it sank on Wednesday, leading to what the International Organisation for Migration said was the biggest single loss of life in the Channel since it began collecting data in 2014. Two survivors are in intensive care. The British prime minister renewed calls for France to agree to joint police patrols along the Channel coast, and said Wednesday’s incident highlighted how efforts by French authorities to patrol their beaches “haven’t been enough”. “We’ve had difficulties persuading some of our partners, particularly the French, to do things in a way that we think the situation deserves,” he said on Wednesday. “I understand the difficulties that all countries face, but what we want now is to do more together – and that’s the offer we are making.” The French have previously resisted UK offers to send police and Border Force agents to mount joint patrols amid concerns about the implications for national sovereignty. Macron also called for an emergency meeting of European government ministers and an immediate funding boost for the EU’s border agency, Frontex. France’s government is holding an emergency meeting on Thursday morning to discuss next steps. “France will not let the Channel become a cemetery,” Macron said. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, called for coordination with the UK, saying “the response must also come from Great Britain”. The House of Commons is set to hold a debate on “the numbers of migrants arriving in the United Kingdom illegally by boat” just before midday on Thursday, according to a recently released parliamentary schedule. Speaking on Newsnight, immigration compliance minister Tom Pursglove confirmed Johnson had renewed a previous offer for UK police and Border Force officers to take part in joint patrols with the French, and said the last incident showed the two countries needed to deepen their cooperation. “The prime minister and President Macron have had exactly that discussion this evening. That is something that I am very keen to see happen,” he said. “It is the case that in the past we have offered to host and to help with joint patrols. I think that could be invaluable in helping to address this issue. I really do hope that the French will reconsider that offer.” A spokesperson for Johnson said the two leaders had agreed to the urgency of stepping up joint efforts to prevent the deadly crossings. They also highlighted the importance of working closely with Belgium and the Netherlands, as well as other countries across the continent. The mayor of Calais, Natacha Bouchart, said it was the British who were to blame and called on Johnson to “face up to his responsibilities”. “The British government is to blame. I believe that Boris Johnson has, for the past year-and-a-half, cynically chosen to blame France,” she said, according to French media reports. The Channel is one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes and currents are strong. Human traffickers typically overload the dinghies, leaving them barely afloat and at the mercy of waves as they try to reach British shores. Both countries cooperate to stem migration across the Channel but also accuse each other of not doing enough – and the issue is often used by politicians on both sides pushing an anti-migration agenda. Darmanin told a news conference in Calais those who died in Wednesday’s tragedy included five women and a girl. He said the boat that sank had been “very frail”, and compared it to “a pool you blow up in your garden”. He said 34 people were believed to have been on before it sank and it was not clear what country the victims originally came from. Four suspected traffickers have been arrested, two of whom later appeared in court, he said. Refugee charities called on the government to save lives by opening safe routes for asylum seekers to apply to come to the UK without taking to the sea. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, said: “How many tragedies like this must we see before the government fundamentally changes its approach by committing to an ambitious expansion of safe routes for those men, women and children in desperate need of protection? “Every day, people are forced to flee their homes through no fault of their own. Now is the time to end the cruel and ineffective tactic of seeking to punish or push away those who try and find safety in our country.” An emergency search was sparked at about 2pm on Wednesday when a fishing boat sounded the alarm after spotting several people at sea off the coast of France. The latest deaths follow others reported but unverified in the Channel in recent weeks, amid a record number of people attempting the crossing. On 11 November, a total of 1,185 people arrived in England by boat, the most in a single day. More than 25,700 people have made the dangerous journey to the UK in small boats this year – three times the total for the whole of 2020, according to official figures. It was widely expected that the number of crossings would reduce in the winter. Instead, bigger boats have been used to bring people to the UK in greater numbers.From underground, the flanged, fluted flaps of new honey fungus mushrooms haul themselves into the light. The older ones are slick with a strange grease, mottling and sagging towards decay from the first golden moment of their appearance. The mushrooms have surfaced to breathe their spores into the air. Their sexual reproduction is mysterious, and geographic populations of the honey fungus Armillaria mellea in the world’s temperate woods may become separate species. This one has probably been here long before there was a garden, a medieval burgess plot, a Saxon or Brythonic farm. For centuries, the honey fungus has been spreading through the soil between the trees that it has killed through rhizomatic “bootlaces”. These bootlaces are like fibre optic cables that attach to the tree roots and produce toxins and mechanical pressure, penetrating the cell walls and flooding them with sheets of white gauzy mycelium: the honeyed voice of rot. From these mushrooms, a root leads back to a Japanese cherry tree, Prunus ‘Kanzan’. A couple of evenings ago, from an unlit office five storeys above Oxford Road in Manchester, I looked down into the little park below to see a golden tree in a golden pool of its own fallen leaves, glowing in the background radiation of the city. Those leaves were momentarily mythic, full of summer, light years falling to decay in space. Suppose the golden bough – the magical branch of golden leaves guarded by a cult of forest kings, given by the Trojan hero Aeneas to Prosperina, goddess of life, death and rebirth, for safe passage into the underworld – has become this fungus Armillaria? It emerges from the land of the dead; it will kill this Kanzan cherry over the next few years, the tree’s spectacular flowering in spring an omen for its demise. It killed its predecessors whose decay feeds the soil to grow new life; it will kill future trees too. The honey fungus mushrooms corrupt to a slimy mass to withdraw underground. The last leaves of the tree, holding the last November light, will fall in tonight’s frost. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe former ABC reporter Zoe Daniel has announced she will run as an independent in the upcoming federal election in the Melbourne electorate of Goldstein, which is currently held by Liberal MP Tim Wilson. Daniel announced in a series of tweets on Thursday that she would be contesting the seat in the city’s south-east, citing integrity in politics and climate change among her core concerns. Her candidacy has been backed by Voices of Goldstein, one of a number of campaigns funding independent candidates in Coalition-held seats under the “Voice Of” movement. Daniel told Guardian Australia it was time to end the “weaponisation” of climate policy. She backs an “enforceable” 50% emissions cut by 2030 to encourage economic investment. She believed Goldstein residents had “a growing and urgent recognition that if we don’t embrace a renewable energy economy that will flow through to our broader prosperity. “[Climate change has been] weaponised as a moral issue. But it’s also a pressing economic issue. “We need to embrace the opportunities that come with climate change rather than being overtaken by other countries that step into that space.” Daniel, who lives in Hampton, one of the bayside suburbs within the electorate, says she is a swinging voter who has never been a member of a political party. She said she voted for Wilson in 2016 largely because she supported the then-prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, and what she considered to be progressive climate and economic policies. But she says that since Turnbull was “white-anted” out of office, moderate Liberals such as Wilson have been more interested in supporting the conservative approach of the National party than representing their electorates. She insists running against Wilson – who tweeted several times about his record as an MP on Thursday without directly linking the statements to Daniel’s announcement – isn’t personal, but it was time he was held accountable. “It’s to do with what they do, not what they say.” Wilson, who was elected in 2016 and was reelected in 2019, holds the seat on a margin of just under 8%. Daniel asked Goldstein residents in a campaign video launched on Thursday whether they valued honesty and integrity in politics, a strategic climate policy, transparent economic management, and safety and equality for women. She plans to flesh out those ideas in a series of “community events”, “listening posts”, “democracy walks” and “kitchen table groups” within the electorate. “It’s not just about telling people things, it’s about listening, consulting and then synthesising that into… a position.” In terms of integrity, Daniel says she supported the bill for an integrity commission designed by independent MP Helen Haines, but also wanted to stop other examples of government spending that voters didn’t necessarily think equated to corruption: “overt and entrenched pork barrelling” that was “not for the good of communities but [for re-election”. Under the Coalition’s commuter car park scheme, which was savaged by the Australian National Audit Office, Goldstein had six projects funded – more than any other Victorian electorate. Daniel dismissed concerns raised by the Coalition – that reportedly prompted a warning from the Australian Electoral Commission – that “voices of” movements were not transparent about their sources of funding. She said the majority of her financial backers were small donors who had made contributions as small as $5, but that she did have a “couple” of larger donors whose contributions would be declared if required under AEC rules. Daniel also dismissed the suggestion that these independent candidates were beholden to the people who fund them, and could in fact be trojan horses for other political parties. “It’s an easy piece of misinformation to deploy that the movement is somehow having its strings pulled by others behind the scenes but as far as I know that’s not happening,” she said. Daniel will officially launch her campaign on Saturday morning in Sandringham, saying she had expected the news of her candidacy would hold until that day. Daniel, who was a foreign correspondent during a career of three decades with the broadcaster, will draw inspiration from independents Cathy McGowan and Zali Steggall. Her campaign video leans heavily on her career at the public broadcaster, and features her walking on the beach with her dog and two teenage children. But Daniel said that she still expected some people in the electorate, which she described as statistically wealthier and better educated than average, would not be familiar with her. “Maybe some people know who I am, but not in this context.”Shares in Australian-listed buy-now-pay-later companies have plunged by an average of about 80% compared to peak prices within the past year, driven down by swelling losses and lower-than-expected consumer interest in the product. While some stocks bounced on Thursday, it came after days of heavy selling that has seen share prices tumble as much as 11.8% in a single trading session. The chief executive of McLean Roche Consulting, payments analyst Grant Halverson, said 12 BNPL companies were listed on the Australian Stock Exchange – more than anywhere else in the world. Investors have been willing to overlook the losses run up by BNPL companies in the hope that their growth will eventually make them extremely profitable. However, Halverson said a $653m loss announced by big player Zip in August, a dramatic increase from its $20m loss last year, “surprised and even shocked many”. “The sector lost over $1.05bn in 2021 which has concerned many investors,” he said. “Most BNPL apps’ 2021 reports were bad, as sales growth declined, credit losses increased and cash burn increased, with a number seeming questionable in cashflow terms.” In August, Openpay’s auditors said there was a material uncertainty the company could continue as a going concern after an ambitious push into the US and UK resulted in a surge in bad debts. Openpay will need to raise more money by either borrowing more or issuing new shares, auditor PwC said. Zip shares have fallen from their peak by 63% while Openpay shares have dropped 78%, according to figures compiled by Halverson. He said big player Afterpay’s share price now tracked that of US group Square, which has agreed to buy the Australian company. IOUpay, which operates in Malaysia, suffered the biggest fall from its peak of the dozen stocks tracked by Halverson, cratering by 96%. The next biggest loser was Fatfish Group, which operates in Singapore and plummeted 84%. Among providers that operate in Australia, Laybuy Group experienced the biggest share price fall, slumping 79%. In Australia, the lightly regulated sector has also come under pressure from consumer advocates, who are concerned that consumers are racking up unaffordable debts and want the product made subject to the same laws that govern loans. Last month, the Reserve Bank also said that it wanted to change payment rules to allow merchants to pass on to consumers the fees BNPL providers charge retailers, a move that could make the schemes less attractive compared to credit cards. And established finance groups are also moving in on the territory of BNPL companies, with PayPal and the Commonwealth Bank entering the market in July and Apple working with Goldman Sachs towards launching its own product. “Of the 12 ASX stocks, none make a profit and the regulatory threat still persists,” Halverson said. The five BNPL groups listed in Australia that do not operate here “have all declined the most”, he said. He said a report issued by the RBA last month “dispelled BNPL spin” about high user numbers by revealing there were 5.2m active BNPL accounts accounting for $11.5bn in sales a year. “The RBA figures also show BNPL spend is flat,” he said. “This raises the question, has BNPL peaked in Australia?” Halverson said that globally, all payments systems, including credit card schemes, had enjoyed a five-year run of share price growth that now seemed to be over. Shares in Visa and PayPal peaked in July and have fallen by 22.5% and 39% since then. Visa is under pressure over a ban on its cards in the UK announced by tech giant Amazon this month while “PayPal’s shares also dropped 5% in one day from a rating change by one analyst – a sure sign of a shift in investor sentiment,” Halverson said.On the final Saturday night in August, the last RAF plane left Afghanistan. On board were any remaining British diplomats and soldiers, escaping a country in murderous chaos. Outside the base, Taliban militia were roaming Kabul’s streets, while the previous evening a suicide bomber had got to the airport gates and set off an explosives belt, killing at least 183 people. As the UK’s largest evacuation mission since the second world war ended, Boris Johnson praised his officials and troops: “They have expended all the patience and care and thought they possess to help people in fear for their lives.” Nearly two months later and 4,000 miles away, a fragile young man in the Kent town of Folkestone remained in fear for his life. Bashir Khan Ahmadzai fled Afghanistan after his father, a police officer, was seized from the family home by Taliban troops who promised they would be back to take his son. He arrived here as a child, crammed into the back of a lorry with other scared and sick boys and men, and applied for asylum. Now the same British government that just weeks before had worked round the clock to rescue people from the clutches of the Taliban was continuing its long-running campaign to deport him. No “patience and care and thought” was wasted on the 25-year-old’s case. He had done nothing wrong, the Home Office accepted; he just did not qualify to be a refugee. It was a Friday in mid-October. He was due in court on Monday. I wrote about Ahmadzai here three years ago, and have kept an eye out for him ever since. A lot of people do that, all of us worrying about what will happen to this skinny foal with big brown eyes. Even hard-headed, gavel-bashing judges describe him as “vulnerable”, while court documents list “complex speech, language and communication difficulties”. What would have happened had he lost, I asked people in Folkestone last week. His mate Hadi recounted how in the months leading up to the hearing Ahmadzai had stopped coming out, had not been sleeping, and had lost more and more weight. Support worker Bridget Chapman remembered sitting in on a psychiatric assessment conducted this summer for the court case. At one point the doctor asked if Ahmadzai had ever had any thoughts of hurting or killing himself. He replied: “I think about it every day”. “His depression is now severe,” concluded the medical report. “I would suspect that the risk of his trying to end his life would increase significantly if he were returned to Afghanistan.” All this summer, as I wondered what would become of him, I had another question: what did his treatment say about the rest of us? These were the weeks when Westminster mourned the noble intentions with which it had 20 years earlier marched into Afghanistan; when newspaper pundits extolled the humanitarian work done after 9/11. Yet when Ahmadzai and I first met, in 2018, he had just been released from a detention centre where he’d been taken without warning and locked in a tiny cell. The small window was too high for him to see out of, but he could hear shouting and planes roaring overhead. He said the staff had taunted him: “We are going to deport you.” Admittedly, Afghanistan then was not in the state it is now. Back then, the Home Office judged it only “the second-least peaceful country in the world”. The Taliban were already taking towns and villages. Hadi remembered how at his school one day the Qur’an lessons had been suddenly swapped for instruction in how to clean and shoot rifles. Then they were taken into the basement and shown suicide vests. You trigger them with your chins, the boys were told. That way their heads would be so badly destroyed that no one could identify them. That is the society Hadi and Ahmadzai escaped. Those immigration officers were ultimately working for us, as part of a Whitehall department acting on our behalf, funded by our taxes and implementing policies endorsed at the ballot box. Ahmadzai’s solicitor, Jamie Bell, calculates that the government has spent in the region of £20,000 on the case to deport him. Over the past six years, Bell has represented about 100 Afghans seeking asylum in the UK and 75% of cases, he believes, have involved some form of injustice from the Home Office. Injustices committed in our names. It was not always so barbaric. Just off the paved market in Folkestone is the local museum, and inside hangs a giant oil painting. The Landing of the Belgian Refugees marks how in the autumn of 1914 Folkestone welcomed Belgians fleeing the German army. Painted by one of those refugees, it shows children and their families on small boats in the Channel. Those clambering on to the docks look thin, anxious and worn out, but there to greet them is the mayor of Folkestone, his deputy, a magistrate, vicars and doctors: all the great and good of the town, who understood that it could easily be them seeking safety and sustenance. Showing me this picture, Chapman told me how on one day alone 16,000 refugees crossed the water. She paused. “What’s changed?” Any number of answers suggest themselves. Those people are white; these are brown. Belgium is only a couple of hundred miles from Folkestone; Afghanistan is a few thousand. But the question is an excellent one, because it highlights the most important element of all: political will. Last Friday, I asked the Guardian’s librarians to count how many articles the Sun, Daily Mail and Daily Telegraph and their Sunday equivalents had run on the asylum system in just the past month. The total was 114, or more than one per paper each and every morning: a daily drumbeat of headlines and opinion on stories from the poppy bomber to Priti Patel. Then I asked: how many of those pieces had featured any comment at all from an asylum seeker or a refugee? The answer was five. Five out of 114. Imagine reading 20 different articles on the social care crisis and only on the 21st hearing from someone actually in the care system. Then imagine if all those articles ever said was what spongers those sick and elderly people were, how they were just playing the system. They don’t need care, government ministers and newspapers columnists would say. They just want room service. It would never happen, of course. Those people are judged too important for such a monstering. But it is done every day to asylum seekers. They are erased from the record, stripped of their humanity and rendered as grotesque stereotypes for others to lie about. Newspapers claim that “record numbers” are coming here, when asylum claims are actually down from last year. The MP for Dover, Natalie Elphicke, claims refugees are “breaking and entering” Britain, when it is a right enshrined in law to seek asylum (this is the same MP who thinks her husband, Charlie Elphicke, is serving an “excessive” sentence for sexual assault). And the home secretary, Priti Patel, says people only come here from war zones and failed states for the hotel rooms, even while she sticks them in abandoned army barracks that government inspectors judge as “impoverished, run-down and … filthy”. The great, galling irony is that this is being done by a home secretary who claims her parents would have qualified for asylum when they left Uganda, and publicly supported by Nadim Zahawi, an Iraqi refugee who spent his childhood on benefits, and is now education secretary. Yet they visit on others treatment that would have broken them. And by their refusal to manage the flow of asylum applicants, they ultimately force people to risk their lives in the search of safety. Those people who sank in the Channel yesterday died because of our asylum regime. As Ahmadzai was preparing for court that Friday afternoon, he got a phone call from his solicitor. The Home Office had dropped the case. With apologies for “late submissions”, it had considered “the recent events in Afghanistan” and the official guidance that had been changed just days before – and was granting him asylum. In the weeks since, Ahmadzai has started to sleep again. He has also begun to dream. He wants to get a moped and ride for Deliveroo or Uber Eats. Oh, and he’s desperate to go to the gym and bulk up. As I left, he mustered up a few words of English and clutched one of his biceps. “Chicken legs,” he said. Despite all he’d been through, he was still just a young man. Your son, your brother, your neighbour. Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnistIn March 2020, Boris Johnson, pale and exhausted, self-isolating in his flat on Downing Street, released a video of himself – that he had taken himself – reassuring Britons that they would get through the pandemic, together. “One thing I think the coronavirus crisis has already proved is that there really is such a thing as society,” the prime minister announced, confirming the existence of society while talking to his phone, alone in a room. All this was very odd. Johnson seemed at once frantic and weak (not long afterwards, he was admitted to hospital and put in the intensive care unit). Had he, in his feverishness, undergone a political conversion? Because, by announcing the existence of society, Johnson appeared to renounce, publicly, something Margaret Thatcher had said in an interview in 1987, in remarks that are often taken as a definition of modern conservatism. “Too many children and people have been given to understand ‘I have a problem, it is the government’s job to cope with it!’” Thatcher said. “They are casting their problems on society, and who is society? There is no such thing!” She, however, had not contracted Covid-19. Of course, there is such a thing as society. The question now is how the pandemic has changed it. Speculating about what might happen next requires first deciphering these statements, and where they came from. Johnson was refuting not only Thatcher, but also Ronald Reagan. Thatcher’s exclamation about the non-existence of society and the non-ability of government to solve anyone’s problems echoed a declaration made by Reagan in his 1981 inaugural address: “Government is not the solution to our problem. Government is the problem.” Thatcher and Reagan often conflated the two – to diminish both – but society and government mean different things. Society usually means the private ties of mutual obligation and fellowship that bind together people who have different backgrounds and unequal education, resources and wealth. Government is the public administration of the affairs of people constituted into a body politic as citizens and equals. Society invokes community, government polity. According to the Reagan-Thatcher worldview, there is no such thing as society. There are only families, who look after one another, and individuals, who participate in markets. The idea that government is the solution to people’s problems rests on a mistaken belief in the existence of society. This mistaken belief leads to attempts to solve problems such as ill health with government programmes such as government-funded healthcare, as if these were problems of society, rather than problems of individuals. Government programmes like these will also interfere with the only place where real solutions are to be found, which is the free market. Not many worldviews build worlds but, long before the pandemic, this one did. It not only contributed to the dismantling of social supports in the US and the UK, but also undergirds the architecture and ethos of the internet, which is ungoverned, deregulated, privatised and market-driven – a remote and barren wasteland where humans are reduced to “users”, individuals, alone, just so many backlit avatars of IRL bone-marrow selves. Then came Covid. Remoteness replaced intimacy, masks hid faces, screens stood in for rooms. States enforced “social distancing”: stickers on sidewalks, chairs left empty. Much carried on as before, only more intensely. Corporations monetised “social networking”: predictive algorithms, “friends”, “followers”. The pandemic forced vast numbers of people not only to retreat from the actual world, but also to live their lives in the anti-government, antisocial world of the virtual, the ersatz, the flat, lonely, locked inside and burned out. To be sure, campaigns to halt the spread of the virus have demonstrated, again and again, the strength of ties of mutual obligation, through sacrifices made for sick and vulnerable people and, not least, through the surging number of mutual aid groups, each another expression of love and nurture and care and fellow feeling, each another proof of the existence of society. All the same, angry unmasked Americans are punching flight attendants on planes and schoolteachers in classrooms, when asked to wear masks, and there is a general sense that social norms are under a wartime level of stress, absent a wartime solidarity. Picture the second world war, where, instead of queueing in the ration line, people are clobbering one another. Even among the peaceable, alongside grief, exhaustion and dread, loneliness and alienation remain as the lasting miseries of the pandemic. Whether the fateful social distance will ever close will depend on the ravages of the virus, on an aching longing for one another, and on something more, too: on political decisions about public goods. * * * This year, while the world begins to remake itself, and as each of us, like so many hermit crabs crawling along the blinding sand, try to get our bearings, it may be that the future of society can be found in its past. Even before the pandemic, intellectuals and policymakers on both the left and the right had been raising alarms about the future of society, launching initiatives designed to pin, stitch and darn the world’s tattered “social fabric”. In 2018, the American conservative columnist David Brooks founded Weave: The Social Fabric Project, advocating “a life for community rather than a life for self”. Last year, Onward, a conservative thinktank in the UK, founded Repairing Our Social Fabric, a programme aimed at offering “a comprehensive understanding of the state of community in Britain”. Nor have these calls come only from conservatives. More in Common, a nonpartisan, multinational research organisation, undertakes projects designed, for instance, to “strengthen the parts of Germany’s social fabric that remain intact”. Racial justice has lately been framed as a social fabric problem, too. “A functioning society rests on a web of mutuality, a willingness among all involved to share enough with one another to accomplish what no one person can do alone,” Heather McGhee writes in her 2021 book, The Sum of Us: What Racism Costs Everyone and How We Can Prosper Together. “In a sense, that’s what government is. I can’t create my own electric grid, school system, internet, or healthcare system – and the most efficient way to ensure that those things are created and available to all on a fair and open basis is to fund and provide them publicly.” The problem, McGhee writes, is that for much of history, both in the US and in many other parts of the world, those goods have been “for whites only”. What with polarisation, tribalisation and atomisation, “the social fabric of the country has been torn,” said Eddie Glaude, chair of the African American studies programme at Princeton University, near the end of the Trump presidency. “We have to imagine a different way of being together with each other.” Sometimes people argue that the pandemic has made all these problems worse; sometimes they argue that the pandemic has cast such a glaring light on these problems that now, finally, they can be fixed. Either way, thinktanks are dedicating funds to the purpose: the Russell Sage Foundation announced a research initiative on Covid-19’s effects on the social fabric. And that’s interesting, because Russell Sage is a New York-based thinktank founded in 1907 by the widow of a railroad magnate who was concerned that the social fabric had been ripped apart by industrialism, which happens to be where the idea of a social fabric came from. The English expression “the social fabric” was coined in the 1790s, the age of the machine loom, when observers worried that the growth of factories and cities, and the movement from farms and towns, was leaving people isolated and alone. Over the next century, all sorts of thinkers, from the Romantics, De Tocqueville and Marx to Hegel and the utopian socialists, agreed that something called “society” was coming apart. They disagreed about solutions but, broadly, for much of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, liberals placed their faith in liberal democracy. In the US, faith in society was a hallmark of progressive and New Deal-era liberalism, especially during the Great Depression. “The faith of a liberal is a profound belief not only in the capacities of individual men and women,” Franklin D Roosevelt said in 1935, “but also in the effectiveness of people helping each other.” But by then, in much of the industrial world, in an age of bone-breaking economic inequality, the suffering masses had grown so impoverished, lonely and alienated that they bent before authoritarians. Fears of economic collapse, civilisational decay and social disintegration go back to antiquity. People are forever warning that the sky is falling. But in the 1930s and 40s, the sky fell. After the second world war, the anguished investigation into the rise of totalitarianism shattered liberals’ faith in society, and “gave rise to a theory of mass society that rooted totalitarianism in modernity itself”, as the intellectual historian Dorothy Ross has recently argued. As Ross writes: “The threat to liberal democracy of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union brought these fears into focus: the atomized individuals of mass society were ready supporters of totalitarian movements and the false solidarity they promised.” The mid-century reckoning this wrought often concerned itself with where to draw the line between “society” and “government”, or between the social and the political. To that end, the political philosopher Hannah Arendt sorted revolutions into those that attempt “to change the fabric of society” and those that try “to change the structure of the political realm”. She admired the second and feared the first, arguing that revolutions can never solve the “social question” – poverty – and should not try, because “the whole record of past revolutions demonstrates beyond doubt that every attempt to solve the social question with political means leads into terror”. Overwhelmed by the desperation of the poor, she argued, revolutions that attempt to change the fabric of society will lead to the evisceration of order, the destruction of property, and the mass execution of intellectuals. She didn’t say that governments that address the problem of poverty are doomed. Only revolutions. But conservative thinkers blamed the fraying fabric of society – and the masses’ vulnerability to totalitarianism – not on the dislocations and inequality wrought by industrial capitalism, but on the growing power of the state. In a 1953 book called The Quest for Community, the American sociologist Robert Nisbet lamented the modern state’s “successive penetrations of man’s economic, religious, kinship and local allegiances”. He believed that it was not capitalism but secularism and statism (especially, in the US, the New Deal) that had loosened social bonds, leading to “personal alienation and cultural disintegration”. He contrasted the pathology of modern life with “earlier times” (when “family, church, local community drew and held the allegiances of individuals in earlier times”). In earlier times, people knew where they stood, and they took care of one another, and didn’t look to the government to help them out when things got difficult. Nisbet, the man who quested for community, was something of a misanthrope. At home, he liked to watch Gunsmoke on the family’s black-and-white television, play croquet with his kids and potter in his rose garden. He went to church only at his wife’s insistence. He did not enjoy society. “I very much like individuals,” he’d say, upending a quote from Dostoevsky popularised by Linus Van Pelt in a 1959 issue of the Charles Schulz comic strip Peanuts. “It’s people I can’t stand!” There is no such thing as society, Thatcher would say later. There are only individuals. Thatcherism, in the end, came from Charlie Brown. Conservatives had long placed their faith not in society, but in the free market. But the gap between liberalism and conservatism closed in the 1950s, when liberal intellectuals, terrified at the prospect of a collapse of liberal democracies into totalitarianism, lost faith in the idea of society and abandoned their commitment to social democracy. Ross argues that these liberals no longer believed their role was to protect society by arguing for assembly, mutual concern, cooperative action and equal inclusion. Instead, they strove to protect the individual, and the individual’s ability to make choices, as if the act of choosing, and the market-driven rhetoric of choice, could inoculate the masses against becoming a mass. In the 1960s, liberals would seem to have renewed their commitment to the idea of society – by way of the civil rights movement and Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society – but this, for Ross, was a mere blip, a slight detour, in liberals’ decades-long abandonment of the social. “The political resurgence of social liberalism during the 1960s did not last,” Ross writes, “for it provoked a political and intellectual resurgence of conservatism and the fragmentation of liberal politics and social thought.” Other scholars see more continuity, an unbroken tradition of liberal and social democracy on the left, from early 20th-century progressivism down to the 21st-century version. But no one disputes that the political revolutions of the 1960s provoked a counter-revolutionary conservative insurgency, animated, in part, by a furious opposition to civil rights. To McGhee’s point, a great many white people appear to have stopped believing in the existence of society just at the point when Black people won enough political power to declare that society could no longer be “whites only”. In the 60s, Nisbet’s work found a new audience, not among liberals but within an emerging, communitarian New Left. The social, on the left, took on a new cast: liberals gave up on social democracy; the New Left decided to fight for “social justice”. The Quest for Community had gone out of print soon after it was published, but was reprinted in the 60s because it had become fanatically popular among the New Left. For the 1962 edition, Nisbet changed the title to Community and Power. It sounds leftier, but it’s the same book, a manifesto about the loneliness and alienation of modern life. Here’s Nisbet, in a preface written for that edition, decades before quarantines and stay-at-home campaigns and the loneliness epidemic and social distancing and lockdowns: “By alienation I mean the state of mind that can find a social order remote, incomprehensible, or fraudulent; beyond real hope or desire, inviting apathy, boredom, or even hostility. The individual not only does not feel a part of the social order; he has lost interest in being a part of it. For a constantly enlarging number of persons, including, significantly, young persons of high school and college age (consider the impressive popularity among them of JD Salinger’s Catcher in the Rye), this state of alienation has become profoundly influential in both behavior and thought. Not all the manufactured symbols of togetherness, the ever-ready programs of human relations, patio festivals in suburbia, and our quadrennial crusades for presidential candidates hide the fact that for millions of persons such institutions as state, political party, business, church, labor union, and even family have become remote and increasingly difficult to give any part of one’s self to.” New Leftists who read Nisbet weren’t joining conservatism; they were trying to marry liberalism to socialism, and to other traditions, too, including Catholic social thought, and the writings of the American philosopher John Dewey. Their manifesto – the Port Huron Statement, issued in 1962 by the Students for a Democratic Society – bemoaned “loneliness, estrangement, isolation”, and celebrated “human interdependence” and “human brotherhood” as “the most appropriate form of social relations” (the word “social” appears 38 times in the document). It pledged that “a new left must include liberals and socialists, the former for their relevance, the latter for their sense of thoroughgoing reforms in the system”. In the middle decades of the 20th century, people on all sides seemed to agree about the problem: the vulnerability of rootless, ignorant mass society to political persuasion and propaganda. But they had different ideas about both its causes and the solution. Nisbet and his conservative kin, blaming the state, placed their faith in a laissez-faire free market and a return to institutions more powerful in “earlier times”: the family, the church. Black civil rights activists called on the communal traditions of the Black church and the Nation of Islam. The New Left, which began as a movement of students, placed its faith in the university and, ultimately, in cultural rather than social or political change. And white liberals invoked a vague notion of choice – the rational political choices of voters, the informed purchasing choices of consumers. Even abortion would be framed as a “right to choose”. But everyone seemed to agree that no matter what they tried, social bonds kept weakening. * * * An MIT political scientist named Ithiel de Sola Pool coined the expression “social network” in 1957, founding a field that he called “small world” studies. Two years later, he founded the Simulmatics Corporation. Its name was a portmanteau, and its purpose was to automate the computer simulation of human behaviour in order to make predictions that it could sell to corporations and governments; it was, in short, the first artificial intelligence-driven data services company. In the 1960s, De Sola Pool made a series of predictions about what would worry people in our day, about society. “In the 21st century, the sort of critic who now attacks conformity in society may be complaining of an atomized society,” he predicted in 1968. “Modern technology, he’ll assert, has destroyed our common cultural base and has left us living in a little world of his own.” De Sola Pool, a technological utopian, believed that emerging technologies of communication – he was at the vanguard of what would become the internet – would instead, by bringing people closer together, make the world smaller. De Sola Pool started out as a liberal but ended as a neoconservative and, technologically, libertarian. Networking computer networks, he predicted in Technologies Without Boundaries: On Telecommunications in a Global Age, a book published posthumously in 1990, would produce “communities without boundaries”. This was the fantasy of the founders of the internet. The world wide web is the 21st century’s machine loom. “I think we have created tools that are ripping apart the social fabric,” said the venture capitalist and former Facebook executive Chamath Palihapitiya in 2017. Critics lately argue that the social network is destroying the social fabric, but the people who built the social network thought it would repair the social fabric. Facebook’s actual mission statement – part of its terms of service – is “to give people the power to build community and bring the world closer together”. Technological utopians have always believed that if the machinery of industrialism had torn apart the social fabric, another machine could repair it. Technologies of transportation and communication always seemed especially promising: bringing people closer together, faster. The telegraph, the telephone, the radio, television, cable television, the internet, the so-called world wide web, its wispy threads gathering us all together. This vision owes a great deal to De Sola Pool, who argued that the internet was a “technology of freedom”. It owes something, too, to Nisbet, and the attraction his ideas held for the strange bedfellows responsible for establishing the lawlessness of the internet: communitarian New Leftists and anti-government conservatives. In the 1970s, Nisbet taught at Columbia. In New York, he spent a lot of time with conservative intellectuals, including William F Buckley. Then, at the age of 64, he moved to the American Enterprise Institute, a leading conservative thinktank. Nisbet disliked what conservatism had become in the age of Reagan. “I dislike intensely the hold on him the people of Moral Majority far right have,” he fumed. “Lord, how I detest these religious-political fanatics.” But in the 1990s, and even after Nisbet’s death in 1996, his work became even more influential than it had been before. “Another Nisbet revival is on right now,” the liberal columnist EJ Dionne wrote in 1996, “this one fueled by political conservatives searching for a coherent philosophy to support their efforts to tear down the modern welfare state and replace it with more localized and voluntary efforts to lift up the poor.” But the Nisbet revival was fuelled not only by conservatives but also by New Democrats, including Bill Clinton himself, and it found its most powerful expression in the anti-government vision of the internet advanced by the coalition of leftists and conservatives, led by the self-described “conservative futurist” Newt Gingrich, architect of the 1996 Telecommunications Act, which set up an internet free of all government interference and oversight. “Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind,” the libertarian John Perry Barlow wrote in his Declaration of Independence of Cyberspace in 1996. “I declare the global social space we are building to be naturally independent of the tyrannies you seek to impose on us.” Barlow’s rhetoric was anti-government (“Cyberspace does not lie within your borders”) but pro-society (“We are forming our own Social Contract”). He predicted that the internet would be all society and no government. He was half right. With notable exceptions – above all, China – it is ungoverned. In 2000, Wired magazine predicted that the internet would heal all of America’s divisions, and the world’s. “We are, as a nation, better educated, more tolerant, and more connected because of – not in spite of – the convergence of the Internet and public life. Partisanship, religion, geography, race, gender, and other traditional political divisions are giving way to a new standard – wiredness – as an organizing principle for political and social attitudes.” Few predictions have been more wrong. Turning the world wide web into a social network, with the rise of “social media” in the first decades of the 21st century, only further corroded social ties. It produced a seemingly unending series of lamentations, and yet another Nisbet revival. In 2013, George Packer published The Unwinding: An Inner History of the New America, his chronicle of America’s crisis of loneliness and alienation and isolation, which won the National Book Award. “No one can say when the unwinding began – when the coil that held Americans together in its secure and sometimes stifling grip first gave way,” Packer wrote. “Like any great change, the unwinding began at countless times, in countless ways – and at some moment the country, always the same country, crossed a line of history and became irretrievably different.” For Packer, the unwinding began “countless times” – a faint echo of Nisbet’s equally vague “earlier times” – but readers understood The Unwinding as a lament about the abandonment of the New Deal, first by the New Left, then by the New Right, and then by the New Democrats. Packer believed that the weakening power of the state diminished community: less government, less society. Nisbet believed the opposite, that the rising power of the state diminished community: more government, less society. In 2020, just as the pandemic was beginning, Ross Douthat, a conservative columnist for the New York Times who wrote the introduction to a new edition of The Quest for Community, published The Decadent Society. Its arguments rest on a Nisbet essay about how golden ages end when the balance between individual and community is lost, in favour of rampant individualism and what Douthat calls decadence. In another 2020 book, A Time to Build, Yuval Levin, the founding editor of the conservative magazine National Affairs, quoted at length from Nisbet’s work. Nisbet wrote of a “twilight age”, marked by the “decline and erosion of institutions” and a strong “sense of estrangement from community”. This is the sort of thing Levin means when he writes that “we are living in an era marked by vacuum of allegiance”. “We Americans are living through a social crisis,” he writes, describing a crisis of “loneliness and isolation, mistrust and suspicion, alienation and polarization”. We have lost faith in institutions: “From big business, banks, and the professions to the branches of the federal government, the news media, organized labor, the medical system, public schools, and the academy, confidence in our institutions has been falling and falling.” For Levin, this decline, which can be measured by public opinion polls, began in the 1970s. For Douthat, who is less interested in loneliness than in cultural decay, the fall began in 1969, when men landed on the moon, and can be followed, among other places, in American cinema, with its endless remakes of old movies. (How many more Star Wars and superhero movies can be left to make?) This comes straight out of Nisbet, and Douthat acknowledges that debt. “The creative burst can last just so long,” Nisbet wrote, “and then everything becomes routine, imitation, convention, and preoccupation, with form over substance.” You can’t really take an indictment written in 1953 and republish it in 2020 as a diagnosis of something that started around 1970. Nisbet’s quest for community, written during the presidency of Harry S Truman, identified New Deal liberalism as the problem, because Nisbet was still living in the New Deal. Levin and Douthat want to blame liberalism, but the decades they identify as marking the decline of society are the very decades marked by the rise of conservatism of the Thatcher and Reagan variety. Those decades are also marked by the increasing illiberalism of the New Left which stands as profound danger to knowledge-driven social institutions, especially education and journalism. If the social fabric really is rent, there is, as ever, plenty of blame to go around. * * * Arguments made in the shadow of Hitler, Mussolini and Stalin do, eventually, become obsolete. Now might be a good time to return your copy of Nisbet’s Quest for Community to the public library for reshelving. In many parts of the world, totalitarianism remains a danger, not from the state but from corporations that control data, knowledge and information. There is no escape. They know everything about you. You can hardly engage in a transaction – political, financial, cultural or social – without them. It’s less that the social fabric has grown frayed, its edges unravelling, than that the so-called social fabric is now manufactured, for profit, by monopolistic businesses, a cheap, throwaway fake. Before the pandemic, there was a real world, and this fake one, real friendships and “friends”, political communities and “followers”, genuine political expression and “likes”. The risk, when interactions with other human beings are narrowed to these remote, glancing and often combative exchanges – simulations – is that, once the lockdowns are over, people will bring the culture of the virtual into the real, creating even angrier, more impatient, more superficial, more transactional, more commercial and less democratic societies. Forging stronger bonds in a post-pandemic world, if one ever comes, will require acts of moral imagination that are not part of any political ideology or corporate mission statement, but are, instead, functions of the human condition: tenderness, compassion, longing, generosity, allegiance and affection. These, too, are the only real answers to loneliness, alienation, dislocation and disintegration. But the fullest expression of these functions across distances as easily spanned by viruses and flood waters as by broadband cables and TikTok videos, requires both society and government. What’s needed is nothing less than a new social contract for public goods, environmental protection, sustainable agriculture, public health, community centres, public education, grants for small businesses, public funding for the arts. It won’t be a new New Deal. The dangers are graver because decades of a world, both real and virtual, shaped by Reaganism and Thatcherism, has left the waters rising, all around us, and the forests on fire. Governments rest on a social contract, an agreement to live together. That contract needs renewing. But the problem, in the end, isn’t with society, or the social fabric. It’s with governments that have abandoned their obligations of care. Liberalism didn’t kill society. And conservatism didn’t kill society. Because society isn’t dead. But it is pallid and fretful, like a shut-in staring all day long at nothing but a screen, mistaking a mirror for a window. Inside, online, there is no society, only the simulation of it. But, outside, on the grass and the pavement, in the woods and on the streets, in playgrounds and schoolyards and ballparks, in council flats and shops and pubs and agricultural fairs and libraries and union halls, society hums along, if not with the deafening thrum of a steam-driven machine, then with the hand-oiled, creaking clatter of an antwacky wooden loom. • This article was amended on 1 December 2021 to clarify the origin of Robert Nisbet’s quip about individuals and people. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.“Are you the most tired you can ever remember being?” asks a friend. Well, yes. I have it easy – my caring responsibilities are limited and my work is physically undemanding and very low stakes – but I am wrecked. The brain fog, tearful confusion and deep lethargy I feel seems near universal. A viral tweet from February asked: “Just to confirm … everyone feels tired ALL the time no matter how much sleep they get or caffeine they consume?” The 71,000-plus retweets seemed to confirm it’s the case. But when we say we are exhausted, or Google “Why am I tired all the time?” (searches were reportedly at an all-time high between July and September this year), what do we mean? Yes, pandemic living is, objectively, exhausting. Existing on high alert is physically and mentally depleting; our sleep has suffered and many of us have lost a sense of basic safety, affecting our capacity to relax. But the circumstances and stresses we face are individual, which means the remedy is probably also individual. The need for a more granular, analytical approach to fatigue is partly what prompted Dr Saundra Dalton-Smith, a physician and the author of Sacred Rest: Recover Your Life, Renew Your Energy, Restore Your Sanity, to start researching and writing. “I wanted people to take a more diagnostic approach to their fatigue. When someone comes in and they say they’re hurt, I can’t treat that without having more details: what hurts, where does it hurt, when does it hurt?” Sacred Rest dates from before the pandemic, when Dalton-Smith’s practice was already full of tired patients. “People would come in saying: ‘I’m tired all the time’, ‘I don’t have energy’ … lots of non-specific complaints. Nothing where you could give them a pill; things that needed lifestyle changes.” Simultaneously, Dalton-Smith was struggling to combine intense career pressure with parenting two toddlers. “I was experiencing some burnout-type symptoms,” she says. The book starts with an extremely relatable account of her lying on the floor, her kids snacking in front of the TV. “I never knew how hauntingly healing cold wooden planks could be,” she writes. Her fatigue prescription is to incorporate seven types of rest into your life: physical, mental, emotional, social, sensory, creative and spiritual. I am dubious. Sacred Rest has a classic off-putting self-help book cover (a jetty shrouded in mist), talks about the “bread of self-disclosure and the wine of community”, and focuses heavily on God (there’s a clue in the title). Then there is the fact that any attempt to take a break over the past 18 overloaded months has left me feeling miserable and unmoored. I confess this when I speak to Dalton-Smith over Zoom. “I don’t like resting,” I tell her. “I get listless and sad and feel a failure.” She is not surprised. “For some people, rest is almost uncomfortable. It’s almost as if their psyche fights back against it because of the new sensation.” She would never, she says, recommend a three-day silent retreat to a completely frazzled patient. “For someone who is actively burned out, that’s almost traumatic.” The book is not, in fact, about that kind of complete withdrawal; it is about incorporating enough moments of rest to stay functional. That may be a depressing indictment of end-stage capitalism: Dalton-Smith is thoughtfully critical of society’s inability to take a preventive approach to its “burnout culture”, commoditising sleep (“It’s a billion-dollar industry, we have speciality pillows, weighted blankets, all of this stuff”) rather than focusing on the root problem. It is, however, refreshingly realistic. I gave the seven types of rest a whirl over a week, to see whether I would feel less tired – whatever that actually means – afterwards. Physical As a lazy, desk-based homeworker, I am rarely physically tired. I do, however, get stiff and achy, sit for far too long and pretzel my body into terrible shapes. Dalton-Smith advises incorporating “body fluidity” into my day with hourly small movements. It’s easy and rewarding to set a phone reminder to roll my neck, clench and unclench my hands, or stand up and rock on my heels. Even better is the advice to “choose to be still on purpose for five minutes while lying down.” I do this on the sofa, under a blanket; the hardest part is getting up after five minutes. I am a poor sleeper, so Dalton-Smith’s “bedroom routine” advice (the usual: dim lights, comfy clothes and no bedtime screens) is mainly stuff I do already. I follow her recommendation to add some stretches before bed; I sleep well the first night but after that I am back to my usual tossing and turning. Mental Mental fatigue – that befuddled, nervy, brain-fog feeling; forgetting what I was doing, and missing important things because my concentration is shot – is my constant companion. “Brain like damp Weetabix,” a friend calls it, which feels about right. It is chastening how easy it is to improve my focus with a basic technique: time spent blocking out “low-yield activities”, such as email and social media, and periods of concentration. It dovetails well with the hourly movement breaks from physical rest, too. I am quickly conscious of how instinctively reactive I am to the most recent – not the most urgent, or the most important – demand; how the chime of a WhatsApp message chips 10 minutes off my concentration, leaving me foggier. I feel idiotic not to have realised this before. Usually when I try something for an article, however beneficial, I abandon it instantly once I finish, but the 25-minute focus, five-minute distraction timers on my phone have become a permanent fixture. Emotional Dalton-Smith has an online “rest quiz” to work out your rest deficits; by far my worst score is for emotional rest. It also turns out to be the area I find hardest to address. One suggestion is to identify people who “drain” you; as an introvert, I fear that’s everyone. Another tip is to “risk vulnerability”, against which I have an almost physical reaction: my mask is there for a reason! The third is to “cease comparison”, but comparing myself unfavourably to others is my main hobby. None of these are exactly quick fixes. I probably need therapy, but failing that, I ask Dalton-Smith for help. She suggests writing down what I am feeling, if confiding in others feels too exposed. I sit in a cafe and write down everything I can think of that makes me feel angry, scared, ashamed and sad. It takes a while and I really hate it: it feels as if I have forced all my worst thoughts to the surface without any plan for what to do with them. Maybe it doesn’t have to feel good to do me good, and maybe if I sustain it for a while, I’ll feel the benefit? I am reserving judgment. Social I assumed “social rest” would mean opting out of socialising for a while, but Dalton-Smith’s social rest means spending time with people with whom you can be your unvarnished self. Thankfully I am seeing my hairdresser this week (as a wig wearer, this is a very rare treat). We have known each other for 25 years and he sees me at my most vulnerable: bald and scared of what he’s about to do with his scissors. He is also wonderful company. Punctuated by the totally misused phrase “long story short, Em”, he treats me to a two-hour monologue on a variety of feuds, scandals and gossip so entertaining I leave feeling more energised than if I had had a transfusion of something unethical in a Swiss clinic. After that, I have a leisurely lunch with my best friend, the woman who knows my worst qualities and nastiest thoughts. We eat like pigs, lapse frequently into silence, and discuss both really important stuff and the rising tide of water in the bottom of our fridges. It’s deeply restorative. She’s my emotional rest too, I realise. Sensory I know exactly what sensory input exhausts me: sound. Almost any noise – the battery bleep from a neighbour’s fire alarm, a distant engine, the bathroom fan – can obliterate my focus (while writing that sentence, I told the dog off for licking himself too loudly). My husband has been a brilliant WFH pandemic colleague, but the man is loud: a volcanic sneezing, expansive yawning, loudspeaker telephoning one-man band. It has been challenging. This is no surprise to Dalton-Smith. Analysing data from her quiz during the pandemic, she saw “a huge uptick in the number of people who were experiencing sensory rest deficits”. People confined to the house with small children in particular, she says, were exposed to constant noise and even some adults “irritated each other to death. That non-stop hum of somebody talking in the background causes you to get agitated. That’s what sensory overload does to us.” I am pretty much on top of my noise sensitivity: this article comes courtesy of a “peaceful piano” playlist that masks my least favourite noises without commanding my attention. But this week, I also try to ensure I appreciate the moments of silence when they happen, and to be conscious that when I feel depleted and stressed, noise is often the reason. Creative I haven’t had a decent idea for at least two years, so I think it’s fair to say I am creatively burnt out. I instantly love Dalton-Smith’s advice to “build sabbaticals into your life”. That’s not a month-long writer’s retreat; it can be as little as 30 minutes, doing something you choose, away from the grind. I decide on lunch at my favourite cafe, then a gallery trip. After checking my email on the bus – a mistake – my lunch becomes a working one, as I do an urgent job. But after that the fun starts. I wander slowly around a ceramics exhibition, which is both transporting and inspiring. Afterwards, I drink a hot chocolate as the late autumn light fades, looking at people and shop windows and even having a conversation with a man about his dog. I feel like a different person for a while, as if there is more space in my head. I still have no good ideas, but looking beyond my usual environment and doing something I have chosen feels wonderful. Spiritual Dalton-Smith is clear that you don’t need to share her – or any – faith to incorporate “spiritual” rest into your life. “At the core of spiritual rest is that feeling that we all have of needing to be really seen, of feeling that we belong, that we’re accepted, that our life has meaning.” That might come through voluntary work, or other activities. I have no faith, and finding what gives me those feelings seems a longer-term undertaking. Instead, I turn to the only spiritual thing I know well: a Quaker silent meeting. I was educated by the Quakers, a faith group whose conception of God is simultaneously so expansive and so minimalist (they believe there is “that of God in everyone”), it’s hard to feel uncomfortable about it. Silent meeting – an hour of silence, interrupted occasionally by anyone who feels moved to speak – is the only kind of meditation I can manage. I turn up, get a warm, no-fuss welcome, sit down, and enjoy the silence. Sometimes I examine my thoughts; sometimes I look at people’s jumpers. I can see the blue sky out of a window; mainly I look at that. It’s the deepest peace I feel all week. Do I feel more rested? I am not miraculously restored and razor-sharp, but that’s not a realistic goal, or even the aim of the book. It is another week of poor sleep, but I feel as if I have a bit more in the tank than usual, which is pleasant. I find it useful, too, to analyse what sort of tired I am, and to have a toolkit to address at least some kinds of fatigue. Of course, there is an unavoidable flaw in this experiment: I am resting for work purposes. That gives me sort of “permission” to rest, while still, actually, working. Could I embrace rest purely for myself? I should: this is basic maintenance, not self-indulgence. We can’t function forever fuelled by adrenalin and caffeine, fogged brains scrabbling to function, nerves frayed like a cheap phone cable. Sure, we can sleep when we’re dead, but a little rest before that would be nice.The England and Manchester City footballer Raheem Sterling is to take over BBC Radio 4’s Today programme as a guest editor between Christmas and new year. Sterling is one of seven high-profile figures who will edit the flagship morning programme over the holiday period, a tradition stretching back more than 20 years. They would “help illuminate and make sense of the world we live in”, said Owenna Griffiths, Today’s editor. Guest editors brought “novel ideas, surprising perspectives and, on occasion, a little sparkle to the programme”. The naturalist Jane Goodall, who has studied the behaviour of chimpanzees since the 1960s, will explore the links between poverty and the climate crisis, and the interaction of science and hope. Mina Smallman, a former Church of England archdeacon whose daughters Nicole Smallman and Bibaa Henry were murdered in a London park last year, will examine support for victims of crime, the role of chaplaincy in times of need, and the Reclaim These Streets movement. On her programme Smallman, who has said she has forgiven the 19-year-old killer of her daughters, will describe how she found strength, support and comfort over the past 18 months. Michael Dobbs, a Conservative peer and author of the political drama House of Cards, will focus his programme on the dangers of prostate cancer. He was diagnosed with the disease, which killed his father and his brother, earlier this year. The other guest editors are Gen Nick Carter, the outgoing chief of defence taff, whose programme will include reports from Afghanistan and ways of treating post-traumatic stress disorder; James Rebanks, the Cumbrian sheep farmer and bestselling author, who will examine how urban farms can create healthier communities; and Jacky Wright, chief digital officer and corporate vice-president at Microsoft US, who will ask if young people are being trained in the skills needed for the jobs of the future. This month Sterling launched a charitable foundation to “educate, empower and inspire” young people in London, Manchester and Kingston, Jamaica. The Raheem Sterling Foundation says it will focus on improving social mobility, education and empowerment. He has described the sacrifices his mother and older sister made during his childhood and when he was training, and how his Christian faith is of “massive” importance. His father was shot dead in Jamaica after being caught in a gang turf war when Sterling was two. “My family, we were really tight. We had to be. All we had was us, you know?” he wrote in 2018. Sterling and other black players in the England squad were subject to racist abuse on social media after the team’s defeat to Italy on penalties in the EEuro 2020 final earlier this year. Harry Kane, the squad’s captain, wrote on Twitter: “Three lads who were brilliant all summer had the courage to step up &amp; take a pen when the stakes were high. They deserve support and backing not the vile racist abuse they’ve had since last night. If you abuse anyone on social media you’re not an England fan and we don’t want you.” Among other BBC radio highlights over the festive season are music stars including Ed Sheeran and Duran Duran thanking key workers such as nurses, teachers and bin collectors in a special week of programmes. The Olympic gold medallist Tom Daley will present a radio show for the first time on Radio 2 on 27 December, and Stacey Dooley will present a Christmas Day special on Radio 5 Live. A midnight slow radio special will take listeners to Venice at night to listen to canal water lapping against the city’s buildings and bells tolling.Plans to scrap tens of millions of “unnecessary” hospital follow-up appointments could put patients at risk and add to the overload at GP surgeries, NHS leaders and doctors are warning. Health service leaders in England are finalising a radical plan under which hospital consultants will undertake far fewer outpatient appointments and instead perform more surgery to help cut the NHS backlog and long waits for care that many patients experience. The move is contained in the “elective recovery plan” which Sajid Javid, the health secretary, will unveil next week. It will contain what one NHS boss called “transformative ideas” to tackle the backlog. Thanks to Covid the waiting list has spiralled to a record 5.8 million people and Javid has warned that it could hit as many as 13 million. Under the plan patients who have spent time in hospital would be offered only one follow-up consultation in the year after their treatment rather than the two, three or four many get now. “While it is important that immediate action is taken to tackle the largest ever backlog of care these short-term proposals by the health secretary have the potential to present significant challenges for patients and seek to worsen health disparities across the country,” said Dr David Wrigley, the deputy chair of council at the British Medical Association. The plan has been drawn up by Sir Jim Mackey, the chief executive of Northumbria hospital trust, who is widely admired in the NHS for finding creative solutions to problems in the service. He last month set out how hospitals could relieve the huge pressure they were under by slashing “on an industrial scale” the number of “pointless reviews” consultants carried out and switching instead to a new model under which patients would tell the hospital if they felt they needed a check-up. One idea under discussion is that patients are told to use an app to let their hospital know that they are sufficiently worried about their health that they want to see a doctor sooner than their next scheduled appointment. Outlining the thinking behind the plan, Mackey told a Health Foundation seminar last month: “We are kicking the tyres nationally on how we could do this on an industrial scale.” But he acknowledged that some patients, especially those who may not use a mobile phone or computer, including poorer and older people, could miss out on care as a result. Changes should be made while at the same time “making sure we don’t fall into a digital exclusion trap or exacerbate inequality by creating some mechanisms that [are] hard to access”, he added. Hospitals in England undertook 124.9m outpatient appointments in 2019-20. Mackey said that “two-thirds of outpatients volume is review, and we have all personally experienced pointless reviews of very low clinical value and low patient-experience value”. “If we can look after the patient properly, enable them to access things the way they want to and communicate with them appropriately we can make a significant impact on that.” Reducing “pointless” follow-ups could be a “game changer” for the overstretched NHS, he added. But, Wrigley said, “relying on a ‘patient-initiated follow-up model’, while of benefit to some wishing for more booking autonomy, risks alienating those who may not have the capacity or access to an app or simply do not seek a follow-up appointment when they need one”. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of hospitals group NHS Providers, welcomed the plan but added that the less regular in-person assessment of patients would involve “clinical risk”. Hopson said: “For some procedures, for example, follow-up appointments are scheduled for three, six, nine and 12 months after an operation. But if all is well with the patient it’s only the six-month review that is clinically vital. “One idea being examined is whether the NHS could say to patients ‘we will definitely schedule the six-month follow-up, but give you the ability to trigger a three, nine or 12-month review if you feel that’s necessary’. If this approach could be applied consistently it would free up a lot of consultant time to do more surgery, thereby cutting waiting lists significantly faster.” The BMA, Royal College of GPs and NHS Confederation all warned that patients without a hospital follow-up could seek help at already hard-pressed GP surgeries. Ruth Rankine, director of primary care at the NHS Confederation, said “effective communication” was needed to educate the public about the change and where in future they could see a doctor. “If we fail to get this right, then the consequences for general practice are huge, with potentially significant additional demands on their time, when they already are under unsustainable levels of pressure,” she added.In 1970, Massachusetts was preparing to celebrate the 350th anniversary of the arrival of the Pilgrim Fathers on the Mayflower. The 53 surviving men, women and children who had left England in search of “religious freedom” are credited with starting America’s first successful colony, in Plymouth, in 1620. Their voyage to the so-called New World is celebrated by many Americans still as a powerful symbol of the birth of the United States. But at the last minute, event organisers reportedly realized something was missing. So they invited a member of the Wampanoag Nation, or People of the First Light – the loose confederation of south-eastern New England tribes whose ancestors were immortalised as the “friendly Indians” who welcomed the Pilgrims and feasted with them at the “first Thanksgiving” in 1621. Unfortunately for the planners, the person who returned their call was schoolteacher Wamsutta Frank James of the federally recognised Aquinnah Wampanoag, of Martha’s Vineyard, Cape Cod, who drove a red Corvette with a bumper sticker that read: “Custer had it coming”. James said he would attend, on the condition he told the truth. That included the fact that the Pilgrims robbed ancestral graves before establishing “America’s home town” in the abandoned Native village of Patuxet, where an estimated 90% had perished from a European-originating pandemic they called the Great Dying. And that the weakened Wampanoag saved the settlers, 50% of whom died the first winter, by teaching them to farm in return for trade and protection – only to be murdered in battle, sold into slavery, their land stolen, their language wiped out, their children taken for indentured servants and the survivors forced to convert to Christianity, by the very people who triumphed the right to worship. In James’s draft speech he wrote: “We, the Wampanoag, welcomed you, the white man, with open arms, little knowing that it was the beginning of the end; that before 50 years were to pass, the Wampanoag would no longer be a free people.” “That’s not the happy story a lot of Americans believe,” said his granddaughter Kisha James, 22, an Aquinnah and Lakota activist and first Native American to give a land acknowledgment at the elite Wellesley college. “They were horrified and demanded he censor it.” After James, who died in 2001 aged 77, refused, he published the speech in newspapers around the US. Weeks later, he stood by the statue of the 17th-century leader Ousamequin, in Plymouth, and declared Thanksgiving a National Day of Mourning for all indigenous people. Mahtowin Munro, a Lakota and co-leader of the United American Indians of New England, which organizes an annual Day of Mourning that attracts 1,500 people and is livestreamed globally, said: “For many, Thanksgiving is the gooey overlay of sweetness over genocide. Even today, a lot of people think we are extinct.” As the most famous meal in American history, “Turkey Day” is a seminal piece of political and cultural theatre, with its purported values of “freedom” and “tolerance” taught to millions of schoolchildren wearing fancy dress and watching American football. But there are increasing attempts to correct the narrative and make space for Native voices, from school curricula, to the appointments of the first Native American cabinet secretary in 2021 and US poet laureate in 2019, to the renamed Indigenous People’s Day in Boston this year. “Talking of myths, they weren’t ‘Pilgrims’ … and the Wampanoag weren’t invited,” said Paula Peters, 62, a historian for the federally recognised Mashpee Wampanoag, of Cape Cod. Instead, settler accounts reveal the Separatists, who had already found religious freedom in Holland in 1608 before leaving largely to preserve their own culture and language, were celebrating their first harvest by blasting muskets, causing “90 Wampanoag to arrive for war”. Peters added: “That being smoothed over, they stayed for a tense, diplomatic meal that may or may not have included turkey. For hundreds of years it wasn’t mentioned again.” David Silverman, a George Washington University historian and author of This Land Is Their Land, said this “nothing event” transformed into “the modern Thanksgiving myth” in the 19th century, to sanitise “America’s bloody, colonial history”. Other contributing factors include Protestant fundamentalists allegedly rebranding “obscure Separatists” as “Pilgrim fathers” to assert power over other immigrants, a Plymouth tourism campaign, and a revisionist footnote in an 1840s book naming the forgotten feast “the first Thanksgiving”. Silverman added: “By the time [President] Lincoln declared it a national holiday [in 1863] during the civil war it was propagated throughout society. At a time when African Americans were newly freed and Native people were being subjugated, this was a way of saying whiteness was dominant … and that God wanted the United States to succeed.” Today the Wampanoag, who once numbered up to 100,000 across 67 tribes, have 4,000 to 5,000 thriving, politically active members belonging to two federally recognised tribes and multiple other groups. Some campaigners liken the recent reckoning with American myth-making to a renaissance of the Red Power movement, including the 1969 occupation of Alcatraz in San Francisco, California, which sparked the west coast’s ‘UnThanksgiving’. One such Renaissance Wampanoag is Jessie Little Doe Baird. In the 1990s, the former Mashpee vice-chair had a vision where she “heard people speaking to me in a language I hadn’t heard before”. Her tribe’s Algonquian mother tongue had been lost for 150 years. The grandmother of 10 studied historical linguistics at MIT, in Cambridge, to bring it back to life. Thirty years-later her Wôpanâak Language Reclamation Project has taught hundreds to reclaim it. In 2010, she was awarded a MacArthur genius” grant. Baird said: “We are a modern people but this focus on us just once a year keeps us in 1620. If we let indigenous people talk year-round, there’s a better chance for equity and change.” Like all Native Americans, the Wampanoag are not a monolith. Some attend the National Day of Mourning to remember ancestors or find solidarity. Others find it painful or voyeuristic. Many simply eat a meal at home. Melissa Ferretti, 53, chairwoman of state-recognised Herring Pond Wampanoag, of Plymouth, will attend on 25 November. Her tiny tribe, which has just 175 citizens, are “ground zero”, as the people who first encountered the Mayflower. Their website reads: “We are still here.” She said: “We survived by silence. That was thought by some ancestors the best way to protect our dignity. But then we get to a place where we perpetuate our own erasure by not speaking out. I feel like the air is changing.”The first thing I notice about David Shrigley is his balls. Twelve thousand, one hundred and sixty six of them, to be precise, lined up neatly over almost every available inch of the gallery walls. Walking around this room of dazzling yellow is a surprisingly psychedelic experience – the bright lights and recurring patterns play havoc with your brain. “It’s ended up looking like a piece of op-art,” says Shrigley, who talks almost as if he had no hand in it. “I wasn’t anticipating that.” The work won’t stay like this. The idea is that for the next few weeks people can wander in off the street and trade these fresh tennis balls for worn-out ones of their own. It reminds me a little of Roelof Louw’s 1967 sculpture Soul City (Pyramid of Oranges), only instead of the work gradually dwindling as visitors interact with it, this will evolve into a grubbier form: a slow, ugly decay. Shrigley says that ideas around trade, currency and even his dog Inca’s (lack of) ball retrieving skills served as inspiration for the work – but really I think he just likes the idea of people doing something weird in the middle of Mayfair. Not knowing exactly what’s going to happen is, he admits, one of the main thrills. The work arose from a question many of us have asked ourselves over lockdown: “Why, exactly, am I doing this?” Shrigley took the time to reevaluate his career and realised there were things he didn’t want to do any more. “I just didn’t want to do another presentation of works on paper,” he says, of the strange, amusing and unsettling drawings that made his name. “I was a bit jaded about making the same exhibition over and over again.” And so Shrigley started creating more conceptual works. In the gallery space across the road from the tennis balls exhibition is a digital wall clock he made, in which the bright red LED digits are blurred, making it almost impossible to read. Shrigley is 53 now, but a few years ago he was in a taxi when he noticed the car’s clock was out of focus. It turned out he needed glasses. “I don’t quite know why I’ve made this,” he says. “It was quite expensive and I don’t know exactly what to do with it.” He gazes at it as if it’s some work by another artist he doesn’t fully understand and tells me how it’s a complete departure from his usual style. I’m not so sure. Feeling your eyesight fail as a clock ticks down another minute closer to death doesn’t feel entirely un-Shrigley like to me. We retire to some sofas. Shrigley speaks quietly, in a soothing monotone that rarely pauses, and you have to listen attentively to tell what he’s actually passionate about and what is just tangential rambling (the inner workings of my Dictaphone, for example). He’s adamant that he still loves drawing: “It’s my life’s project, somehow,” he says. “The inquiry continues and it will never end until I’m gone.” But he will occasionally say things that suggest he finds the process, if not frustrating, then certainly a little baffling. “I will make 100 works on paper with the intention that no more than half are any good,” he says. “And there are probably four where you’re like: ‘This is basically fantastic! This is me demonstrating my area of expertise and all the other 96 are just attempts to do this.’ And do they sell? Do they fuck. You look through the inventory going: ‘Nobody bought that? Nobody bought that? Well, what did they buy?’ And it’s a picture of a cat or something.” He laughs. “I’ve realised my tastes are very peculiar relative to the rest of the world. I see genius and other people see rubbish. I see rubbish and they see genius.” These days he lets the gallery choose which works to exhibit. For Shrigley the drawings that he likes best are the ones that surprise or confuse him. “Where I think ‘It’s kind of funny, but I don’t know what it means … so I’ll just put it out there and figure it out.” It’s the same reason he enjoys his more interactive work – inviting people to draw a giant urinating sculpture as part of his Turner prize show, opening pop-up tattoo parlours so people can have his doodles inked on to them, or inventing a bunch of strangely shaped instruments – such as a one-stringed electric guitar – and getting musicians to play them. One of his musical heroes, Sonic Youth’s Lee Ranaldo, recruited a bunch of avant garde musicians and terrorised a New York restaurant with Shrigley’s instruments. What did it sound like? “A noisy racket,” he says. Shrigley was born in Macclesfield but grew up in Oadby near Leicester. His main interaction with art as a kid was through record sleeves (the Fall’s Live at the Witch Trials was a favourite, long before he heard it). But it was a trip to Tate Britain with his dad in 1982 that really sparked his interest: Jean Tinguely’s kinetic constructions led him to Dada – the absurdist art movement that sprung up in Zurich during the first world war – which he still believes is the most important moment in art history. “Thinking of art as being in opposition to everything,” he says. Unsurprisingly, this obsession led him to being a “smart-arse” student by the time he’d arrived at Glasgow School of Art. His tutors didn’t always share the same outsider viewpoint. Was he disappointed with a 2:2 after his final show? “I was mortified, yeah,” he says, deader than deadpan. “I felt like I deserved a 2:1.” He says the art school put a lot of emphasis on traditional craft, which reminds me that the Guardian once said Shrigley “would win few prizes for drawing, and even fewer for his handwriting” – does he agree with that? “Well it depends what the competition would be,” he says, laughing. “Put it this way: when I was six, I was the best at art in my class. By the time I graduated from art school, I was close to the worst. It’s just not really important, I suppose. I make the drawings that I make through a desire to present ideas in as economic a fashion as I can.” He went through this same journey of understanding with René Magritte: he considered the Belgian surrealist a master painter at 14, but by the time he got to art school and learned to draw himself he realised he wasn’t actually all that. “And then by the time I graduated I understood that none of that mattered too much anyway,” he says. “For me, it was all about Ceci n’est pas une pipe. That’s such an important statement, an illustration of the slippage between language and image.” You can certainly see the link between that work and what Shrigley does. “Whereas I have no interest at all in someone like Salvador Dalí,” he says. “Well, not as an artist. If he was presenting Bake Off then I’d definitely watch that.” Shrigley left art school feeling as if he had no saleable skills. But then he got a job at an agency – “they said ‘we like the way you think’” – and struck gold with his simple yet inimitable combinations of drawings and text featuring freaky figures and twisted thoughts. “I play in my play pen. I am very happy,” reads the text next to a caged stick man. “I don’t know why I did it,” is the caption to a man aiming a catapult at a hairy beast’s bum. His work, which used to feature weekly in the Guardian’s Weekend magazine, has ended up on tea-towels, salt and pepper pots (labelled “cocaine” and “heroin”) and greetings cards (“We will be glad to attend your wedding,” says one message, running down the full length of a cock and balls). I wonder if the recent political turmoil has had an effect on his drawings, and he says that inevitably it has. He’s noticed they have a lot more swearing in them. “But then again, less bloodshed.” People read their own messages into them regardless. “You think you’re making a work about the climate crisis and then it becomes about the pandemic, because that’s what everyone’s thinking about. Or everything you make becomes about Brexit.” He tells me about a work he’s making at the moment which is harder to misread: “I’ve acquired 5,000 copies of Dan Brown’s The Da Vinci Code, and I’m pulping them all,” he says, with a hint of mischief. “Then I’m making paper with it and, on that paper, I’m reprinting an edition of Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell.” He laughs. “I can do it because nobody wants to buy The Da Vinci Code any more – they just want to deposit it. So that for me is a project about: ‘Wake up! We are sleepwalking into a totalitarian regime!’” Suddenly, his enthusiasm dims: “Making that artwork feels like a very impotent gesture somehow,” he decides. Which brings us to another lockdown decision he made: selling his house in Brighton and setting up Sidmouth School of Art, a mental health and wellbeing charity in Devon. At the moment the four people behind the project are applying for charitable status and have spoken to a local GP practice about the idea of referring people to them. The thought of being prescribed an art session with Shrigley paints an image as surreal as some of his own works. Butthe artist reasons: “If I can make an art project that is helping people with mental health problems then is that more helpful than making a funny drawing about the mental health crisis?” He’s not without experience: back in Glasgow, where he lived for 27 years before moving to Brighton in 2015, he participated in community education for five years. He found working with elderly people, mentally disabled people and prisoners rewarding – although other jobs were more challenging. “Personality wise, I’m not so good at dealing with hostile Glaswegian teenagers. With weapons. Who don’t want to do the papier-mache,” he says, before putting on a fantastic Scottish accent: “Ah dinnae wantae paint a picture ye prick!” I suspect Shrigley himself will be a beneficiary of the charity too. He says he’s spent his career feeling “not like a fraud, but … a bit selfish, like I’m just pleasing myself and enjoying my life far too much.” Recently he’s been reading about people who have overcome chronic pain through their artistic endeavours. “This one woman was really suffering with an arthritic condition, she was basically incapacitated. Then she joined a choir and the pain went. The doctors don’t know how it works, they just told her to keep doing it.” Once more he sounds utterly astounded by this endlessly confusing, utterly unknowable thing he’s devoted his life to. “It was just so exciting to find out that art is … actually good for people.” David Shrigley: Mayfair Tennis Ball Exchange is at Stephen Friedman Gallery, London, until 8 January.Flash flooding affected some parts of Israel last week with the country hit by frequent storms. Earlier this year, the country experienced an extended period of dry and windy conditions. This is thought to have exacerbated the flooding, with drainage systems blocked by sand and the infrastructure unable to cope with torrential downpours. Vehicles skidded off roads and people became stranded in the flooding. One man found unconscious in the flood waters. Somalia is heading for its fourth consecutive drought, with worsening conditions expected over the coming months. So far, more than 100,000 people have fled their homes looking for water and food. Extreme drought conditions can affect 80% of the country of 2 million people. Projected to be one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change, Somalia has been ravaged by natural disasters, with 12 droughts and 19 flooding events since 1990. Sicily had an eventful day of weather last Tuesday with 14 tornadoes, and waterspouts reported along the south-western flank of the Italian island amid heavy showers and thunderstorms. Intense rainfall inundated the region, with reports of flooding and buildings being destroyed by the strongest tornadoes.Reports of wildlife crimes surged in the pandemic-hit year of 2020, including badger setts being bulldozed by builders and birds of prey being killed near grouse moors, according to a new report by wildlife charities. The illegal taking of fish such as salmon from rivers and disturbance of seals and dolphins by people in boats also rose, the report found. Plants and fungi were also the targets of criminals, who snatched large numbers of mushrooms and bluebells to sell. At the same time, convictions for wildlife crime fell significantly. The wildlife groups acknowledge the data they collect is incomplete and represents just “the tip of the iceberg”. This is because police are not required to officially record wildlife crimes – most are listed as “miscellaneous”. The groups said wildlife crimes must become notifiable so resources can be better assessed and repeat offenders targeted. The lockdowns and restrictions of 2020, with the police busy monitoring social distancing rules, may have emboldened offenders, the report said, while greater use of the countryside by the public could have increased the witnessing of wildlife crimes. It said Covid-19 restrictions and staff absences also appeared to have reduced the capacity of police and prosecutors. ‘‘Wildlife crime is something that should concern everyone,” said Martin Sims, the chair of Wildlife and Countryside Link’s (WCL) wildlife crime working group. “It inflicts pain, harm and loss for much-loved wildlife and fuels wider criminality against people and property. It is high time the government steps in to treat wildlife crime with the seriousness it deserves.” The report was produced by WCL, the biggest coalition of wildlife and environment charities in England, and Wales Environment Link. It found reports of suspected crimes against badgers rose by 36% to 614 reports in 2020, compared with 2019. About half were referred to the police. Reports of potential fishing crimes went up by more than a third in 2020 and disturbances of marine mammals in Cornwall jumped by 90%, according to data gathered by the NGOs. The number of confirmed birds of prey crimes in England and Wales almost doubled in 2020 to 104 – the worst year for bird crime since recording began in 1990, according to the RSPB. Buzzards, red kites, peregrine falcons and sparrowhawks were the most common victims. There were few known convictions for wildlife crime in 2020: one related to birds of prey, two to bats and four for trading in illegal wildlife. The exception was in fishing, where the sale of fishing licences to anglers provides funds for the Environment Agency to enforce its duty of protection. But even here, fishing crime convictions fell by almost two-thirds, from 2037 in 2019 to 679 in 2020. Dawn Varley, of the Badger Trust, said: “Badger crime has been a UK wildlife crime priority for more than a decade, but sadly this persecution shows no sign of letting up. The 2020 rise [was] driven in large part by a shocking 220% increase in reports of developers interfering with badger setts. A small minority seem to see badger habitat protections as an inconvenience to be quietly bulldozed over, rather than a legal requirement to conserve an iconic British mammal.” Nearly half of the UK’s biodiversity has been lost since the Industrial Revolution, making the UK one of the most nature-depleting countries in the world. Mark Thomas, at the RSPB, said: “Wildlife declines are already being felt, and species can ill afford to face the additional pressure of being brutally shot, trapped or poisoned.” David Bunt, at the Institute of Fisheries Management, said: “It is hugely worrying that fisheries crimes have been on the rise in the pandemic, but convictions are down by two-thirds. Our biggest concern is whether inland enforcement agencies, the Environment Agency and Natural Resources Wales have the resources and staff to detect and deter crime on our rivers and lakes.” The National Wildlife Crime Unit only receives funding year to year and the wildlife groups said it should be put on a permanent footing. The NWCU has produced a shortlist of wildlife offences that is being considered by the Home Office for official recording. The groups are also calling for sentencing guidelines; currently there are none on wildlife crimes. A government spokesperson said: “We recognise the importance of tackling wildlife crime, which is why we directly fund the NCWU who provide intelligence and support to police forces protecting our precious wildlife. Those found guilty of harming animals should be subject to the full force of the law. Significant sanctions are available to judges to hand down to those convicted of wildlife crimes.”Ministers are urging millions of Britons to get their Covid booster jab by 11 December to ensure they have “very high protection against Covid by Christmas Day” as new evidence shows the risk of infection increases with the time since the second dose. The fresh warning comes after cases broke records in parts of Europe on Wednesday, with the continent once again the centre of a pandemic that has prompted new restrictions. About 16 million people have had a booster vaccine or a third dose across the UK. Everyone aged 40 and over and the clinically extremely vulnerable are eligible to get a booster six months after their second jab. “If you’re yet to get your first, second or booster dose, please do come forward for the jab as soon as possible,” said Maggie Throup, the vaccines minister. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson added: “People who have had their booster vaccine by 11 December will have very high protection against Covid by Christmas Day. Following a rise in cases and a return of lockdown restrictions in Europe, those eligible for a booster have been urged to take up the offer as soon as possible to protect themselves and their families, and help to reduce the pressure on the NHS.” Research has previously shown that two weeks after a booster people have a very high level of protection from getting a symptomatic case of Covid. It comes as new research today shows immunity against infection falls significantly in the six months after two doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. Experts say the major study highlights the importance of boosters. The findings, based on a study of 80,000 people in Israel, showed that the chances of a breakthrough infection was roughly double by four months after the second dose of Pfizer/BioNTech and had increased more than tenfold by six months. Previous work has shown that vaccines are highly effective at preventing hospitalisations for at least six months but that protection against infection falls more steeply, meaning that booster programmes are required to prevent the spread of infection. Ariel Israel of Leumit Health Services, who led the research, said: “The message is that boosters are needed after about five months.” The study, published in the British Medical Journal, is based on the electronic health records of just over 80,000 people who had a PCR test between mid-May and September at least three weeks after their second vaccination. None of the people in the sample had evidence of previous Covid-19 infection. The study found that the rate of positive results was found to rise in line with the time since people had had their second dose. Across all age groups, 1.3% of people tested positive 21-89 days after a second dose, but this increased to 2.4% after 90-119 days; 4.6% after 120-149 days; 10.3% after 150-179 days; and 15.5% after 180 days or more. The authors said it appears clear that immunity wanes after the first three months of being double-vaccinated but returns to a high level after a booster dose. They said: “Large-scale Covid-19 vaccination campaigns can achieve control over the spread of the virus, but even in countries with high vaccination rates, breakthrough infections can occur. The risk of [Covid] infection in adults who received two vaccine injections increased with time elapsed since vaccination compared with the reference [individuals vaccinated in the last 90 days].” They said it was too early to say whether immunity also wanes after a third booster dose. AstraZeneca has said antibody protection from its vaccine also wanes, although its chief executive, Pascal Soriot, said on Tuesday that the jab is thought to offer long-term T-cell immunity for older people, which could be better than other vaccines.Water companies spilled raw sewage into coastal bathing waters used by holidaymakers and families 5,517 times in the last year, an increase of more than 87%, new data reveals. The discharges, through storm overflows, went on to beaches that were supposed to be the cleanest and safest in England and Wales, used by children, tourists, surfers and swimmers. “We are in the midst of a new wave of sewage pollution,” said the 2021 Water Quality report by Surfers Against Sewage. “There are hundreds of thousands of sewage discharges polluting rivers and coastlines, all of which could impact the overall health of aquatic ecosystems.” The data is gathered from water company alerts of spills via storm overflows across 308 locations. During the bathing water season – 15 May to the end of September – water companies issued alerts 3,328 times. The rest of the spills took place outside those months. Storm overflows are supposed to be used in emergencies to ease pressure on the system after extreme weather or exceptional rainfall. But this report adds to the growing evidence that they are being used routinely. Southern Water, which was fined a record £90m this year for billions of litres of raw sewage spills, issued 1,194 alerts of sewage spills, an average of 38 spills for each bathing water location, compared with an average of between two and eight for other water companies. Almost 30% of the 286 health reports submitted this year came from Southern Water’s operating area. South West Water also produced a “notably poor performance for the third consecutive year”, with 406 discharges in the bathing water season on to popular beaches. Hugo Tagholm, the chief executive of Surfers Against Sewage, said: “The findings of our report are shocking and outrageous, but they are by no means unexpected. Time and time again, governments have claimed concern over the pollution of rivers and seas, but have so far failed to take concrete action to change the status quo. Loopholes in laws and systematically defunded regulators have left water companies to run amok.” For the first time the campaign group carried out testing of water quality at river mouths feeding into bathing beaches. The results were “shocking.” In six out of eight rivers the quality of the water was so poor as a result of faecal contamination that it posed an extreme danger to human health. The findings come as the Environment Agency continues a major investigation into more than 2000 sewage treatment works after water companies admitted they may be illegally discharging raw sewage. Concerns over sewage dumping into rivers and seas have sparked grassroots campaigns all over the country. Members of the public in Southern Water areas have taken to beaches to protest and some have begun a rate payers revolt. The citizen testing at river mouths provided a strong comparison to water quality testing undertaken by environmental regulators, and was carried out to fill the gap in the monitoring of river water quality. Only one river in the UK – the Wharfe in Ilkley – is a designated bathing water and therefore subject to the same scrutiny as coastal waters. The rest are not monitored for faecal pollution, despite the fact that 90 percent of storm overflows discharge directly into rivers. Only 14 percent of rivers in the UK are of good ecological standard, a rating that suggests they are as close to their natural state as possible. The rivers tested were; Afon Wyre River flowing into Llanrhystud Beach, Hoffnant River, flowing into Penbryn Beach, Figgate Burn into Portobello Beach in Scotland, River Bann flowing into Portstewart Beach in Northern Ireland, Seaton Burn flowing into Seaton Sluice Beach, Northumbria, the River Adur into Southwick Beach in Southern England, the River Ribble into St Agnes Beach in northwest England and the Cadoxton River flowing into Whitmore Bay Beach, Barry Island, south Wales. E.coli levels in Figgate Burn were continuously at a level that poses an extreme risk to public health. At the remaining five river locations results consistently showed faecal contamination levels that posed an extreme risk to public health. Water quality at the River Bann and Cadoxton river was excellent. Dr Christian Dunn, senior lecturer in natural sciences at Bangor University, said: “Untreated sewage can be a death potion to our rivers and waterways. It is a cocktail of harmful viruses, bacteria and chemicals. Some of these can directly harm aquatic life and others lead to devastating disruptions in the oxygen levels of the water – risking entire ecosystems … Rivers are essential for the health of entire landscapes, our wildlife depends on them, and there’s no surer way to destroy a river than flooding it with sewage.” A spokesperson for Water UK, an industry body, said the companies recognised the urgent need for action to protect and enhance the UK’s rivers and seas. “Our recent 21st Century Rivers report sets out the key steps needed to achieve the radical changes we all want to see, including calling on government to bring forward legislation in a new Rivers Act that will provide greater protection for rivers in law. We know we need to go further and water companies want to invest more to improve infrastructure and stop harm from storm overflows and outfalls. “With our coastal bathing waters we have a good base to build on with more than 70% rated as ‘excellent’, and over 90% as either ‘excellent’ or ‘good’. This improvement has come about thanks to collaborative working between industry, government, regulators and other stakeholders over several years.” Dr Toby Willison, director of environment and corporate affairs at Southern Water, said: “We share the passion and commitment of Surfers Against Sewage to protect our precious coastal water and the 700 miles of coastline in our region. “We know our performance has to improve and we are driving a step change in investment spending £2 billion to cut pollution incidents by 80 per cent by 2025. “Our new task force aims to cut storm overflows by 80 per cent by 2030. Our target is ambitious but all 83 of our bathing waters meet strict European standards and 78 are excellent or good, a challenge which 20 years ago seemed impossible.” • This article was amended on 25 November 2021 to remove Bristol Water from the graph of discharge alerts issued by water firms. The water-only company does not maintain any sewer networks and was included in the original Surfers Against Sewage report in error.A joint report by human rights bodies and environment groups has found activists are increasingly facing repression by Australian governments. The report comes as the ABC publishes allegations VicForests carried out a campaign of surveillance against anti-logging protesters. The report by the Human Rights Law Centre, Greenpeace Australia Pacific and the Environmental Defenders Office, published on Thursday, tracks how pressure from business interests, legal changes and policing tactics have converged to create an environment of repression for those protesting inaction on the climate crisis. They say the introduction of harsh anti-protest laws around the country, the use of heavy-handed bail conditions normally reserved for organised crime and excessive penalties given to those who commit minor offences while protesting indicate a worrying trend. General counsel at Greenpeace Australia Pacific, Katrina Bullock, said the trend had been building over the previous five years but is now “reaching fever pitch.” “Before it was something very difficult to prove and it was happening in a covert way,” Bullock said. “I think the Australian government and the fossil fuel industry are getting more desperate now that countries are moving away from fossil fuels, and they’re attempting to shut down this dissent.” In addition, the report warns about proposed reforms such as the Australian government’s charities bill that could be used to deregister organisations that engage in climate activism and the growing popularity of legal actions aimed at silencing opponents. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Senior lawyer at the Human Rights Law Centre Yusur Al-Azzawi said these legal actions were carried out by companies against individuals or organisations with the aim of delaying protests, tying up resources or bankrupting them. “But what’s really frightening is that we’re not talking about one or two isolated incidents, we’re looking at a systemic and broad-ranging attack on climate defenders,” Al-Azzawi said. “We’ve just come back from Cop26. It really is time for governments to take action instead of attacking people protesting their inaction.” Meanwhile, the ABC alleges that conservationist Sarah Rees was subjected to surveillance by VicForests – a for-profit company owned by the Victorian government – in 2011 after the organisation hired a private investigator to monitor her activities in an effort to obtain “dirt”. According to the ABC, when Rees was made deputy chair of the Australian arm of the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), an international not-for-profit organisation that runs a sustainable timber certification scheme, in 2019 VicForest attempted to discredit her in a formal complaint about alleged bias, based on her tweets. Rees told the ABC the complaint was part of an effort by VicForests to shut-down voices they disliked, while FSC said she remains a valued director. The company also complained about another FSC director, Australian National University scientists Chris Taylor whose research alleged VicForrest was engaged in illegal logging, a claim denied by VicForests. Taylor told the ABC: “The allegations [of bias] were investigated by FSC Australia and they were rejected”. According to the ABC, an investigation into the complaint made no findings of wrongdoing by the directors. A spokesperson for VicForests said the claims made in the ABC report “do not reflect the culture, the values and the people of VicForests”. “VicForests takes historical claims it hired a private investigator in 2010 and 2011 very seriously and will commission an independent investigation into the matter to address these claims and establish the facts,” they said. Climate activists in New South Wales who have been blockading the port of Newcastle, the biggest coal port in the world, have been threatened with prosecution under laws that carry 25-year sentences. NSW police set up Strike Force Tuohy to target “disruptive protesters” after the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, complained earlier this month that protesters stopped $60m in coal shipments. On Monday, one 22-year-old activist was sentenced to 12 months in prison with a non-parole period of six months for obstructing coal trains in the Hunter region of NSW.New South Wales and Queensland will see another weekend of “torrential” rainfall as dangerous flash flooding risks hitting already drenched areas. The immediate forecast came as the Bureau of Meteorology released its summer outlook on Thursday, predicting high rainfall to lash eastern, northern and central parts of Australia until February, with Queensland to bear the brunt of the rain. The BoM meteorologist Dean Narramore said the heavy rainfall was expected to move through western and southern NSW later on Thursday before passing into south-east NSW on Friday. “Severe thunderstorms are expected in the coming days and heaps of rivers are already experiencing flooding,” Narramore said. “Some inland hail might occur but the main risk is very, very heavy rainfall leading to dangerous flash flooding, and damaging winds. Further rivers are likely to flood. “It’s going to be a wet and stormy few days.” Severe thunderstorm warnings were in place across Victoria, NSW, Queensland and parts of the Northern Territory on Thursday, while there were more than a dozen flood warnings in place across NSW and Queensland. Several rivers in NSW including the Lachlan were already flooding as a result of previous storms. Dams across the state were at 94% of total storage capacity, a 0.4% increase on the previous week. The Burrendong Dam was at 126.4% capacity, while the Menindee Lakes were at 110.8% total storage capacity. “We could see them be really impacted by heavy rainfalls … and numerous other rivers could see minor to moderate flooding,” Narramore said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Isolated showers and thunderstorms were expected to extend from Darwin in the north to eastern Victoria in the south in the coming days, impacting about a third of the nation. “It’s not some massive band of heavy rain everyone’s going to get, but most of the eastern parts of Queensland, NSW and Victoria will see showers and thunderstorms,” Narramore said. Peak rainfall was expected to occur on Friday, with isolated heavy falls in excess of 100mm predicted for eastern parts of Queensland and NSW. Bundaberg, south of Gladstone had already seen 122mm of rain on Thursday, with more on the way before an eventual easing by the weekend. Widespread eastern parts of Australia had seen between 20 and 50mm of rain on Thursday afternoon. Sydney and Brisbane were expected to see between 50 and 100mm of rain in the coming three days, while Melbourne would largely miss out on the downpour. Parts of eastern Victoria were likely to see between 25 and 50mm of rain. “It’s good news if you don’t want it,” Narramore said. “Melbourne will just get occasional light, drizzly showers.” The heaviest storms were expected to ease by the weekend, with some showers still to pass through NSW and Queensland. Narramore said if you didn’t like humid, sticky weather, you weren’t in luck, as there was “a lot more to come” in the following weeks and months. “Nothing in weather is constant, but it’ll be wet and stormy through Sydney and Brisbane and there’s no long sunny stretch on the way yet,” he said. This year’s spring was likely to be the wettest since 2016, while this month was to be among the 10 wettest Novembers on record for NSW and South Australia. The higher than average rainfall was expected to continue throughout summer as La Niña in the Pacific Ocean combined with the positive Southern Annular Mode (SAM). La Niña was officially declared by the BoM on Tuesday, following weeks of wild weather in eastern parts of the nation. The bureau’s head of operational climate services, Dr Andrew Watkins, said warmer waters in the west coupled with increased moisture was likely to create wet conditions for parts of Australia’s east coming into summer. “La Niña … is now established in the Pacific Ocean for the second year in a row,” he said. “December is likely to see our typical summer weather systems pushed further south than normal, meaning more humid air coming off the Tasman Sea, and into NSW and eastern Victoria. “Spring has been wetter than normal and, as a result, soil moisture is high, water storages are full, and we’ve seen flooding in some areas. Any additional rain on our already wet landscape will increase the flood risk for eastern Australia this summer.” But despite high rainfall, temperatures were also forecast to be warmer than average across most of Australia this summer, except the south-east. Minimum temperatures were also predicted to be above average, though below average daytime temperatures were expected for eastern NSW. There were no strong swings to wetter or drier conditions in South Australia, while parts of Western Australia were likely to see above or slightly above average rainfall. While there was below average fire potential in many forest areas in NSW and eastern Victoria, Watkins said strong grass and crop growth over spring could dry out during summer, increasing fire risk.Queens of Rap 10pm, Channel 4 When Megan Thee Stallion and Cardi B dropped WAP in the middle of a pandemic, it inevitably became The Moment in pop culture. But does a Wet Ass Pussy rap perpetuate the male gaze or was it a stroke of feminist genius? Poppy Begum investigates by retracing female rap and sexual empowerment – such as when Salt-N-Pepa told the horny to “Push It” – and unpicking the story of how an ex-stripper/reality TV star came to define the summer of 2020. Hollie Richardson Handmade: Britain’s Best Woodworker 8pm, Channel 4 After baking, pottery, sewing, floristry and just about any other crafty pursuit you can name, woodworking finally got its own Bake Off-esque format with this Mel Giedroyc-fronted series. As it concludes, a seriously tough finale sees the woodworkers tasked with creating their own garden structures. Hannah J Davies Nadiya’s Fast Flavours 8.30pm, BBC Two Nadiya Hussain is serving up a magical custard tart tonight. That alone is surely worth your time. If not: the nation’s unofficial favourite cook is also baking shortbread biscuits “like you’ve never had before” and rule-breaking sweet focaccia. Pass the napkins. HR Wirecard: A Billion Euro Lie 9pm, Sky Documentaries Online payment company Wirecard imploded last year after an enormous black hole was revealed in its accounts. This feature-length documentary unravels the tangled story of “the Enron of Germany” with the input of talking heads including a whistleblower, a financial whizz nicknamed “the Dark Destroyer” and a boastful company enforcer. Graeme Virtue Mock the Week 10pm, BBC Two Dara Ó Briain and Hugh Dennis once again lead the charge with this week’s news-based shenanigans, standup lucky dips and satirical rambles. Tonight’s panel includes Angela Barnes, Rhys James and Ahir Shah, led by Maisie Adam, who’s such a masterful offbeat storyteller it makes you wonder why women had just the occasional seat on panel shows for so long. Hannah Verdier Death of England: Face to Face 10pm, Sky Arts The National Theatre’s lockdown play makes a striking, seamless transition to the screen, as Neil Maskell and Giles Terera act their guts out – along with an appearance from Phil Daniels. Holed up in an east London flat in January 2021, tensions run high as friends Delroy and Michael are forced to confront their relationship with each other and their country. HR Film choice All the President’s Men (Alan J Pakula, 1976) 10pm, BBC Four Remember a time when the US president would resign over his misdemeanours in office? Alan J Pakula’s fact-based Watergate film now has a distinct nostalgic tinge to it, as Washington Post reporters Carl Bernstein (Dustin Hoffman) and Bob Woodward (Robert Redford) probe a break-in at Democrat party headquarters and the subsequent cover-up of their involvement by Richard Nixon’s White House. An all-too-rare cinematic representation of journalists as honest and diligent, expressed via the twists and turns of a first-rate thriller. Simon Wardell Live sport Uefa Europa League Football: Rapid Vienna v West Ham United 5.15pm, BT Sport 1. Group H match at Allianz Stadion. Uefa Europa League Football: Leicester City v Legia Warsaw 7.45pm, BT Sport 1. From King Power Stadium.Top story: Call for safe routes for those in need of protection Hello, Warren Murray bringing you Thursday’s headlines. Emmanuel Macron and Boris Johnson have traded blame after the deadliest incident in the Channel since the current migrant crisis began. At least 27 people died trying to reach the UK in an inflatable dinghy on Wednesday. The British PM renewed calls for France to agree to joint police patrols along the Channel coast. Macron, the French president, said Johnson must not politicise migrant flows. Two survivors remain in intensive care while police have arrested four people suspected of being linked to the drownings. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, likened the boat that sank to “a pool you blow up in your garden”. The French are to hold an emergency meeting this morning and Macron has called for more EU help, saying: “France will not let the Channel become a cemetery.” Johnson said efforts by French authorities to patrol their beaches “haven’t been enough … what we want now is to do more together – and that’s the offer we are making”. The French have been resisting UK offers to send police and Border Force agents on to France’s sovereign territory. Refugee charities have called on the government to save lives by opening safe routes for asylum seekers wanting to come to the UK. Enver Solomon from the Refugee Council said: “How many tragedies like this must we see before the government fundamentally changes its approach by committing to an ambitious expansion of safe routes for those men, women and children in desperate need of protection?” * * * Arbery murder trio all guilty – The three white men who chased and killed Ahmaud Arbery have been found guilty of murder following his 2020 shooting death in south Georgia. Travis McMichael, his father, Greg McMichael, and their neighbour William “Roddie” Bryan pursued the unarmed Arbery in February 2020, claiming without evidence that he had been involved in a spate of neighbourhood burglaries. They face life in prison and will be sentenced at a later date. All the men face separate federal hate crimes charges that are due to go to trial in February 2022. * * * ‘Taking the mick’ – Geoffrey Cox has again appeared in his million-dollar role as a lawyer for the British Virgin Islands (BVI) inquiry while the UK parliament is sitting. Cox joined the BVI inquiry into corruption allegations for two hours while the House of Commons was sitting on Wednesday afternoon. Cox has previously voted by proxy at least 12 times over four days while doing paid legal work. Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, said Cox was “taking the mick” and called it a “test of leadership” for Boris Johnson: “The prime minister is letting him get away with it.” Cox has previously defended his outside work saying it is up to electors whether they wish to be represented by a “distinguished professional” working in their field. Some cabinet ministers have rowed in behind Johnson as Downing Street seeks to play down divisions between No 10 and the Treasury. In the Commons, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has ribbed Johnson about the disquiet of Tory MPs, asking: “Who knows if he’ll make it to the next election?” * * * ‘Worry and dread’ – One student in England has amassed a study debt of £189,700, according to official figures. The Student Loan Company said the figure was “an exceptional case” and was possibly accrued over loans for several courses, according to a response to a Freedom of Information request. However, when the FOI response was published on Reddit, other graduates cited debts around the £100,000 mark, including those who had studied five-year medicine degrees, postgraduate courses or who had switched courses or institutions. Debts soared after annual tuition fees were tripled to £9,000 in 2012. Those who graduated in 2020 took out an average of £45,060 in loans, according to a report from the Higher Education Policy Institute, which warns that graduates’ “draining” debt is causing them “anxiety, pressure, worry and dread”. * * * Bulb’s dim strategy – The scheme allowing Bulb to keep supplying gas and electricity to its 1.7 million customers through the winter months could cost taxpayers up to £1.7bn, according to a court application to hand the company to a special administrator. Officials are understood to be focused on finding a quick exit strategy from the arrangement as signs of the supplier’s “unsustainable” business model grow clearer. Bulb was founded in east London in 2015 by entrepreneurs Amit Gudka and Hayden Wood. An industry source pointed to Bulb’s habit of buying energy from the market three months in advance as a large part of its downfall. Analysts have said the company failed to buy its wholesale supplies far enough in advance to cushion it against recent price hikes. * * * Plastic surgery teen ad ban – Cosmetic surgery clinics are to be banned from targeting adverts for procedures such as breast enlargement, nose jobs and liposuction at Britain’s under-18s. New rules will bar ads on all media – ranging from social media sites such as Facebook, TikTok and Instagram to billboards and posters, newspapers, magazines and radio as well as social influencer marketing – that are aimed at under-18s or likely to have a particular appeal to that age group. The changes come into force from May and follow a consultation by the Committee for Advertising Practice (Cap), which writes the codes that all UK advertisers have to follow. Today in Focus podcast: Disappearance of Peng Shuai The Chinese tennis player vanished after making an allegation of sexual assault against a senior political figure. Her subsequent reappearance has raised more questions than answers. Lunchtime read: Is society coming apart? Despite Thatcher and Reagan’s best efforts, there is and has always been such a thing as society. The question is not whether it exists, but what shape it must take in a post-pandemic world. Sport Frankly, this could have gone on all night. Did we have to stop? Did we really need to call an end to it? On a chilly, still night at the Etihad Stadium, Manchester City produced a performance against PSG that was oddly hypnotic: a brilliantly fluid, delicately stitched, oddly gentle display of how to win a game by simply picking your opponent apart. Nothing can disrupt Liverpool’s procession through a group of European heavyweights. Jürgen Klopp rested, re-energised and recuperated players against Porto and was rewarded with a fifth successive victory that yielded the club’s highest ever points tally in the Champions League group phase. He could not have wished for more. Premier League clubs should pay a stamp duty-style tax on every transfer fee to help support the English football pyramid, the government’s fan-led review has said, in one of 47 recommendations to safeguard the future of the game. England has been given an effective green light to stage the 2025 women’s Rugby World Cup while Australia was given similar backing to host the men’s 2027 tournament. The Rugby Football Union has laid bare the full financial impact of the coronavirus pandemic, announcing a revenue shortfall of £120m compared to previous forecasts. A survey of county board membership undertaken by the Guardian has found the majority have failed to meet the target of 30% representation of each gender, to which they committed more than two years ago, and exposes the hard deadline of April 2022 that the England and Wales Cricket Board is attempting to impose on them as far-fetched. Business Britain’s manufacturers are struggling to meet the biggest demand for goods since records began in 1977 after severe supply constraints put a brake on production lines. The CBI said its monthly snapshot of industry showed the increase in demand was being accompanied by heightened inflationary pressure. The global supply chain crisis also threatens higher food prices in the US due to a shortage of nitrogen fertiliser. The FTSE100 looks like climbing 0.25% this morning and the pound nudged up to $1.334 and €1.190. The papers Today a full roundup of the papers can be found here. The Guardian front page headline, which went to print before the total death toll was revised down to 27, reads “Tragedy at sea claims 31 lives in deadliest day of refugee crisis”. The Times says “Dozens of migrants drown in Channel dinghy tragedy” and features a photograph of migrants preparing to launch a boat from France. The FT takes a similar angle to the Guardian noting the worst day so far in the migrant crisis. The Telegraph reports that Boris Johnson has told the French government that it has to “step up”. The Mail uses what it says are the prime minister’s words to the French president – “You’re letting gangs get away with murder” – under the strapline reading “Tragedy in the Channel”. The Express carries a slightly different interpretation of Johnson’s words with “PM: Smugglers getting away with murder”. The Sun’s headline reads “Shameful” and asks “Now will leaders finally act?” A French police vehicle is shown parked nearby as people pull an inflatable dinghy into the water. The Mirror has a close-up version of that scene, showing children loaded into a vessel – not thought to be the same on involved in the drownings. It says “A human tragedy” was allowed to occur “under the noses of French cops”. The i hints at the wider causes, saying the boat people died “in search of a better life”, while the Metro shows the same scene as the Sun and asks “Why didn’t France stop them?”.The amount of waste washing up on the UK’s beaches is falling year by year, according to the results of the 2021 Great British Beach Clean, organised by the Marine Conservation Society (MCS). Volunteers found 385 pieces of litter for every 100 metres of beach on average, down from 425 in 2020 and 558 in 2019. Single-use plastic bags have fallen from a high of 13 for every 100 metres in 2013 to just three in 2021. The plastic bag charge introduced in 2015 has cut their use in supermarkets by 95%. Plastic cotton bud sticks dropped out of the top 10 most common types of rubbish following a ban in Scotland in 2019 and in England in 2020. The average of six per 100 metres in 2021 was the lowest since the beach cleans began 28 years ago and was down from 15 in 2020. The MCS said the results were positive and showed that actions being taken at a personal, local and national level were having an impact. But it said 75% of beach litter was still plastic or polystyrene and that the government’s “piecemeal” approach to phasing out single-use plastic was not good enough. The beach clean took place from 17-26 September and more than 6,000 volunteers cleared five tonnes of litter from 34 miles (55km) of UK beaches. The most common items were pieces of plastic and polystyrene, followed by cigarette butts, crisp and sweet packets, and plastic caps and lids. Recent research showed plastic items from takeaway food and drink dominated the litter in the world’s oceans. A study in 2020 found the UK and US produced more plastic waste per person than any other major countries. The UK government took its latest step towards banning single-use plastic plates, cutlery and cups on Saturday, when it launched a consultation along with a call for evidence on how to cut litter from wet wipes, cigarette filters and plastic sachets. The consultation had been trailed in August when campaigners said progress on cutting plastic waste was “snail-paced”, with the EU having banned many items in July. A deposit return scheme (DRS) for plastic bottles will not be in place in England until late 2024 at the earliest, six years after being proposed by the government. A Scottish DRS scheme has also been delayed until 2023. Dr Laura Foster, the head of clean seas at the MCS, said: “The UK governments’ current piecemeal approach to single-use plastics policy just won’t cut it any more. While we’re seeing a downward trend in litter on beaches, we’re still seeing huge volumes of plastic washing up on our shores. Comprehensive and ambitious single-use plastics policies are the quickest way of phasing out plastic from our environment.” Lizzie Prior, beachwatch officer at MCS, said it was difficult to say how much changes in people’s behaviour during the pandemic had influenced litter trends: “There were changes in lunchtime eating habits, with fewer people in the office and therefore a reduction in single-use lunchtime plastic. But some of the downward trends, such as plastic bags, were occurring before the pandemic.” She said PPE waste was found on one in three beaches, though masks were only the 59th most common item. A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, said: “We’re pleased to see the amount of litter being found on our beaches dropping and the positive impact of our policies such as the single-use carrier bag charge. However we know there is more to be done.” Environment, pollution and climate change is now the British public’s top concern, according to a poll by Ipsos Mori published on Wednesday. Twice as many people named climate and environment as a top issue than cited the economy, a result the pollsters had not seen before. As in previous surveys, green concerns were found to be high across age, social class and the political spectrum.The Munga-Thirri-Simpson desert has been declared Australia’s newest and biggest national park after a decade-long campaign to protect the area from exploration by fossil fuel companies. The desert stretches into Queensland and the Northern Territory but the area covered by the new national park lies within the Lake Eyre Basin in South Australia and spans 3.6m hectares. The new park is double the size of Kakadu – the next biggest national park in Australia – and four times the size of Yellowstone national park in the US. The desert is a sanctuary to more than 900 species of plants and animals, including dingoes, thorny devils and wedge-tailed eagles, and is the site of spectacular scenes during the rainy season when water becomes trapped in the dunes. Temporary wetlands spring to life attracting migratory birds and causing native flowers to bloom in the usually dry and arid environment. Several First Nations groups maintain a connection to the area with uninterrupted custodianship stretching back thousands of years. Peter Owen, the director of the Wilderness Society of South Australia, hopes that legacy can be continued. “As far as desert systems go around the world, this one is in pristine condition,” Owen said on Thursday. “The Simpson desert is a huge, intact desert system with some of the longest parallel dune systems in the word. It’s an intact wilderness and a credit to the custodianship of First Nations people over thousands of years. This type of thing is not common in the world any more.” The South Australian environment minister, David Speirs, said the official proclamation marked the “biggest expansion of national parks in the state’s history”. “It is truly exciting that South Australia is now home to Australia’s largest national park and along with our other changes, this provides a significant boost to conservation as well as enhance our reputation as a world-class eco-tourism destination,” he said. The announcement means the total area protected under national parks legislation in South Australia has doubled to 7.9m hectares. Speirs said the government would set aside $130m in funding to help conserve “vitally important ecosystems” that provide “a wide range of environmental, social and economic benefits”. The Wilderness Society first began seeking protection for the area in 2010 but efforts stalled when it was opened up to oil companies seeking to explore for gas deposits. While one company interested in the region abandoned plans after community pressure, Tri-Star Energy, an oil company based in Tennessee, took over the lease in 2017 and announced its intention to explore for gas in the area in 2020. In response the Wilderness Society met with the company and accelerated its campaign to have the area protected. Owen hopes the new national park will make the prospect of massive groundworks required during exploration – where grid patterns are bulldozed into the landscape – and the potential construction of gas pipelines unthinkable. “It’s going to be a very odd situation if we’re announcing a huge new national park and then in go the bulldozers. That won’t be satisfactory at all and I can’t see that happening,” Owen said. “We’ll be hoping that this is a very strong message that the community here wants to see this area protected.” Comment is being sought from Tri-Star Energy.On Wednesday morning, the most vicious thing facing New Zealand’s opposition party was former leader Simon Bridges’ appearance on TV grinning like a Cheshire cat, declaring he had no intention of challenging Judith Collins for the leadership. In the following 24 hours the National party became an omnishambles. With poll after poll showing the party might move to depose Collins, I contacted some MPs on Wednesday morning to get a read on what they were thinking. One of the replies confirmed that Simon Bridges was serious about a challenge, and added presciently that “Judith would fight it hardcore”. Just how hardcore became clear on Wednesday night when Collins, without consulting her caucus or Bridges, accused her rival of “serious misconduct” towards a fellow MP, now known to be Jacqui Dean. Collins said she was stripping Bridges of his portfolio responsibilities because of the comments at a caucus event five years ago, which she characterised as “harassment”. We’ve since learnt the seemingly ribald comments were in a group discussion relating to “old wives’ tales” about how Bridges and his wife might conspire to have a girl after having two boys. Whether voters see such comments as beyond the pale, time will tell. But most of her caucus seem to have concluded that the tone and timing – and the fact Bridges had been reprimanded for them and apologised at the time – did not seem to warrant a late-night sacking. It was a flamethrower play sure to do as much damage to the party as it did to Bridges. Burn the village to save the village stuff. So Collins arrived at parliament on Thursday to face furious colleagues and promptly lost a vote of no confidence. That Collins’ tenure should end in a ball of flames is one of the least surprising events in the tumultuous past 10 years of New Zealand politics. A decade when the two major parties – Labour and National – have run through 11 leaders. Collins has always been combustible and polarising. As a minister she revelled in the nickname “Crusher”, based on her policy to crush the cars of speeding drivers and her famous commitment to “reward” her political opponents with “double” the pain they inflicted on her. She had said that if you can’t be loved, it was best to be feared. And whatever you think of Bridges’ sin, it was the politics of fear and “reward” that she couldn’t resist. While Collins as leader has tried to rein in her more brutal tendencies, the misjudged press release reminded everyone what she’s capable of. And while National MPs are looking for something to counter the “kindness” brand attached to prime minister Jacinda Ardern, they sent the clear message on Thursday that these sorts of tactics aren’t what they’re looking for. It’s fitting that Collins’ leadership exploded the same day Labour announced the end of New Zealand’s MIQ (managed isolation) system. It’s a big step away from the country’s lockdown era and National sent out press releases damning Labour as out of touch, “making it up as they go along” and rushing changes “under huge pressure”. The government has been struggling to choose the right time to move. What’s too soon or too late? How much of this will the public take? Replace “MIQ” with “Collins”, though, and the truth is you could say exactly the same thing about National. Crusher Collins, as leader, had become Lockdown Collins. Just as Labour has long known it would one day have to ease border restrictions, National MPs have long known they’d have to confront the fact that Collins was never going to win them the next election. Just as many New Zealanders have grown frustrated by a sense of treading water, so National MPs have grown impatient at their failure to dent the government and improve the party’s polling. And like MIQ, Collins was only ever intended to serve a temporary purpose when elected leader in July 2020. Always ambitious and never a unifying figure, she was a necessity, a way to buy time until better options came along. National faced a difficult few weeks trying to figure out whether Collins needed to go before or after Christmas. She has saved them that dilemma. But the party now faces the sort of introspection and infighting voters hate most, just when the government is at its most vulnerable and New Zealand other’s rightwing party, ACT, is at its strongest. The caucus is divided and there’s nothing from the past few years that suggests the talent pool at its disposal is very deep. How telling is it that that until last night the front-runner was a retread candidate whose poll ratings as preferred prime minister just two years ago were even lower than Collins’ are now? We’ll soon see, as the caucus will elect a new leader next Tuesday. Whoever wins will have the challenge of making their mark through the political wasteland that is summer, then returning to parliament in the new year just as borders are opening, New Zealanders begin coming home and – God willing – a sense of normality is starting to return. The party’s interim leader, Shane Reti, said the party would “get up and lift our eyes to the horizon”. It was an encouraging line for his troops, but Bridges’ assessment was more honest. He said National was starting from a low base and “there is still a huge amount of work to do”. The facts are that National has now rolled through four leaders since it lost power in 2017. That’s still one behind Labour’s tally when it was opposition 2008-2011. But National still has plenty of time before the 2023 election to catch up.On Wednesday evening Smeaton’s Tower, a lighthouse on the waterfront in Plymouth, was lit purple – an attempt to draw attention to violence against women in the wake of the death of 18-year-old Bobbi-Anne McLeod. In the past year, vigils have been held for Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman, for Sarah Everard and for Sabina Nessa. Candles have flickered in windows, tributes have been shared and women have taken to the streets after the high-profile killings, knowing that millions of other instances of abuse will never make a headline. But as another murder investigation opens after the death of another young woman, figures published on Wednesday by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show the sheer scale of the violence against women and girls. To mark the UN’s International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women on Thursday, the ONS has pulled together the first comprehensive set of statistics on violence against women and girls in England and Wales into one gut-wrenching corner of the internet, with the charity SafeLives highlighting the human cost of the statistics with real-life stories. The stats hit the reader hard: an estimated 1.6 million women aged 16 to 74 suffered domestic abuse in England and Wales in the last year. In the year ending March 2020, 81 women were killed in a domestic homicide. The ONS estimates that one in three women over the age of 16 in Great Britain were subjected to at least one form of harassment in the past year – a figure that increases to two in three for women aged 16 to 34. The National Stalking helpline for England and Wales, run by the Suzy Lamplugh Trust, received 871 calls in the year to April 2021, up 14.9% from the previous year. Charities argued that the coronavirus pandemic worsened an already dire situation and the statistics bear that out. Calls to the national domestic abuse helpline in England rose by more than a fifth during the pandemic, with Refuge getting 49,756 calls in the year to March 2021. And yet, according to Women’s Aid, high demand meant that 63% of referrals of women to refuges in England and 34% of referrals of women to refuges in Wales were declined in the year to March 2020. Against a backdrop of growing fear and outrage over high-profile cases this year, the criminal justice system’s abject failure to protect women has been starkly laid out. In the past 12 months just 41 extra suspects were charged with rape by the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) compared with the year before, but the figures for prosecution of domestic abuse continue to drop. Police referrals of suspected domestic abusers to the CPS fell 3% to 77,812 and the number of CPS prosecutions fell for the fifth consecutive year. In the year ending March 2016, there were 75,236 convictions for domestic abuse; in the year ending March 2021, that figure had dropped to 42,574. The impact of these crimes on women is “significant and often long-lasting”, said the ONS’ head of crime Meghan Elkin. The crime survey revealed that 63% of survivors of rape or attempted rape reported mental or emotional problems, 21% had taken time off work and 10% had tried to kill themselves. In June 2021, the Opinions and Lifestyle Survey showed that 89% of women in Great Britain who had experienced harassment said they felt “very or fairly unsafe” walking on their own after dark, with 78% of non-harassed women saying the same. There is no respite from this fear for many women. At a profound level it is everywhere, all the time. After every murderand every vigil, the government has insisted it is radically changing how violence against women and girls is tackled with a new strategy and a “whole-system approach”. But in the wake of the tragic death of another young woman, after an extraordinarily bleak year in the fight against violence against women, radical change cannot come soon enough.As the guilty verdicts were read aloud, one after the other, Ahmaud Arbery’s mother, Wanda Cooper-Jones, could be seen in the courthouse with tears in her eyes. The three white men who murdered her son back in February 2020, claiming they had acted in self-defense during an attempted citizen’s arrest, expressed little emotion. But the verdict, which holds each of these men responsible for murder, is an indictment not only of their defense in court, described by prosecutors as “completely made up for trial”, but elements of the local criminal justice system itself, which could so easily have allowed none of them to stand trial at all. Speaking on the steps of Glynn county courthouse, the Rev Al Sharpton summed up the case neatly. “Let us more than anything thank the mother and father of Ahmaud Arbery,” he said. “They lost a son. But their son will go down in history as one that proved that if you hold on, that justice can come. “Let the word go forth all over the world, that a jury of 11 whites and one Black in the deep south stood up in the courtroom and said that Black lives do matter.” Wednesday’s verdict capped almost two years of anguish for the Arbery family, marked by allegations of corruption, bias and racism both inside and outside the courtroom. The family first waited for months as the initial investigation into their son’s shooting stalled and was passed around to three separate local district attorneys. Greg McMichael, a former Glynn county policeman, was a retired investigator for the Brunswick judicial circuit’s district attorney office, which was first handed the case. After that district attorney, Jackie Johnson (who was later indicted for allegedly interfering in the investigation and blocking the arrest of Travis McMichael), recused herself. The second district attorney assigned the case, Waycross judicial circuit’s George Barnhill, was also forced to recuse himself months into the investigation. It emerged that Barnhill’s son had known and worked with Greg McMichael. Barnhill did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Wednesday’s verdict. Shortly after the third DA took the case, a shocking eyewitness video filmed by William “Roddie” Bryan emerged, and state investigators were assigned to the case. Following release of the video, Marcus Arbery, Ahmaud Arbery’s father, told the Guardian: “They lynched him. He didn’t deserve that.” Eventually all three men were arrested, almost three months after the shooting occurred. As the case progressed through initial court hearings it emerged there was further evidence of racist beliefs held by all three men. Phone messages and social media posts examined by investigators had revealed use of “racial” language before and after the shooting. Bryan had testified to law enforcement officers that Travis McMichael used a racist slur shortly after shooting Arbery and as his body lay on the ground nearby. Body-camera footage from responding officers showed Travis McMichael’s truck had a license plate that bore the Confederate battle flag. Notably, prosecutors elected not to mention this evidence during trial, focused instead on a forensic unpicking of the events of 23 February 2020 using the cellphone footage, CCTV footage, police interviews and forensic science testimony. And, after completing two weeks of exhaustive jury selection, defense attorneys struck 11 potential Black jurors, leaving a final jury of 11 white members and one Black member, vastly disproportionate to Glynn county’s racial demographics. Arbery’s mother described the selection as “devastating” at the time, but added she remained confident the jury would “make the right decision”. Judge Timothy Walmsley acknowledged the appearance of “intentional discrimination” by the attorneys but concluded his hands were tied by the matter as the attorneys had not articulated deliberate discrimination as they struck each Black juror. As the trial began the audacity and racism from the defense side continued. Bryan’s lawyer, Kevin Gough, who had complained throughout jury selection that the pool did not contain enough “Bubbas or Joe six-packs” (a reference to white middle-aged males without a college degree) also complained about peaceful activists who sat outside the courthouse each day. These activists included Arbery’s soft-spoken aunt Diane, in her late 60s, who sat on the lawn in a fold-out chair recalling stories of her nephew to journalists and campaigners. Later, in a statement branded “reprehensible” by Walmsley, Gough objected to Black pastors being allowed into the courtroom to console Arbery’s mother and father during a trial that saw videos of their son’s death played repeatedly and graphic autopsy images of his bloodied body. “There’s only so many pastors they [Arbery’s family] can have. If their pastor’s Rev Al Sharpton right now, that’s fine. But that’s it. We don’t want any more Black pastors in here or others,” said Gough, a former chair of the Glynn county Republican party and a disgraced former public defender. Travis McMichael himself would be the defense’s last witness. He claimed was forced to fire three times on Arbery, who was unarmed, with his 12-gauge Remington shotgun because he feared for his and his father’s life. (Gregory McMichael was armed with a .357 magnum handgun.) Under cross-examination McMichael was forced to concede he had not witnessed Arbery taking part in any break-ins that day and had never cited an attempt to conduct a citizen’s arrest during initial interviews with police. Prosecutors would later argue this highlighted how the alibis had been concocted after the murder. It was during closing that the defense cast their attention to Arbery himself, with each of the three attorneys attempting to blame the 25-year-old for his own death. Laura Hogue, representing Greg McMichael, argued that Arbery had “no socks to cover his long, dirty toenails” that he was a “recurring night-time intruder” whose presence was “frightening and unsettling”. She argued in front of the jury and Arbery’s parents, seated in the public gallery, that their son’s life had gone “astray” from that of “a beautiful teenager with a broad smile” to someone “acting erratically when approached and making terrible, unexpected, illogical choices”. “I realise, probably more than any of you, what an incredibly unpopular thing that is to say. But in a courtroom, with Greg McMichael facing the charge of murder, somebody’s got to say it,” she said. “And believe me I’m proud to be the one to say it.” Ultimately the depths to which the defense sank did not work on the jury. The video of Arbery’s murder told its own objective story, a fact that prosecutor Linda Dunikoski alluded to after the trial was complete. Speaking at the same lectern as Sharpton had, the senior assistant district attorney for Cobb county said: “The verdict today was a verdict based on the facts and based on the evidence. And that was our goal. To bring that to that jury, so they could do the right thing, because the jury system works in this country. She continued: “And when you present the truth to people and they can see it, they will do the right thing.”Isabella Burrows, 19, started working at PetSmart in Michigan just ahead of the holiday shopping season in 2020. “It was one of the worst things I’ve had to work through. We didn’t have enough people to deal with those crowds. We had three registers and there were lines around and out the doors for how much traffic we had,” said Burrows. This year, Burrows is scheduled to work from 3 to 11.30pm on Black Friday at a store one hour away from where she lives. She was transferred from a closer store in May after complaining to human resources that her manager downplayed and dismissed the tragic death of her 12-year-old brother two days after it happened. Though she has different managers at her new store, she still fears asking anything from management, while still grappling with the trauma from the incident at her previous store, ongoing worries about Covid-19, and bracing for the influx of store traffic and aggressive customers during the holiday shopping season. “For everything that inconveniences customers, it affects us just as much. We don’t have control over prices in our stores or how much we receive of a product,” said Burrows, who is also a member of the advocacy group United for Respect. “I think that’s something people forget sometimes: that we’re people too.” Retail sales in November and December are expected to increase between 8.5% and 10.5% – an all-time record – compared with 2020, according to the National Retail Federation. And this despite ongoing supply chain issues, the decision of some retailers including Walmart and Target, to close on Thanksgiving, and employers’ continued struggle to find and retain enough workers. “The week of Thanksgiving and Black Friday into Christmas is the worst time of the year to work at Walmart, especially for cashiers and self-checkout hosts because of the sheer volume of customers who flood into the stores and become volatile and angry over issues not within our control, such as merchandise they want is out of stock,” said Peter Naughton, a Walmart cashier and self-checkout host in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. “We all deserve better and more respect, appreciation, better compensation, and understanding that we are not robots but human beings.” An Amazon worker, who requested to remain anonymous, described Amazon’s peak season, where workers are scheduled to work extra shifts to meet the surge in demand from holiday shopping as “hell”. “Peak is hell,” the worker said. “Sometimes you don’t know your schedule until the day before and when you need HR for something you wait in line during your break. Most of the HR staff seems to have as high of a turnover rate as the rest of the building so you’re constantly getting wrong information from HR.” During peak season, their weekly shifts are increased from three 12-hour overnight shifts to five 11-hour shifts. Employees lose a 15-minute break from the 12-hour shift being reduced to 11 hours, the worker noted. “They really monitor time off task and supervisors walk around telling people what their rate is and telling them they need to be faster and work harder,” the worker said. “Reporting an injury, and there will be many during peak, to AmCare [Amazon’s on-site health centers] usually isn’t worth it because your manager has to be with you and you’re questioned by Safety, AmCare and management and the actual treatment is just typically Tylenol, an ice pack or a heating pack, maybe a few stretches and back to work.” Several worker protests in the US and abroad are planned for Black Friday this year as part of a Make Amazon Pay campaign to push Amazon to pay workers fairly, pay their taxes, and pay for the environmental impacts of their supply chains. Holiday travel is also expected to surge this year, with AAA predicting a 13% increase in Thanksgiving holiday travel over last year, nearly recovering to pre-pandemic levels, and an 80% projected rebound in air travel. Deloitte predicts holiday travel spending will be comparable with pre-pandemic levels. For low-wage essential workers in the retail and travel industries, the spike in demand during the holidays provides an opportunity to push employers to raise wages, benefits, and improve working conditions after what these workers have sacrificed throughout the pandemic. Across the US, airport workers have held strikes and protests demanding wage increases, improved working conditions and benefits in Tampa, Florida; Orlando, Florida; Houston; Denver; and Phoenix. On 18 November, contract workers at Orlando international airport held a one-day strike for better pay, as many workers are paid less than minimum wage, forced to rely on tips that they often don’t receive, while working severely understaffed. Gate agent and wheelchair attendant Joseph Gourgue Sr, 61, makes just $9 an hour without any benefits or paid time off, working at one of the busiest airports in the US. He has worked through the pandemic, even catching Covid-19 earlier this year, and went without pay while quarantining. “They don’t pay us enough,” said Gourgue, who described his work as providing social work in addition to customer service for travelers. “Thousands and thousands of kids come here with their parents to go to Disney World. I’m a grandfather. I would love to bring my grandkids to Disney World, but because of the lack of wages and unpaid time off, that cannot happen. I can’t even take time off during November or December.” Airport workers in Houston held a protest for higher pay on 17 November. Teresa McClatchie, an escalator security guard at the airport for six years, worked through the pandemic making only $9 an hour before her pay was recently increased to $12 an hour. She receives no affordable healthcare benefits, and has continued working through pain and swelling from a neck injury she incurred from a car accident. “On July 15, I had surgery. The following Monday, I had to work. If I didn’t come in to work, I’d be terminated,” said McClatchie. “Making ends meet on the pay is always a challenge because to get an apartment, you have to make at least two or three times the rent and you can’t do that with what we make, so we have to do two or three or four jobs in order to make that happen.”Those of us with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder crave absorption more than most. It would help if I were blessed with more practical skills. Basic competences in carpentry, knitting or even Lego would be so useful to me in my search for peace. As I am sorely lacking in these departments, when I do find a task to lose myself in, it is a source of great joy. Pooterishly, I have written before about a lockdown love I developed for ironing, my ardour for which is undimmed, but now it has a rival for my affection: log-stacking. A great load was discharged from the side of the log man’s van. I looked at the waist-high pile and sighed. Almost all previous experience in my life of tidying or imposing order merely constituted moving piles of stuff from one place to another. Pointless. Listlessly, without hope, I went about the task at hand. The first row I assembled didn’t look too shabby; the second row, even if I say so myself, fitted together rather nicely. With some judicious log selection and some slight rearranging, row three also came to look the part. Faster and faster I worked, as a spatial awareness I had never before tapped into slowly emerged, blinking into the light after more than 50 years dormant. I had never known absorption like it. My stack is my work of art. I have lovingly photographed it and it is now my screensaver. Later, glowing with peace, I went for a walk and chanced upon a dry-stone waller of my acquaintance at work. I have often admired his work. He reminded me that I had once said I would like to spend a day with him. I gushed about my log-stacking achievements and saw the fear in his eyes as it dawned on him that I would, after all, be asking to spend a day with him soon. What is log-stacking if not entry-level dry-stone walling? What a joy it will be. No wonder this bloke always looks so happy. • Adrian Chiles is a Guardian columnistDzaleka, Malawi’s first refugee camp, is about 25 miles north of the capital Lilongwe. Built 25 years ago in response to a surge of people fleeing genocide and wars in Burundi, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it was then home to between 10,000 and 14,000 refugees. But the camp now houses more than 48,000 people from east and southern African countries – four times more than its initial capacity. Several hundred continue to arrive each month, according to the UN refugee agency (UNHCR), and in August 181 babies were born there. The deteriorating situation in neighbouring Mozambique is swelling the numbers further, as is the government’s recent decree that an estimated 2,000 refugees who had over the years left Dzaleka to integrate into wider Malawian society should go back, citing them as a possible danger to national security. In April the ministry of homeland security gave a 14-day deadline for people to return to Dzaleka or risk sanctions. The decision was subject to a court injunction which has now been lifted. Now many refugees, some of whom have married into the local population, had families, and have businesses or jobs, complain they are expected to return to a camp where they have no accommodation or work. Tensions have been rising in Malawi recently over dramatic price increases for fuel, cooking oil and other foodstuffs. Expensive new banking charges have been imposed and last week police used teargas to disperse a crowd of more than 2,000 anti-government demonstrators in the country’s financial centre, Blantyre. The protesters attribute the rising cost of living to what they say is the “bad and incompetent” leadership of President Lazarus Chakwera. The worsening economic situation in one of the world’s poorest nations has also led to violence and vandalism against refugee businesses seen to be undercutting Malawian traders. But the return to Dzaleka has highlighted concerns about the camp’s desperately overstretched water supplies and healthcare provision. There is not enough accommodation or school places for the people already there, and minister of homeland security Richard Chimwendo Banda has conceded that the camp is overcrowded. The UNHCR has been urging the government to reconsider the directive to return people to the camp, saying that while Malawi is fully entitled to make such a request, the order to return people to an overcrowded facility has “serious human rights implications”. Addressing the media in Lilongwe on the refugees integrated outside of the camp in April, Banda said: “We are not chasing them, and we just want them to be where they should be, those who have businesses … will have to operate from Dzaleka. “There is not enough accommodation at the camp, but we are coming up with different resolutions to look at how best we can settle that, for example we are facilitating self-repatriation to decongest the camp,” he said. Like many asylum seekers, Walimu Nduwayezu sees a return to Dzaleka as a punishment for himself and his family after their successful integration into the community. Nduwayezu, 60, a Rwandan refugee and a father of four, lost his business outside the camp when the government ordered them to relocate. He is back in Dzaleka but says life is very tough and running a business at a profit is hard. “Take a look at our house, it’s made of thatching grass and we live hand to mouth,” he says. Another who has returned to Dzaleka, Kenyan Miburo Aajman, says: “Bringing those thousands of people outside back again will just congest the camp even more.” The 27-year-old says there are already food shortages inside the camp. Human rights groups are also expressing concern. Speaking at a press briefing in Lilongwe, Gift Trapence, chair of the Human Rights Defenders Coalition (HRDC), called on the Malawian government to safeguard the refugees’ property. “We don’t want to see scenarios where people will take advantage to grab or ransack the refugees’ assets,” he says. Fidel Butoyi, 54, a Burundian community leader who is also chairman of the peace committee at the camp, has lived at Dzaleka since it opened. His application for asylum in Malawi has been under consideration for 28 years, he says. He says life is hard in the camp, especially for those without accommodation or shelter, and adds that hostility from local business people against refugee traders is increasing. Political instability and social unrest in the Great Lakes and Horn of Africa regions have driven a continual flow of refugees into Malawi for more than two decades. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The Grand Hotel is where I met the big bad world. In 1979, when I was 15, a work-experience place led to a part-time job as a commis chef, so I spent weekends as an underling in a huge, sweltering hotel kitchen full of moody, permanently hungover chefs preparing 1970s delicacies like prawn cocktail, black forest gateau and joints of meat and cauliflower cheese for the carvery restaurant. I still have asbestos hands developed from handling sizzling pans, can chop carrots in that show-offy chef way and have a scar on my finger to prove it (all of which I’m still, ridiculously, quite proud of). I was constantly sworn at and occasionally shoved out of the way for messing up. It was an exhilarating and slightly terrifying crash course in growing up, and I loved every minute of it. I left in 1981 and the hotel was boarded up for half of the following 40 years. It was easy to see why: the Grand had opened in 1879, and a century later the rickety back of house still felt Dickensian (thrillingly so in my eyes, though not the hotel inspector’s). The crumbling stonework had become so dangerous by 2002 that it was forced to close. Every time I went home to Birmingham, I’d walk past the scaffolded building and wonder if the palace that once hosted Winston Churchill, James Cagney and Charlie Chaplin would ever reopen its doors. At one point it was almost demolished, but the Victorian Society came to the rescue and helped secure a Grade-II listing, protecting the huge site on Colmore Row, one of Birmingham’s most picturesque streets, from developers. It finally reopened in May this year after a decade-long, £45m restoration and, I was delighted to discover, now looks grander than ever. It is attracting Hollywood royalty again, too – Tom Cruise stayed while filming in the city, and had his car nicked from outside. Welcome to Birmingham, Tom! The hotel has retained its imposing French Renaissance facade, and Arts &amp; Crafts and Victorian features, including an exquisite staircase with marble-and-gold columns, and intricate moulding in the Louis XIV-style ballroom (previously known as the Grosvenor, where I used to serve food at banquets for up to 400) with golden electroliers hanging from the ceiling. As it’s an old hotel, the 185 rooms are refreshingly non-formulaic: varying in size and shape but generally roomy, in simple muted tones with large bathrooms (marble sinks, heated mirrors and Molton &amp; Brown smellies) and high ceilings. There are some nice touches – yoga mats, retro rotary telephones, Nespresso machines – and the odd not-so-nice one, such as plastic flowers. Considering the city-centre location, we had a wonderful night’s sleep – the clever overlapping curtains and excellent sound-proofing block out all the light and hubbub. By day the large sash windows offer views over Saint Philip’s Cathedral and churchyard, and the fabled back of Rackhams. It’s a shame the entrance is now on a side road, not at the front – it means the new reception is a bit pokey for such a prestigious hotel. Luckily, the adjoining Madeleine, the opulent ground-floor cocktail bar, fills that void as the heart of the hotel. It’s all dark wood panelling, gothic fireplaces, modern globe chandeliers and Corinthian window columns, furnished in rust red, burnt orange and warm pink velvet and leather. The cocktails are lush, too, particularly the signature Round Midnight, a deliciously smoky brandy concoction served with a frozen plum acting as an ice cube, and fragrant woodsmoke spilling dramatically over the rim. And so to the restaurant. As someone who learned to both cook and love food right here, I wanted to be wowed by Isaac’s, the new basement restaurant named after the hotel’s founder, Isaac Horton. Sadly, the “New York-inspired brasserie-style restaurant” concept didn’t work for me, neither did the American comfort food menu. There were either too many flavours or not enough: my sister’s half a lobster (£26) was smothered in a Madeira and cayenne hollandaise that completely overpowered the seafood, while my tuna carpaccio was almost tasteless. My son liked his short-rib burger (£15) but his starter of crispy chicken wings (£6) were not. My dinner was saved by the southern-crumbed cod (£19), a lovely hunk of well-cooked fish, served with grits. Like the rest of the hotel, the brasserie looks the part, with gleaming pine-green tiles and leather booths, but is let down by the details. Old black-and-white photography is an obvious choice, but the images are unmemorable; and why play generic modern pop when there is such a wealth of brilliant American music from the very era the restaurant decor aims to evoke? Hearing some old classics would certainly have been more in keeping for my walk down memory lane, not to mention the glamour and civic pride this Brummie grande dame has rekindled after two decades in mothballs. It’s a joy to see the city’s most monumental hotel back in business. Standing in the beautiful historic ballroom, I can picture the Peaky Blinders schmoozing in here with local politicians in Birmingham’s heyday. • The trip was provided by the Grand Hotel, doubles from £129 B&amp;BA north London pub, walls dripping vinyl. Fingers white on an acoustic guitar, spittle roared on to microphone. For folk-punk star Frank Turner, it’s a gig like hundreds he has played on his 17-year path from squat parties to arenas. The song, though, is unlike any he’s performed before. “My father is called Miranda these days,” he sings. “She’s a proud transgender woman and my resentment has started to fade …” A lifetime of hurt, anger, abandonment, self-discovery, reconciliation and tentative closure are wrapped up in these opening lines of Miranda, the anthemic glam centrepiece of Turner’s forthcoming album FTHC. It tells a story for our times: in 2015, after years of bitter estrangement and decades of acrimony, Turner saw his 72-year-old parent, a banker turned bookshop owner, at the funeral of a family friend. In their 30-second encounter, she told Turner she was thinking of beginning the process of transitioning. “I just was like: ‘OK, cool, whatever’, and walked away from it,” Turner says. At the time, the pair had not been on speaking terms: “I wasn’t in a good place.” But as a fundamentally inclusive person (Turner works with the US LGBTQ+ charity The Ally Coalition and frequently raises money for them at his gigs), his hot-headedness soon gave way to understanding. “Obviously, right from the beginning, it was like: ‘If this is serious, then I will back it,’” he says. The root of Turner’s animosity lies in early childhood. Another FTHC song, Fatherless, digs back into Turner’s despair at being “shipped off to a dormitory” at prep school at eight and then to Eton, where he “cried myself to sleep each night” until he felt “dead inside”. It is only through recent therapy that he realised it was “really fucked up. That’s how my dad was raised, and it was kind of expected I would do the same thing. But I found it extremely traumatic … I had a long history of self-harm and mental health issues as a kid that was entirely and completely caused by that, and I have scars to prove it. The second that I became even vaguely socially or politically conscious, all I wanted to do was escape that world and have nothing to do with it ever again.” His temper-prone father was, he says, “filled with rage” at Turner’s teenage lifestyle, and they had “volcanic” rows over tattoos or his DIY mohawk aged 16 that “looked quite a lot like mange … It was never violent, but it was everything up to that, and it was extremely fucking unpleasant.” Their relationship “oscillated between extremely awkward and nonexistent” and Turner left home as a teenager, opting to live in north London squats. In retrospect, he wonders whether his “small-C conservative” father envied his punk reinvention: “When I was finding a community and an identity that had absolutely nothing to do with where I was raised, I wonder whether there was a degree of almost jealousy on my dad’s part, which then expressed itself in negativity. “Certainly, one can see that my father was a person who was not at peace with themselves,” says Turner. “But then we barely had a relationship at all … I didn’t see my dad as a kid, partly because I was at boarding school and partly because he was in London on business a lot of the time … which wasn’t really business.” Increasingly, that business was infidelity, which came to light in Turner’s early 20s. “There was an explosion,” he recalls, which put paid to his parents’ marriage and, in time, his relationship with his father, too. “I said to myself: ‘I’m not gonna call my dad until he calls me’, and it was about nine years. I reached a point where it was just not a part of my life. When I met my wife, I told her that I wouldn’t go to my dad’s funeral if he died.” But in 2018, Turner’s terminally ill uncle arranged a reconciliation at his deathbed, by which time his father, after a lengthy transition, was living as Miranda. “Immediately I felt that this was a person who was a lot more considerate,” he remembers. “More aware of the people around them and of their impact on other people. Less boringly male and forthright. Miranda is a really nice person, and my dad was a prick.” “Miranda, it’s lovely to meet you,” Turner sings on Miranda but, while he immediately embraced her identity, forgiveness was a slower process. “When anger and resentment and rage didn’t die immediately,” he admits, “there was a lot for me to deal with.” Gradually, a relationship has bloomed, although their familial stiff upper lip has prevented them discussing Miranda’s journey at length just yet. She started turning up to Turner’s shows, whereas his father had only previously attended two gigs “both of which he ostentatiously slept through”. She even appeared beside his DJ decks on stage at a tattoo festival, dancing. “It was the moment where I’m either gonna completely crack or I have to find it funny, enjoy the moment,” he says. “Since then we’ve found our even keel. She’s really fun, really chatty and she cares. [She’s] interested in who I am and what I do, which my dad never was at all. It’s always going to be a work in progress, but we’re doing all right.” A weight lifted, even? “Absolutely, yes,” Turner nods. “I’ve gone from saying I wouldn’t go to somebody’s funeral to: we’re going to see each other for Christmas.” He gives a warm smile. “And I’m excited about that.” Miranda is out on Friday. The album FTHC is released on 11 Feb.My parents, who are in their 80s, attempted to contact their domestic appliances insurer, National Home Cover, when their dishwasher packed up. They were unable to reach it by phone or email. It turns out they had been notified by a scam email in April that their previous insurer, Domestic &amp; General (D&amp;G), had been bought out by National Home Cover, and they were asked to pay £284 to renew the policy. An online search flags this company as suspect. The modus operandi appears to be to target the elderly or infirm, take their money and then ignore any attempts at contact when a claim is made. IM, London Insurance scams that target elderly householders have soared during the pandemic. A common ruse is for cold-callers to claim they have taken over from D&amp;G, the country’s largest warranty provider for household appliances. D&amp;G says there are currently 23 injunctions against such scam companies. “The intelligence we have suggests that these rogue traders have similar strategies,” it tells me. “Some of the individuals in control of the enterprises are often involved in a number of different scams.” Campaign group Which? says a number of the scam companies it investigated are “based” in Brighton and Hove, which is where National Home Cover claims to operate. In fact, the addresses are PO boxes. Adam French of Which? says: “We suspect that unscrupulous firms are working together to target vulnerable people – in some cases taking four-figure sums every month to cover appliances that don’t even exist. While the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has issued warnings, some firms simply reappear under different names.” No one answered National Home Cover’s customer service line when I called, nor was there a response to my email. Brighton and Hove Trading Standards confirmed it was investigating. Fortunately, your parents’ bank, Lloyds, refunded the premium. Anyone else who has been scammed should also make a claim via their bank which, if it has signed up to the contingent reimbursement model, is pledged to refund stolen funds. Consider whether you really need the cover, which often just duplicates manufacturers’ warranties. But if you do, choose a company registered with, and therefore regulated by, the FCA. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsEvery year Dontae Sharpe braces himself for the pardoning of the Thanksgiving turkey. It’s not that he objects to turkeys being spared the butcher’s knife. It’s that, from where he’s sitting, there are far more urgent candidates for a reprieve from the governor of North Carolina than a bird. For a quarter of a century Sharpe watched the pardoning of the Thanksgiving turkey on a prison TV, having been sentenced in 1995 to life imprisonment for a murder that he did not commit. Even after he was exonerated and released in August 2019, he was unable to clear his name or claim compensation because the same governor who spared the turkeys had yet to pardon him. “Every time the governor pardoned the turkey I’d think, there we go again,” Sharpe told the Guardian at his home in the suburbs of Charlotte, North Carolina. “I’d laugh. There are humans who need pardoning, not turkeys.” This Thanksgiving, Sharpe has at last managed to avoid the annual turkey humiliation. On 12 November the incumbent Democratic governor of North Carolina, Roy Cooper, granted him a pardon of innocence – rendering Sharpe fully free and clear of any lingering judicial cloud for the first time in almost 28 years. *** Sharpe was 19 on 7 April 1994 when he was arrested for the murder of a 33-year-old white man, George Radcliffe, who had come to the teenager’s overwhelmingly black neighborhood in Greenville, North Carolina, in search of drugs. The shooting of a white man in a black area was a perfect storm, given the toxic state of race relations in the 1990s US south. “A white man gets killed in a black neighborhood – that was a no-no in North Carolina when I was growing up,” Sharpe said. “Whites run the city, they are the ones in power. So when that white man got shot everybody said it, even I said it: ‘Whoever killed that white guy is through.’” Two months after Radcliffe’s murder the police arrested Sharpe. There was no forensic evidence linking him to the shooting. The prosecution’s case depended almost entirely on the testimony of a single witness, Charlene Johnson, who was 13 at the time of the killing and had recently been discharged from a three-week stay at a psychiatric hospital. That fact was not disclosed to Sharpe’s defense lawyers at trial. Nor were forensic details about the position of Radcliffe’s body, which prosecutors knew conflicted with Johnson’s eyewitness account. Years later a medical examiner testified that had she been aware of those forensic details she would have told the jury that Johnson’s testimony was medically and factually impossible. Johnson herself recanted her statement, saying she had not been present at the crime scene and had made up the story under pressure from detectives and with the inducement of a $500 reward. At several points over the course of his 25-year incarceration Sharpe was offered plea deals that would have set him free on the spot. He turned down every one. “I didn’t do the murder, so I’m not going to say I did it just to get out of prison. I told my lawyer, ‘Don’t bring me any other plea, I’m not taking it.’” So he carried on fighting, working with his lawyers at the Wrongful Convictions Clinic of Duke University’s law school, writing thousands of letters, filing habeas petitions. At times he got close to proving his innocence in court, only to be knocked back. But he never lost hope. “I made a conscious effort that prison wasn’t going to destroy me, that I was going to grow up inside the right way and not like a convict. I grew up in there. It changed my view of the world, helped me learn how to sacrifice and hold on to your principles. To fight and not give up.” Footage included in a BBC documentary on Sharpe’s case shows the scene in court in 2019 when the judge ordered a new trial and the prosecutor dismissed all charges. Sharpe is seen slumped over the defendant’s desk, head in his hands, shoulders heaving with immense sobs. What was he thinking in that moment? “I couldn’t believe it. I was scared, fearful. Of the new life. Going back into a new society. Just the fear of the unknown.” Within hours he was a free man. But his ordeal was not over. Sharpe was one of hundreds of exonerated Americans who have been released from prison, their wrongful convictions overturned, who remain trapped in a form of judicial limbo. According to the National Registry of Exonerations, 2,891 people have been exonerated in the US since 1989, but for many of them their struggle for justice carries on long after the prison gates have been flung open. After Innocence, a non-profit organization that has helped more than 800 exonerees in the US after their release, points out that in 13 states, including Arizona, Georgia and Pennsylvania, exonerated prisoners are offered zero compensation. Other states offer meagre recompense – in Wisconsin it’s $5,000 for each year of imprisonment, capped at $25,000. Several states impose a pardon trap, whereby prisoners who have proved their innocence to the satisfaction of a judge still have the pall of their wrongful conviction hanging over them pending a formal pardon. In Maine, all compensation is withheld until the governor grants a pardon – an Alice in Wonderland concept given that the former prisoner has to ask to be pardoned for something they never did. “I believe most Americans expect that if you can prove in a court that you were imprisoned for a crime that you did not commit, then you should be eligible for compensation,” said Jon Eldan, founder and director of After Innocence. “But under North Carolina’s current compensation statute, for many exonerees, innocence will not be enough: you must receive a pardon, which is in the sole discretion of the governor.” When Sharpe emerged from 25 years in prison he found that his fate remained entirely in the governor’s hands. In North Carolina, prisoners like Sharpe whose cases are not picked up by the state’s Innocence Inquiry Commission are left at the mercy of the governor’s discretion. For more than two years Sharpe had to live with the consequences. He was a free man, but in the absence of a pardon he had no right to claim compensation and struggled to find work. Prospective employees expressed unease about his overturned murder conviction, exoneration notwithstanding. While he was in prison he ran the commissary for 10 years, gaining a reputation as a skilled and reliable store manager – yet in the outside world he could not even get a job stocking warehouse shelves. “Employers would ask if I had a felony. I would explain I was exonerated, but a lot of times people don’t listen to you. They don’t hear,” Sharpe said. Finding a place of his own also turned out to be difficult. Property owners balked at renting to a man once classed a felon, exoneration be damned. It took the intervention of Forward Justice, a non-partisan law center working in the US south, to secure him a home. Sharpe said he grew used to the limitations of living as a free yet unpardoned exoneree. But it irked him. “It made me feel, dang, being innocent you’re still not worthy or worth it to society. I did nothing to get a murder on my record, but it’s still got me looked down upon. It felt like I wasn’t talking when I’m talking, like folk weren’t hearing me, like I wasn’t even human.” The final push for a pardon came in September when the Rev T Anthony Spearman, president of the North Carolina NAACP, began what has become known as the Freedom Friday vigils outside the governor’s mansion. The vigils were joined by the Rev William Barber, co-chair of the Poor People’s Campaign. The alliance kept up the pressure until Cooper granted Sharpe the pardon. Despite the victory, Barber told the Guardian that the struggle should have been unnecessary. “Once the courts exonerated Dontae, he should have been pardoned the same day. Innocent people shouldn’t have to wait years to clear their names and to be eligible for compensation from the state. North Carolina must end its pardon system where the governor holds all the power through a process that lacks any transparency,” he said. Sharpe said the pardon will now allow him to move on. There’s a large financial implication: given his years of imprisonment he will be able to claim maximum compensation of $750,000, which he hopes to use to buy his mother a house and to set up a foundation helping families devastated by wrongful convictions. The Freedom Friday vigils will continue, pressing the governor to pardon other exonerees caught in limbo. Sharpe, who now works with Forward Justice campaigning for automatic pardons in North Carolina, plans to campaign along with them. But first there is Thanksgiving. He’ll be celebrating at his mother’s home in Greenville. “I’m going to sit back and be thankful for my family and my mom, because for a long time I didn’t know whether I’d ever be with them again.” He plans to do the cooking. “Probably deep-fried turkey,” he said.Aboriginal elders, health organisations and frontline workers in the Northern Territory’s Covid outbreak have lashed out at false information about public health measures on social media, with the NT chief minister blaming the misinformation on “tinfoil hat wearing tossers, sitting in their parents’ basements in Florida”. Over the past few days false claims have been circulating online that Aboriginal people from Binjari and Rockhole were being forcibly removed from their homes and taken to enforced quarantine in Howard Springs, and people including children were being forcibly vaccinated. None of these claims are true, according to the Aboriginal Medical Services Alliance Northern Territory (AMSANT), the local Aboriginal health services and community leaders. On Thursday, the chief minister, Michael Gunner, laid into “conspiracy theorists” online, blaming overseas groups for the misinformation. “Hello to all the conspiracy theorists overseas watching this. Please get a life,” Gunner told a media briefing on Thursday. “There are ridiculous, untrue rumours about the ADF’s involvement. As we all know, they aren’t carrying weapons – they are carrying fresh food for people. “Ninety-nine-point-nine-nine per cent of the BS that is flying around on the internet about the Territory is coming from flogs outside the Territory – mostly America, Canada and the UK, people who have nothing better to do than make up lies about us because their own lives are so small and so sad. “If anybody thinks that we are going to be distracted or intimidated by tinfoil hat wearing tossers, sitting in their parents’ basements in Florida, then you do not know us Territorians,” he said. The Jawoyn traditional owners of Binjari and Rockhole said they were “very hurt by the untrue comments being made in the media and social media” about their situation. “We have been treated with a lot of respect and appreciate all the support being given by these support personnel people. We are in lockdown because we’re in the biggest fight of our lives. We’re trying to keep safe. We’re trying to do the right thing by the community and Katherine,” they said in a statement. “We don’t need people out there creating another flood for us. We don’t appreciate outside people making comments that are untrue. “People on social media saying that our people are being mistreated need to realise their comments are hurting the very people they claim to care about. We want people to respect our privacy and show respect for our feelings,” they said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Luke Ellis, an Aboriginal health worker with Katherine Aboriginal community-controlled health organisation Wurli Wurlinjang, also spoke out after testing positive to the virus. Ellis took to Twitter on Wednesday from quarantine at Howard Springs. “The ‘army’ isn’t going into communities with soldiers and guns, the air force is helping out with trucks, drivers and freeing up the police in checkpoints,” Ellis wrote. “The reason that people are being moved from Binjari is that overcrowding is a huge issue in Binjari and Rockhole. Isolating at home is not feasible when 20-30 people live in one home.” Ellis said he was a part of the health team that did vaccination drives at Rockhole and Binjari. “In the past people have been hesitant about getting the vaccine. People have been hesitant because of misinformation. But in all my time doing vaccines in the community, not a single person was ‘forced’ to have it. We respected people’s wishes to decline even though we knew that this could potentially bring disaster. “Not everything is perfect. There are legit issues and causes for concerns about the way things are unfolding. But they are being drowned out by the crazies who are using this situation to fuel their own agenda.” Ellis said his grandmother was part of the stolen generations and he was particularly offended by comparisons between Howard Springs quarantine and “what she went through”. “Any comparison to stolen generation is spitting on what those poor souls went through in those days,” he said. Aboriginal members of Norforce are supporting ADF activities around Katherine and several Indigenous members of the ADF are involved in delivering food to vulnerable communities, an ADF spokesperson said. “ADF personnel serve in a supporting role to Northern Territory police for this task and are not empowered or authorised to conduct any law enforcement activities under this arrangement,” they said. Earlier, the ADF’s NT Covid-19 response commander, Colonel Tim Rutherford, told AAP the social media claims were “lies”. The territory detected one new case overnight, bringing the outbreak to 52 cases after a teenager from Binjari tested positive.Environmental campaigners have said a $200,000 fine issued to Whitehaven Coal for water theft at its Maules Creek mine near Boggabri “will not stop this repeated behaviour”. The fine was handed down in the New South Wales Land and Environment Court on Wednesday after the company entered a guilty plea for taking 1bn litres of surface water without a licence over three years from 2016 to 2019. The charges were brought by the Natural Resources Access Regulator (NRAR) for breaches of the water management act and carried a maximum penalty of $2m. The judgment accepted there had been undefined actual harm to surface water flows and it was likely harm was caused to vegetation around Back Creek and to its aquatic ecology as a result of the offence. It found Whitehaven’s failure to comply with water regulations undermined the scheme in a substantial way and considered the seriousness of the offence was at the low end of the medium range. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The judgment factored in mitigating circumstances, including Whitehaven’s early guilty plea and the fact it had cooperated with authorities. “Taking into account my finding on objective seriousness and mitigating factors, I consider the appropriate penalty is $250,000 which will be reduced by 25% to $200,000 in light of the early guilty plea,” it says. The Boggabri farmer Sally Hunter said the fine did not come close to reflecting the seriousness of the offence. “While farmers were ploughing in their crops and stock were dying during the drought, Whitehaven took one billion litres of water without a licence,” she said. “This water, at this time was priceless, and would have been a lifesaver for lots of farms and businesses.” The fine is one of a number of breaches Whitehaven has been accused of at its mining sites. This week the NSW Environment Protection Authority (EPA) said it had directed the company to suspend blasting at the Maules Creek site while it investigated seven blasts from the mine that are alleged to have generated uncontained and potential toxic fumes between 1 October 2021 and 11 November 2021. Earlier this month, the EPA fined the company $30,000 for discharging dirty water from a failed sediment dam at its Tarrawonga coalmine near Boggabri. It was the third alleged discharge of dirty water by the mine and the EPA said it had found high levels of metal and bicarbonates discharged from the mine site in to nearby Goonbri Creek. Hunter said thefine handed down on Wednesday “will not stop this repeated behaviour”. “Ordinary members of the public are fined far more for much less,” she said. “It’s long past time for the NSW Perrottet Government to get tough on mining companies and appropriately penalise them for the heinous crimes they are committing.” Whitehaven said in a statement the judgment had noted the offence was at the low end of the medium range and the case had not established there had been adverse impact on other water users. The company said there was no contention by NRAR that the passive take of water was intentional or premeditated and “it was not established any material environmental harm arose from the passive take of water”. “During an investigation spanning two years, NRAR comprehensively examined the water management at Maules Creek,” the statement said. “Whitehaven has previously acknowledged shortcomings in the operation of some of its systems and has made significant progress to implement measures to improve clean water management at the mine.” Grant Barnes, the chief regulatory officer at NRAR, said the water regulator had been working in and out of court to remedy the illegal water take. “This judgment needs to be viewed in the context of our complementary work outside of the court room,” he said. “In addition to the fine, we have entered into an enforceable undertaking with Maules Creek Coal which requires it to take a range of actions including decommissioning a dam and updating its biodiversity management plan.” He said the enforceable undertaking strengthened Wednesday’s judgment and had been agreed to by both parties “as part of the mine operator’s movement to a position of water compliance”. But Georgina Woods, a spokesperson for the Lock the Gate Alliance, said people were “sick of mining companies getting away with serious crimes with insignificant repercussions”. She said it was particularly jarring in a week in which an activist had been sentenced to 12 months in jail for blockading coal trains in the state’s Hunter region. “It is difficult to see how the public can have faith in the legislation that governs coalmining companies when it is so clearly failing to keep the companies in line,” she said.The killing of George Floyd by a white police officer may have taken place thousands of miles away, but his agonising cry – “I can’t breathe” – reverberated in the UK, too. In fact, it became the catalyst for the largest wave of anti-racist protests in British history, taking place in more than 260 towns and cities last summer. These protests were very much rooted in the British experience. Demonstrators carried handmade placards with the names of black Britons killed by the British police; they demanded justice for members of the Windrush generation threatened with deportation and the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire; they decried the high Covid-19 death rate among communities of colour. Statues were toppled, streets renamed and venerable British institutions such as the Bank of England were forced to reckon with their ties to the slave trade. A year later, Black British Lives Matter, edited by Lenny Henry and Marcus Ryder, takes time to reflect on this extraordinary movement. The book comprises essays from 19 prominent black figures, including the historian David Olusoga, the architect David Adjaye, the Labour MP Dawn Butler and Baroness Doreen Lawrence, the mother of murdered teenager Stephen. It is an effective primer for those keen to understand why Floyd’s death drove hundreds of thousands of people to the street. The essays offer a 360-degree portrait of the black British experience, taking in health, the criminal justice system, politics, art, journalism, business and education. They interweave the writers lived experiences with their expertise. This is expressed most powerfully in Lawrence’s essay, Black British Mothers Matter. She writes about how the tragic events of 22 April 1993, when her 18-year-old son was murdered by a gang of racists, have defined her life since. She had just turned 40. “I am aware that to many people I am ageless,” she writes. “I am ageless in the way that people in the public eye often are frozen in time by a single event … I am also ageless because people don’t always see me as human.” Her tireless battle to get justice for her son, and force the country to confront the reality of racism, has transformed her into a symbol, but this has also dehumanised her. “And I need you to remember my essential humanness and the essential humanness of all Black mothers,” she writes. This plea to recognise black Britons’ humanity recurs throughout the book, from Marverine Cole’s account of mental ill-health, which deconstructs the devastating consequences of the “strong Black woman” stereotype, to Ryder’s closing essay, which describes his own horrific encounters with the police. So large is the political crisis to which the book is responding that some of the essays only manage to scratch the surface of their subject, while others at times feel repetitive. But what the collection occasionally lacks in depth, it makes up for in range. There is certainly enough variation in style and approach to keep the reader interested. The essays are most effective when the authors use their experiences and expertise to address a specific problem. Butler laments the smattering of black and Asian representation in overwhelmingly white institutions such as parliament, arguing that, as a result, minorities can easily be pitted against each other. Too often there is “one person of colour to argue for a policy that would deny their own parents entry into the UK versus another politician of colour arguing for policies that would benefit other people of colour”. A “critical mass” of black politicians would avoid this. It is clear, though, that the response to last summer’s Black Lives Matter protests must go beyond just representation. Protesters called for the dismantling of racism and vowed to weed it out of society. In Olusoga’s chapter, which is an interview conducted by Henry, the historian admits this surprised him. “It never occurred to me that it was even possible. And maybe I’m right and they’re wrong, or the other way around. The fact is I put limitations on what I thought was possible; I always presumed racism would always be here, that it was a given.” Perhaps that is what makes this moment critically important, and what makes the breadth of experience reflected in this collection justified: whereas we have become used to simply asking for space to breathe, our imagination has now been expanded. We see that not only is a new world possible, it is ours to win. • Black British Lives Matter is published by Faber (£16.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.It is a mark of the instability of our times that the game of association football in England may have a chance of changing for the better. That there is still no guarantee should go without saying. The fan-led review of football governance is hardly the first attempt by politicians to correct the course of the national sport. Whether all 47 recommendations complete the long journey into implementation is even more uncertain. But the fact that no one is writing it off on publication day makes for a pleasant change. The great expectation around the review has come in part because of the belief that, this time, it could be for real. There are a number of reasons for this, not least the identity of the chair. Tracey Crouch is a politician respected across parliament and throughout the game. She has led an inquiry that was thorough and inclusive. We’ll call it the Crouch review from here. Another big reason is quite the pickle that English men’s football finds itself in. It has never been more popular nor more lucrative, yet barely any of its clubs are profitable, its divided governance is commonly ineffectual and its cultural clout means every misstep is a national incident. The game has had a long time to sort itself out and has failed to do so. Even the heightened circumstances of the pandemic did not result in greater sustainability or a more even redistribution of resources. Instead we got the European Super League. It was in response to this plutocratic wheeze that the government finally turned a delayed manifesto promise into reality. Something had to be done and so here we are. The proposal that underpins the Crouch review has been widely trailed: the creation of an independent regulator for English football. The IREF would have two primary responsibilities, one financial, one corporate. It would demand financial plans from a club’s owner and would be able to inspect the books at any point. It would also be able to make greater demands of the owners themselves, including asking that they pass an integrity test and resubmit to assessment every three years (as opposed to the current one-off criminal record check). Should any of the agreed criteria not be met, the IREF could revise the terms under which any club was allowed to compete or remove that right. That’s a big change. The IREF would be like Ofcom, licensed by government but not run by it. It would not be controlled by the current powers of the game, and there is an interesting paragraph or six in the review about why the Football Association has not been given control. Crouch wants to get a “shadow” regulator up and running as soon as possible, even before the formulation of legislation, to hit the ground running (and perhaps prevent any drain on momentum). The IREF has, it is understood, won government approval. It is far from the only structural change suggested by the review. There are some populist measures that suit the political times: a golden share for fans to veto certain changes at their club (the colours, for example, or the sale of the stadium) and a trial that would allow League Two fans to booze in the stands. There is more gritty stuff too, particularly when it comes to financial imbalances. The Crouch review looked at a number of ways of controlling costs, including wage caps, and largely decided against them. Instead it argues for a “prudential” approach to funding. The details are to be left to the IREF to devise but, just like a bank in a stress test, clubs will be expected to have enough capital and liquidity at all times to ensure their ongoing operation. On the issue of owner injections, the cash that often causes competitive imbalance but equally keeps a number of clubs alive, the Crouch review argues that it should be proportionate to a club’s current finances, a solution that will benefit bigger clubs, but only if they have the money in the bank. On parachute payments, the issue the EFL believes to be the most iniquitous in football, the Crouch review has stepped back. It will be for the Premier League and the EFL to work out something between themselves “with compromises on both sides”. They have until the end of the year, after which the review recommends independent advice. If that doesn’t work, the IREF will work something out for them. “Eyes on the prize” has been the slogan of fans groups, who would now have actual – if limited – control over clubs. For the FA, there is a need for reform with the prospect of greater control in future. For the EFL, sustainability is on the table at last, if not currently the redistribution it is looking for. As ever, what the Premier League thinks is both most important and least discernible. Its statement welcoming the review took care to acknowledge that issues needed addressing, particularly “to restore and retain [fans’] trust in football’s governance”. But there were warnings too that “any reforms do not damage our game”. The Premier League may be riven by rivalry among its shareholders, exemplified by the Saudi-led takeover of Newcastle, but it has dominance over English football. The Crouch review would diminish these powers, while taking some of its greatest challenges off its hands. How it responds will be of interest. The Crouch review is a reality, but the politics is not finished yet.A developer of new low-cost, fire-resistant battery technology spun out of the University of Sydney is set to list on the London Stock Exchange. The company, Gelion plc, will be the university’s first market listing anywhere when it is scheduled to begin trading on the bourse’s Alternative Investment Market on November 30. It raised £16m ($30m), giving the company a market capitalisation of £154m ($A285m), and allowing Gelion to accelerate the research and production of new storage products, primarily zinc-bromide batteries. While the combination was originally patented in 1889, the university team led by Prof Thomas Maschmeyer created a zinc-bromide gel that they claim is a safer, longer-lasting and cheaper form of storage than the dominant lithium batteries. “It will not catch fire. If anything, it puts it out,” Maschmeyer said, detailing some of Gelion’s advantages. “It has that high temperature operation window [up to 50C] and it’s really super safe, recyclable and has a really low environmental footprint.” By contrast, lithium batteries are more of a fire hazard and perform less well in heat, requiring temperature controls and other engineering work, he said. Lithium now dominates the battery market because of its relatively high energy density, making it suitable for mobile applications from smartphones to electric vehicles. Other forms of storage, such as thermal energy or compressed air, are also vying for a share of a market that Bloomberg New Energy Finance this month predicted would grow from 17 gigawatts in 2020 to a cumulative 358GW by the decade’s end. So far, Gelion’s total sales have totalled about $1m as it prepared demonstration products using its Endure-branded battery. The company plans to use the funds raised from listing to expand its manufacturing site in Fairfield in Sydney’s west, and to start producing batteries in India. “I can see that Australian manufacturing actually being very substantially upgraded into potentially a gigawatt-hour a year capability,” Maschmeyer said. Gelion’s strategy hinges largely on convincing existing makers of lead-acid batteries to retrofit their operations to use zinc-bromide instead. Such a conversion to produce a 1GW-hour annual output would cost about $US16m ($22m), compared with an estimated $US76m for a rival EOS Energy to start a zinc-bromide plant from scratch, or $US135m for a similar-sized lithium plant, he said. Once zinc-bromide batteries can be produced at even a modest scale, their cost of operation will prove to be 25% less than lithium because they don’t need fire-suppression systems or airconditioning, Maschmeyer predicted. “The system costs go down, down, down, and so already at a low level of manufacturing, we are competitive,” he said “We don’t need 10GW hours [of scale] to get the manufacturing cost down.” Maschmeyer, who will step down as Gelion’s executive chairman, but remain its principal technology adviser, said the firm had chosen London over a Sydney listing in part because of tax incentives in the UK. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Australia is also a more risk-averse market with investors still spooked by the polarised debate over climate action unleashed during Tony Abbott’s election in 2013. “The climate wars of the Coalition have, you know, really hurt that whole investment climate and led to investment uncertainty, and everybody hates uncertainty,” he said. “It wasn’t a huge difference at the end of the day, but it was enough of a difference for us to go to the UK.” Li Daixin, a China-based storage analyst with Bloomberg New Energy Finance based, said a zinc-bromide battery “intrinsically has a lower energy density and lower charging/discharging rate [than lithium batteries] and thus has a much narrower application scenario”. “Also its further cost reduction is harder because of the lack of economies of scale,” Li said. “It mainly targets some stationary storage applications that require long-duration systems. So I don’t think it can be taken as a rival to lithium and instead could be complementary in the storage market for some application scenarios.” Other technologies in Gelion’s pipeline include developing silicon and sulfur additives that can improve lithium battery performance. This technology would be licensed to existing battery markers rather than the company trying to produce them. “We’re just making the lithium ion and lithium sulfur batteries more energy dense and less prone to thermal runaway waste,” Maschmeyer said. “So we’re not eating into the same markets [as zinc-bromide]. They’re completely separate markets.” The company expects to break even by early 2024. The listing will help boost current staff in Australia from 30 to 45. The University of Sydney’s 5% share in Gelion will be reduced to 3% after the listing dilutes its holding. The university’s support showed “what’s necessary for a startup to go all the way to listing and they’re putting their money where their mouth is,” Maschmeyer said “They’ve just been a real beacon.” This story was amended on 25 November 2021. The headline previously stated the company had listed. It is due to list on 30 November 2021. It also stated the company raised £154m ($A285m) when the correct figure was £16m, with the University of Sydney’s share reduced from 5% to 3%.Harper’s law is named after PC Andrew Harper, killed in pursuit of three quad bike thieves in 2019. It introduces mandatory life sentences for anyone whose crimes result in the death of an emergency service worker, and is expected to take effect at the start of 2022, after a successful campaign by Harper’s widow, Lissie. The pair were newlyweds when the police officer was killed. Some crimes and their subsequent prosecution demand systemic change; others feel simply unresolved by the legal outcome, and it’s hard in the moment to distinguish between the two. Harper’s killers, Henry Long, then aged 18, and Jessie Cole and Albert Bowers, both 17, were all cleared of murder and convicted of manslaughter. Their sentences weren’t insignificant – Long’s was 16 years; Cole and Bowers were both sentenced to 13 – but their conduct was unrepentant, chilling. It emerged after the trial that the jurors had been given extra security amid fears of potential intimidation by supporters of the defendants. It was understandable to perceive, as Lissie Harper did, that rather than facing justice, Long, Cole and Bowers had slipped through its technicalities and niceties, that their punishment was insignificant compared with the harm they had caused. It’s essentially to redress that balance – the loss of such an upstanding, public-spirited and altruistic character as Andrew Harper, distortedly mirrored in the leniency toward three antisocial, callous criminals – that Lissie Harper pursued this law change. Appeal judges had already rejected calls to increase the sentences. There is a principle at the core that is unarguable: people who put themselves at risk to protect others deserve a more ardent protective social shield than an ordinary citizen. It’s a principle that is echoed in rhetoric around ex-service personnel, prison officers, nurses and, more recently in the wake of Covid, bus and delivery drivers. In order for all of us to live peaceably, some must put themselves in danger, and gratitude for this demands a responsive reciprocity. The law is a social tool for mitigating those dangers. This, Harper’s law indicates, is more important than more abstract questions, such as whether it is possible or desirable for a judicial system to sort citizens into a hierarchy of good ones versus bad ones, and build different laws around each. It is highly questionable, however, whether giving a mandatory life sentence to anyone whose actions cause a death in service does actually protect those public servants. By definition, this new law will predominantly affect criminals whose actions accidentally resulted in death, since murder carries a mandatory life sentence anyway. Putting aside the ethical question of whether wrongdoing is better or worse when you didn’t mean it, there is the practical question of whether it’s possible to be deterred in advance from an act that you didn’t intend. So unless we believe that very long sentences will warn people off committing crime altogether (and we know from the three-strikes sentencing process in California that extremely harsh sentencing has only a marginal deterrent effect, offset from a social perspective by massive increases in the prison population), the protective force of Harper’s law is questionable. This isn’t to minimise the threats the emergency services face. Some 10,000 attacks on police officers, nurses, and other frontline staff take place every year. Ambulance drivers describe, in astonishment, the violence they face from people as they undertake the immediate business of saving lives. Prison officers give alarming accounts of surging violence, exacerbated by overcrowding and understaffing. The common factor across all of these tales of violence is that frontline workers are meeting with unprecedented rage and frustration, both in predictable contexts (policing, prisons) and unpredictable ones (A&amp;E). Public servants often account for this in ways that sound nebulous and unfixable: has the pandemic triggered a large-scale mental health crisis? Are public services so underfunded that previously routine situations have become sites of tremendous pressure and potential violence? These factors, hard but not impossible to quantify, are still a problem even if public discourse does not acknowledge them. Against this backdrop, many emergency service workers will feel about Harper’s law roughly as nurses felt about being clapped every Thursday: it’s nice to know you care, general public, but this display does very little to improve the lived reality of the challenges you say you care about. The underlying political agenda is grimly recognisable – a display of harshness to give the impression of competence and grip; a constructed enemy, to sort the nation into categories of those who are on the side of good versus those on the side of evil. It is tactically not unlike New Labour’s “tough on crime” shtick – sacrificing insignificant people (who in the case of antisocial behaviour orders, as likely as not couldn’t even vote) was easy meat for bellicose media. Harper’s law has a much less widespread application. Fewer than one police officer a year is killed while attempting to prevent, stop or solve a criminal act. But it’s nonetheless unsettling. It’s a law that ties the hands of judges and disregards their expertise; but more than that, it is a law designed to meet the real problem of a newly febrile public sphere. It washes away the intricacies of policy, the complexities of evidence and pluralism, with a set of false dichotomies: are you in favour of our brave service personnel or do you prefer lowlifes and defence barristers? Are you for good or for evil? Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistIt is virtually impossible to imagine international football without Formiga, in part because, with the Brazil midfielder’s career spanning seven World Cups and seven Olympics, few have watched an international competition without her and no one has watched women’s football at the Olympics without her. She has been ever-present in the women’s football ecosystem for so long that to even contemplate a major international tournament without the “ant” (Formiga in Portuguese, a nickname given for a style of play) scurrying relentlessly over every blade of grass is like trying to envisage living the rest of your life without shoes or perhaps, more aptly, never being able to look at a piece of artwork again. Yet here we are, with one game, against India in Amazonas’s largest city Manaus on Thursday, between us and a somewhat inconceivable reality despite her age at 43. The Bahia-born player has decided to step back from the international game for the second time after retiring in 2016, only to be coaxed back two years later, having made her Brazil debut aged 17. Brazil’s most-capped player, with 233 appearances, has won two Olympic silver medals, in 2004 and 2008, was a runner-up at the 2007 World Cup, finished third at the 1999 World Cup and won three Pan American Games and six Copa América Femenino titles. Her former Brazil coach René Simoes, who was in charge in Athens in 2004, summed up Formiga’s impact in an interview with Goal in 2016: “The last time I screamed a name of a player was in the age of Pelé and Garrincha. I was a child. Today is when I realised I was screaming Formiga with everyone in Maracanã. Formiga, Formiga. “That’s impressive. Her game reading, constant movement. Marta is Pelé, but Formiga is the most intelligent player that I’ve seen. I’ve never seen someone so smart playing football like her.” The US two-times World Cup winner Megan Rapinoe paid tribute on Instagram. “One of the very best to ever do it,” she said. “Had the honour of playing with Formiga and of course against her. And I truly cannot say there is anyone better on or off the field. Wow! What a career, what a player. Goat for real. Thank you for allowing us all to bear witness to your greatness.” The only girl among five children, Miraildes Maciel Mota was born in 1978, three years before Brazil’s 40-year ban on women’s football was lifted, and began playing football aged 12, inspired by the Brazil midfielder Dunga. In her 26-year career to date Formiga, who returned to her first club São Paulo this year, has spent time in Sweden, the US and France (where she helped Paris Saint-Germain to a first league title last season) around playing for eight Brazilian teams. Her longevity is testament to her incredible ability on the ball and her energy in and out of possession but also a stark reminder of underinvestment in the talent pathways in Brazilian women’s football that has meant players such as Formiga, Marta and Cristiane have yet to be pushed aside. That issue prompted Formiga to step back in 2016, to give others space, and was highlighted by the six-times world player of the year Marta in an impassioned speech into a camera after Brazil’s exit at the 2019 World Cup in France. “Women’s football depends on you to survive,” Marta said. “Think about it, value it more. We’re asking for support – you have to cry at the beginning and smile at the end. “It’s about wanting more, it’s about training more, it’s about looking after yourself more, it’s about being ready to play 90 minutes and then 30 minutes more. This is what I ask of the girls. There’s not going to be a Formiga forever, there’s not going to be a Marta forever, there’s not going to be a Cristiane.” Unfortunately she was right and the world of women’s football will look very different without its mainstay.A Wisconsin city has been buoyed by a “rebel” wild turkey, residents say, with the bird inspiring charity events and Halloween outfits and even being awarded a local celebrity prize. The turkey, named Carl, has charmed locals in Kenosha ever since his arrival more than two years ago, and has since garnered a huge following. A Facebook group dedicated to the turkey, who stands at 2ft tall and is covered in rich brown plumage, has more than 5,000 members and is flooded by reports of sightings. Wild turkeys are not uncommon in urban areas in Kenosha and elsewhere, but Carl has become particularly recognizable for his scant regard for Wisconsin highway laws, regularly stopping traffic to peck enthusiastically at car wheels. With a sky blue head and scarlet red wattle, Carl is a daily sight in the Forest Park neighborhood, in the west of Kenosha, and has been a welcome diversion from the contentious Kyle Rittenhouse shooting trial, which has divided the city. Rittenhouse was charged with homicide and attempted homicide after he shot and killed two people, and wounded another, during a protest about the shooting of Jacob Blake in Kenosha in August 2020. He was found not guilty last week. “Kenosha has had a really rough year, especially with the trial,” Lisa Hawkins said. She sees Carl almost every day, and started his Facebook group. “He makes everyone smile, even though he gets into traffic and disrupts and holds things up,” Hawkins said. “I think it is pretty amazing how this turkey has been able to be the one thing that we can all get behind and smile and laugh.” She said Carl’s rise to fame had even prompted discussion among members of the Facebook group about alternatives to eating turkey this Thanksgiving. The turkey has little respect for the rule of law, however. “There was a video posted the other day where he was on top of a police officer’s car. He’s kind of a rebel,” Hawkins said. Such is Carl’s popularity that he was named “Kenoshan of the week” by Kenosha.com in September. “He has so many fans I think people are looking out for him,” local resident Paul Merklein said. “It’s like having a mascot. He could be the mascot of Kenosha.” Hawkins said Carl avoided early efforts to capture him, in part because he is able to fly, which animal officials are unable to do. According to Bird Watching Daily, turkeys can fly at up to 50 miles an hour, and are also able to swim when required, “by tucking their wings in close, spreading their tails, and kicking”. Since his arrival in Kenosha, Carl has inspired a charity drive for a wildlife hospital, and local businesses have reported increased sales after introducing Carl-themed products, including cakes, T-shirts and car stickers. Carl has been honored in song, by local musician Keith Pauley, in the Ballad of Carl the Kenosha Turkey. “In the city of Kenosha there’s an outlaw running loose, in the streets and on the sidewalks, in the trees where he may roost,” Pauley sings. “He’s a champion of the people and an enemy of the law, the mayor would like to catch him, and ship him out to Bong.” During his rise to fame there was reportedly some discussion among local politicos of catching Carl and transporting him to the Richard Bong state recreation area. The inability of animal specialists to apprehend the bird ultimately rendered the debate moot, and Carl has remained at large, free to continue to charm local residents. “For a lot of people, Carl seems to represent hope, he often brings smiles and laughter,” Michael Nelson wrote in Kenosha’s Happenings magazine. “Carl’s presence and behavior seems to be helping teach so many that life is too short and maybe it’s time to slow down, enjoy everything life has to offer.” • This article was amended on 29 November 2021 to correct the spelling of Paul Merklein’s surname.This Thanksgiving marks the first time Trysta Barwig, 31, is reuniting with her extended family and friends since the start of Covid-19. While she’s excited to reconnect with loved ones at her aunt’s Atlanta home, she says she’ll be walking on eggshells in order to avoid the elephant in the room: the pandemic. Some family members who work in the travel industry lost their jobs and are still unemployed, she says. Guests’ vaccination statuses, and vaccine-related viewpoints, will be a very mixed bag. “If this was my holiday, my event – my birthday, for instance – I would say you can’t bring up Covid,” Barwig says. “I’m having an open mind but I know someone is going to bring it up. Someone is going to be offended.” The holidays can be a trying time under normal circumstances, but this year adds new complications. For some families, this holiday season may mark the first time in two years that the extended brood has gathered under one roof. Anticipatory tensions are high: 56% of Americans are nostalgic for last year’s pared-back holiday season, according to a recent TD Bank survey. With a contentious presidential election to reflect on, differing views on vaccination, inflation, supply chain woes and, of course, the still-present pandemic and its related health risks, this year’s festivities are poised to be more fraught than ever. As a result, many are actively dreading what is supposed to be the jolliest time of year. A year of tension and change Between the pressure to replicate Hallmark movie idylls of seasonal gatherings – and the fact that even adult children can revert to old familial roles when visiting home – it’s no surprise that guests can get snippy at family celebrations. Longer-than-usual time apart may bring new tensions to this year’s holiday table. Melanie Booth-Butterfield, a professor emeritus of communication studies at West Virginia University, warns that people tend to form idealized snapshots of their loved ones over extended periods of separation. This holiday season, she anticipates that many reunited family members may be disappointed by how their expectations of each other contrast with reality. People may also feel put off by the ways that their relatives have changed since their last visits together – from discomfort in realizing how much a young grandchild has grown up to chagrin over a cousin’s stance on politics. “Even if you saw them six months ago, you would not be as surprised [by the changes],” says Booth-Butterfield. Others, like Philadelphia-based Sonja Hayden, 29, are grappling with the interpersonal fallout of changes already felt. For Hayden, that means a holiday season spent mourning the relationship she once had with her husband’s parents. While her in-laws once offered a tight-knit, loving support system – especially in light of her estrangement from her own parents – Hayden says that the past year has seen the relationship fray. The shift began last November, when Hayden’s in-laws doubted the legitimacy of the 2020 election results and became reliant on the far-right One America News Network for information. Once Covid-19 vaccines became available in early 2021, they presented Hayden’s in-laws with a ready new target for their partisan distrust. Hayden, who was diagnosed with diabetes in May 2020, says that her in-laws’ growing obstinacy has had a negative effect on her health. “Stress impacts my blood sugar,” Hayden says, “and I don’t need this stress from my in-laws.” ’Tis the season (to navigate conflict) The stress of ideological opposition can be significant, according to Los Angeles-based clinical psychologist and author Leonard Felder. When a relative fundamentally disagrees with you, or acts in opposition to a core value, it can feel like a personal affront – perhaps especially in the aftermath of the pandemic’s social restrictions. “Many people only talk these days with people who agree with them,” Felder says, “so it’s a shock to your system to be in the presence of someone who says or does things so differently from what you prefer.” It can also be anxiety-inducing to expect. Manhattan-based author Kate Walter, 72, says she is nervous about Christmas, which will mark her first indoor, sit-down dinner with extended family since 2019. The get-together comes on the heels of her recently released pandemic memoir, which not only documents her experiences during lockdown, but contains arguments against Donald Trump and his supporters – a cohort that includes her niece, who will be present at the gathering. Rather than let these divergences result in a fight, licensed clinical psychologist Shannon Curry recommends prioritizing one of three things before responding: your goal for the interaction, the importance of the relationship with the person, and the importance of your self-respect. While many people may value their self-respect first and foremost, Curry says it’s sometimes necessary to make compromises if, for example, a progressive wants to maintain a relationship with a grandparent who is a Trump supporter. If the goal of the holidays is simply to get through them without a fight, you might have to take the uncomfortable approach of saying nothing at all. Olivia, a 30-year-old who lives in Philadelphia and declined to share her last name in order to speak openly about her family, has struggled with the internal conflict of preserving her sense of integrity while continuing a relationship with her immediate family. For most of her life, Olivia has felt at odds with her family’s conservative values; their differences only became more pronounced following the 2016 election. Since she is typically the lone dissenter among her parents, brother and grandmother, she’s given up on fighting with her family at holiday gatherings and now bites her tongue when they make disparaging remarks against the Black Lives Matter movement or when they poke fun at her boyfriend, who is Jewish. (He no longer joins her on visits back home.) “It’s finding this balance between wanting to stand your ground,” she says, “but also not to start a fight because you don’t want to be the person who ruined the holiday.” Once again, Olivia is steeling herself for another holiday season of policing her emotions for others’ comfort. There is one aspect of the pandemic that has worked in her favor, however: smaller family gatherings. This year’s festivities will be limited to just her immediate family, a welcome departure from the “blatant, belligerent nonsense of politics and racism” that her extended family brings to the table. Still, she expects no short supply of this year’s particular brand of political complaints – contempt for Biden, inflation – from her father and brother. Hayden and her husband, on the other hand, have come to terms with the matter at hand. Because Hayden’s diabetes puts her at higher risk of illness, she and her husband have had to re-evaluate their plans for the coming weeks. “We’ve hit the five stages of grief, of anger, denial, reasoning,” Hayden says. “We’re at the stage of acceptance: we’re not going to see them on Thanksgiving, we’re not going to see them on Christmas.”1) Chelsea and Manchester United meet on Sunday at Stamford Bridge having had very different seasons so far. There are plenty of previous classics between the two sides to delve into, so let’s start back in 1965 with a Reds side featuring Law, Best, Charlton et al hammering Chelsea 4-0 on Match of the Day. Another TV-featured meeting of the two, in 1973, saw Chelsea win through a Peter Osgood goal at the Bridge. In the Premier League era we’ve had Chelsea thrashing Sir Alex Ferguson’s recent treble-winners in October 1999, José Mourinho’s Blues securing the title in 2006 and a 4-0 win over Mourinho’s United in 2016. On a more heartening note for those in red, here’s an eight-goal FA Cup victory in 1998, United’s comeback in a 3-3 thriller in 2012, and their last win in this fixture, in 2020 just before lockdown. 2) AB de Villiers announced his retirement from all forms of cricket last week. The South African has been one of the most destructive batters of the modern era, so let’s relive his record 31-ball ODI hundred against West Indies in 2015, and his incredible 162 against them at that year’s World Cup. And here he is nonchalantly hammering a 19-ball domestic Twenty20 half-century. He was no mug in the Test arena either – feast on his 278 against Pakistan 11 years ago, or just enjoy this overall career showreel. 3) The World Chess Championship gets under way this week, pitting the defending champion, Magnus Carlsen of Norway, against Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi. It’s the first edition of the showpiece since before the pandemic when, in 2018, Carlsen saw off Fabiano Caruana. Here’s Carlsen beating this year’s opponent in 33 moves at a rapid game. This documentary about the chess legend’s childhood shines some light on his upbringing, and this is why he’s known as the Mozart of chess. His opponent is formidable too though – take a look at his five best moves. 4) Teófimo López defends his lightweight world titles at Madison Square Garden on Saturday against George Kambosos Jr. He claimed the title just over a year ago with this impressive win over Vasyl Lomachenko, while here’s his victory over Richard Commey to take the IBF world lightweight title two years ago. López’s top five knockouts can be seen here. 5) Time for some more under-the-radar goals of the week. A 94th-minute winner is always to be savoured, and one as memorable as this, from Morecambe’s Cole Stockton, away from home at local rivals Fleetwood, doubly so. Just look at those away fans! And has this University of Central Lancashire goal been bettered in student football? 6) England’s women are back in action on Saturday, hoping to extend their 100% record in World Cup qualifying when they take on Austria. England have won all of their previous four meetings; their first, in 2010, featured Ellen White’s debut goal for her country, which she talks about here. England also won this 2017 friendly comfortably and another meeting in Austria a year later. Our favourites from below the line last week 1) This week the 49ers had this magnificent butt-interception wiped by a penalty, but last year the Jets’ Marcus Maye got a clean one. Of course, as Giants fans will tell you, there’s nothing wrong with using your head in the NFL, and Julian Edelman proves that using other people to catch the ball is perfectly viable. 2) A sleeper smash of the autumn sporting calendar has been Guadalajara’s hosting of the WTA Finals. Anett Kontaveit met two-time major winner Garbiñe Muguruza in the final. 3) Getting out of trouble at the Open. Spotters’ badges: germit, vsbain67, whobroughtoranges Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe, if you fancy. Guardian YouTube sport channel Likewise.The Beatles’ 1970 album Let It Be and its depressing accompanying documentary were always bugbears among the former Fabs. John Lennon dismissed the music as “badly recorded shit”; Paul McCartney was so horrified by the album that he masterminded a new version in 2003, shorn of the additions by Phil Spector, whom Lennon employed as a producer without telling McCartney. None of the Beatles turned up to the documentary’s premiere; Ringo Starr objected that it was “very narrow” and had “no joy”. Peter Jackson’s Get Back is a documentary series designed to address Starr’s concerns. It shows a broader, ostensibly happier, picture of the band’s doomed 1969 project to write a new album, rehearse the songs and perform them live in the space of two weeks. Whether the Get Back sessions hastened the Beatles’ demise remains moot, but a preponderance of footage featuring songs sung in funny voices, mugging to camera and in-jokes can’t stop the initial sessions at Twickenham Studios from looking like misery. Harrison is alternately surly and prickly, as you might be if you brought in a song as good as All Things Must Pass and got a lukewarm reception. Lennon is visibly, joylessly stoned out of his gourd. Valiantly attempting to jolly things along, McCartney keeps slipping into passive-aggressive wheedling. Matters aren’t helped by the original documentary’s director, Michael Lindsay-Hogg, who insists that the band should perform in an amphitheatre in Tripoli – “Torchlit! In front of 2,000 Arabs!” – and is heroically undaunted by various Beatles telling him where to stick his idea. He is still at it when Harrison storms out and can’t be persuaded back, a move that McCartney genuinely seems to think signals the end of the band. As Macca sits disconsolately in Twickenham, eyes brimming, Lindsay-Hogg seizes the moment: “I think we should have a good location …” The Beatles have apparently split up, but the dream of Tripoli and its torchlit Arabs lives on. Things improve when the band decamp to a studio in Apple’s headquarters – at least for the Beatles. For the viewer, it is another matter. Jackson is not a director noted for the brevity of his approach – his version of King Kong is twice the length of the original; his Hobbit films turned a 310-page novel into eight hours of cinema – and so it proves here. The three episodes of Get Back last the best part of eight hours. There are doubtless Beatle maniacs who think that is impossibly stingy – there is a bootleg set of recordings from the Get Back sessions that fills 89 CDs – but, for anyone else, its sheer length can feel like a schlep. There are fantastic moments. Lennon and McCartney’s eyes locking as they harmonise on Two of Us; the producer Glyn Johns’ gentle, futile attempts to dissuade Lennon of the apparently unimpeachable genius of Allen Klein, a crook whose involvement hastened the Beatles’ demise and ended in litigation; Lennon’s delighted cry of “Yoko!” as McCartney’s adopted six-year-old daughter, Heather, starts screaming into a microphone; and especially McCartney, casting around for a new song, idly strumming his bass and singing nonsense words, gradually settling into a rhythm and melody that turns into Get Back. Indeed, it is hard not to boggle at the Beatles’ productivity. Ostensibly short of material at the outset, after a month they have grubbed up not only the entire Let It Be album, but also more than half of Abbey Road and a selection of songs that ended up on their early solo albums: Jealous Guy, Back Seat of My Car, Gimme Some Truth. But the moments of inspiration and interest are marooned amid acres of desultory chit-chat (“aimless rambling”, as Lennon rightly puts it) and repetition. There is a point, about five hours in, when the prospect of hearing another ramshackle version of Don’t Let Me Down becomes an active threat to the viewer’s sanity. That is doubtless what recording an album is like, but for an onlooker it is – to use the language of 1969 – a real drag. Much opprobrium has been cast at Yoko Ono for her constant presence at Beatles’ recording sessions, but, after this, you marvel at her fortitude for sitting through them. With Lindsay-Hogg’s 2,000 torchlit Arabs a memory, it ends with the famous concert on the roof of Apple’s HQ, which Jackson makes the most of by showing it in split screen, shared with footage of the street below and police arguing with the building’s receptionist. It is 40 minutes of untrammelled joy, but it is an inordinately long and winding road to get there. You wonder how many viewers will last the distance and if any, other than the aforementioned maniacs, will take it more than once. The Beatles: Get Back is on Disney+ on 25, 26 and 27 NovemberThe largest amount of debt amassed by a student in England is £189,700, according to official figures as research warns of the severe “psychological toll” that high levels of student debt is taking on graduates. The Student Loan Company said the £189,700 figure was “an exceptional case” and was possibly accrued over loans for several courses, for instance because the person had undertaken postgraduate study or dropped out of multiple courses, according to a response to a Freedom of Information request. However, when the FOI response was published on Reddit, it prompted an outpouring of comments from graduates citing student debts around the £100,000 mark, including those who had studied five-year medicine degrees, postgraduate courses or who had switched courses or institutions. The sum sheds light on the scale of the debt burden for graduates who attended university after annual tuition fees were tripled to £9,000 in 2012. Those who graduated in 2020 took out an average of £45,060 in loans, according to a report from the Higher Education Policy Institute which warns that graduates feel their debt is “draining, weighing them down, on their shoulders” and causing them “anxiety, pressure, worry and dread”. Many of the 98 graduates interviewed for the report, who started university between 2006 and 2013, felt that “tuition fees and interest rates are too high, the amount of debt owed is a burden and the loan repayment period never-ending”, the authors wrote. Claire Callender, professor of higher education at UCL and one of the report’s authors, said: “It is essential we listen to graduates to develop evidence-based, sustainable and fair higher education funding policies in the future. “Why should the loans of even the poorest post-2012 students accrue such high interest rates while they are studying and before they reap any benefits from their higher education? Why burden students psychologically and materially with enormous debts when most will never fully repay them? And is the student loan system and the income it generates for the Treasury really worth the potential long-term consequences for graduates’ welfare, life choices and opportunities – affecting the lives of generations to come?” Interviewees felt that the 5.6% interest rate was too high and unfair, and worried about the government’s ability to change repayment terms retrospectively, which could result in unmanageable payments. For instance, at the moment repayments do not start until a graduate earns £27,000 but there are reports this could be cut to £23,000. One graduate said they felt they were “moving one step forward and then two steps back”. Graduates acknowledged the benefits of some aspects of the system – that there are no upfront costs to attend university and that repayments are currently affordable – but resented the “excessive” costs of their degree relative to what earlier students had paid. They felt there was a lack of transparency in how the money was used, and that fees represented poor value for money. Most did not believe that they would repay their “lifelong” loan and felt that “there is no light at the end of the tunnel”. The problem was especially acute for for those who attended university after 2012. One graduate described the debt as “an insane amount of money” that is “beyond comprehension of what anybody in my position could earn”. Many said they avoided looking at loan slips, and some said they had made life and career decisions based on their loan repayments. Their experience is echoed by Craig Rossiter, who sent the FOI request to the SLC after wondering whether, at £61,000, his debt might be the largest in the UK. Rossiter dropped out of five university degrees, initially due to his struggles with depression and drug abuse, and later after having a baby meant he needed to secure a full-time job. Rossiter sees his “debt as a graduate tax that will be with me for ever”, and is especially worried about how changes to the repayment term could impose “a huge extra cost” he will struggle to meet. Rossiter thinks the high debt burden especially penalises those who struggle most at university. “There are things I did wrong but people from a working class background like myself and who go to the schools I went to aren’t as prepared,” he said. One respondent to Rossiter’s Reddit post, Simon Tyrie, said that in the three years post-graduation his loan had increased from £49,510 to £60,081, and he had calculated that by 2050 he would have £152,000 worth of debt. He said the “alarming” figure had dissuaded him from pursuing a postgraduate degree. He added that the debt and interest accrued hit poorer students the hardest, since he had to take out the highest maintenance loan and did not receive any support from parents, as some of his wealthier peers had. “It becomes a regressive tax on people from low income families.”The Senate has disallowed rules cracking down on charities’ advocacy work, a major defeat for the government in the penultimate sitting week of the year. On Thursday afternoon Labor, the Greens and crossbench combined to support a disallowance moved by independent senator, Rex Patrick. One Nation joined the push despite fears they were set to green light powers to investigate and deregister charities. Charities’ advocacy will be further debated in the Senate when the government’s political campaigner bill is considered next week. That bill aims to lower the threshold for disclosure of political spending from $500,000 to $100,000. The government has alarmed the charities sector with a flurry of late amendments expanding its retrospective effect and reach to include Voices groups raising money for independents. The charities regulations would have allowed the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission to investigate and deregister charities and not-for-profits for engaging in or promoting a range of minor offences. The sector has warned that the changes would threaten entire organisations with deregistration on the mere suspicion of a minor offence – trespass or harassment, for example – and would restrict their ability to engage in protests. The government had ignored the recommendations of a Liberal-led committee that found broad new powers for the regulator would threaten free speech and should be scrapped. News Corp Australia reported on Monday that One Nation, previously undecided on the changes, had struck a deal with the government to support the powers against challenge on the proviso that it better shield churches from the changes. But on Thursday afternoon the Senate voted 24 votes to 19 to scrap the powers, with senators Stirling Griff and Jacqui Lambie voting with Patrick, Labor and the Greens to reject them. One Nation’s two senators were not present for the vote, but were paired to vote with Labor and the crossbench, reducing the government’s tally of votes by two. Patrick told Guardian Australia: “It’s been a long week but in one of the last votes for the Senate, it has done a fantastic service to the charities sector. I thank the Senate.” Anglicare Australia director, Kasy Chambers, said the vote “is not just a win for charities and the people we serve, it is a win for democracy”. “If they had been allowed to stand, the rules would have meant that charities could be targeted and shut down for subjective reasons,” she said. “They were designed to stop organisations like Anglicare Australia from speaking up for our communities by punishing us. “This vote means we can continue speaking up for those who don’t have a voice in public debate.” Human Rights Law Centre’s Alice Drury said: “This is an important win for human rights and for charities across Australia at a time when their advocacy is more important than ever.” Drury accused the government of attempting to silence charities with a “strategy of death by a thousand cuts” in relation to ACNC powers and the political campaigners bill subjecting them to “even more red tape”. On Monday the House of Representatives passed the government’s political campaigner bill, which is listed for debate in the Senate but unlikely to be voted on until next week. On Wednesday and Thursday the government rejected calls for the bill to be examined by a Senate committee, despite a flurry of amendments on Monday the crossbench argued needed further scrutiny. The changes broaden the definition of “electoral matter” requiring political campaigners to declare any spending “in relation to an election”, a broad definition that charities and not-for-profits fear will exaggerate their attempts to influence voters. The amendments also broaden the definition of political campaigners to organisations that operate for the dominant purpose of fundraising for electoral expenditure –a move some fear are directed at grassroots fundraising organisations like the Voices for independents. An alliance of 80 charities, Hands Off Our Charities, has written to senators urging them to oppose the changes as “the latest of a long line of government attempts to silence civil society voices speaking”. They said the category of political campaigner “conflates independent, issue-based advocacy with ‘party-political’ or partisan campaigning”. Charities are not permitted to be politically partisan, and may only engage in advocacy in support of a charitable purpose. “Yet the label of ‘political campaigner’ gives the misleading impression that charities are spending money on partisan activities during election periods – which raises significant reputational and regulatory risks for us,” they said.That is where we will leave the blog for today, the end of this parliamentary sitting week. We’ll be back with you again tomorrow, but for now here’s some of what made the news today: Australia has sent 23 Australian federal police and 43 Australian Defence Force personnel to the Solomon Islands for riot control, amid violent protests. A 55-year-old man has been charged with the murder of two Victorian campers who disappeared in early 2020. The member for Bass, Bridget Archer, crossed the floor to vote for debate on independent MP Helen Haines’s federal Icac bill. The vote ultimately just failed due to not being able to get an absolute majority due to Covid restrictions resulting in pairings. The government introduced its long-awaited religious discrimination bill into parliament. The Senate disallowed rules cracking down on charities’ advocacy work, which would have allowed the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission to investigate and deregister charities and not-for-profits for engaging in or promoting a range of minor offences. The former ABC reporter Zoe Daniel will run as an independent at the next federal election in the Victorian seat of Goldstein against Liberal incumbent Tim Wilson. Victoria has ended the use of border permits for travel into the state with 90% of the 12+ population now double-vaccinated against Covid-19. Victoria recorded 1,254 new cases and five deaths, while NSW reported 276 cases and no deaths. The Northern Territory reported one additional case. Hill says police are searching a potential crime scene area in the Great Alpine region, and it is hoped that is where the remains of the missing campers are found. They are also looking out for a blue car and trailer. He says it is believed the trailer was sold on Gumtree between March and July last year. He won’t go into what happened when the man was interviewed by police in the past couple of days as it is now before court. The Victoria police assistant commissioner, Bob Hill, says a 55-year-old man has been charged over the murder of the missing Victorian campers Russell Hill and Carol Clay. He will appear in court tomorrow. Hill says police are still searching for remains, and are hopeful they will be able to find the deceased and provide ultimate closure for their families. Hill and Clay were last heard from on 20 March 2020 while camping in the Victorian Alps. Victoria police will be holding a press conference at 7.15pm AEDT to provide an update on the arrest of the 55-year-old Caroline Springs man in relation to missing campers Russell Hill and Carol Clay. A law to allow terminally ill people to access voluntary assisted dying has been passed by NSW parliament’s lower house, AAP reports. The bill was put to a vote on Thursday evening, winning by 53 votes to 36. “NSW is the only state to have no legislated this compassionate reform and it is time we ... moved forward with this safe, compassionate end of life option,” the Sydney MP who spearheaded the bill, Alex Greenwich, said before the vote. The Legislative Assembly now faces a potentially lengthy debate on more than 160 amendments to the bill that have been lodged by supporters and opponents. That debate will continue into Thursday evening and into Friday, the last sitting day of the year. Some of the amendments are from supporters who wish to address concerns raised in the debate. Greenwich said he was working collaboratively with many MPs who’ve put forward amendments. But, he said, “there are some amendments that were literally lodged at midnight and others that are coming thick and fast”. “I don’t believe that last-minute amendments on complex matters if is how we make good laws,” he told parliament. The 167 proposals include labelling VAD medication “poison” and changing the name of the bill to something more inflammatory. Nevertheless, Greenwich is optimistic the lower house debate can be finalised before parliament retires for the year on Friday. “There is sufficient time to be able to resolve it and I think it’s in the parliament’s best interest to see if we can resolve it this year.” Both premier Dominic Perrottet and opposition leader Chris Minns opposed the bill, but allowed their MPs a conscience vote. Health minister Brad Hazzard was among the MPs to speak in favour of the bill on Friday. He hadn’t supported euthanasia for the first 29 years of his three-decade career in parliament, he said, but this bill was different. Hazzard became emotional as he recalled holding his mother’s hand and asking her to squeeze it if she wanted palliative care, knowing that death might come more quickly if she did. His mother squeezed his hand. She died the next day. Hazzard said that voluntary assisted dying did not “remove the importance of the value of palliative care.” “What it does do is give choice to those who are approaching the end of their life, to those who might suffer (what) none of us would want family members or friends or anyone to suffer, to enable that person to control their own passing.” He also said he couldn’t withhold a right from NSW residents that Australians in all other states had. Attorney general Mark Speakman and police minister David Elliott spoke in opposition to the bill when debate resumed on Thursday. If it passes the upper house, the bill will make NSW the last state in Australia to permit voluntary assisted dying. The proposed legislation restricts euthanasia to terminally ill people who would die in no more than 12 months. Two doctors will have to assess applicants, and the bill makes a criminal offence of attempting to induce a person to apply for voluntary assisted dying. Hello. As of 14-ish minutes ago, you no longer need to apply for a border permit if entering or returning to Victoria, as part of the easing of restrictions now 90% of the 12+ population has been vaccinated against Covid. The traffic light system has been abolished, and people can return to Victoria regardless of vaccination status (though doing anything once you’re here is limited). The border bubbles will end, and international travellers who quarantined interstate will also no longer need to apply for a permit. Acting chief health officer Prof Ben Cowie said: Victoria’s border permits were designed for a time before we had a vaccine, and there was the likelihood of incursions from other states and territories. Now we are a highly vaccinated society and there are fewer cases interstate, the risk is much lower. Even though we are highly vaccinated, it is still critical that we wear masks where recommended, maintain social distancing, use hand sanitiser and have gatherings outside wherever possible. It is also essential that we get tested if we have any symptoms of coronavirus, no matter how mild, and tell our family, friends, workplace and school if we test positive to Covid. The parliament is officially adjourned for the first sitting week. We have four more sitting days for the year. And possibly, this parliament – depending on how the summer goes. Again, no one knows when the prime minister will call an election, other than he will do it at a time which suits him. That could be straight after Australia Day, with a March poll date, or it could be after two more sitting weeks in February, or it could be for May. We don’t know and neither, at this stage, does anyone else. Prime ministers call elections when they think they can win them. That’s the only certainty. Everyone is going back to their own corners for a few days, and no doubt Scott Morrison will spend the weekend trying to get his messages back on track. The ground he wants to be fighting the election on is the economy, as well as appealing to the middle – which is why there was so much emphasis put on religious freedom today. As for the attacks on Icac and the defence of Gladys Berejiklian, that’s because as far as Morrison and his electoral thinking is concerned, NSW is the state which will either win him the election, or lose it. And western Sydney is one of the most important parts of that strategy. Based on the last election, faith is one of the burning issues. So expect to see a lot more of Morrison’s focus on NSW – which is comfortable ground for him, being where he has the most influence over the party at large. The very wonderful Josh Taylor will take you through the evening events and make sure you tune back to the Guardian for Sarah Martin, Katharine Murphy, Daniel Hurst and Paul Karp’s reports on the issues of the day. They are absolute saints. A very big thank you to Mike Bowers, who is still toiling away, not just putting in photos, but in letting us know what is happening in the corridors. He will be back on Monday doing exactly the same thing, as well as keeping us all smiling, so our never ending thanks to him. I’ll be back on Monday, where hopefully I will see you all to follow along. Thank you for your support. We truly mean it. You do us all a great honour by spending your time with us and we appreciate it. We hope you manage to get some you time this weekend, whatever that means. And please – as always – take care of you. Here are the numbers on the support Australia is sending to the Solomon Islands: ADF units: 43 people. Around 30 from 3rd brigade, as well as medical treatment from 17th brigade and military police from 6th brigade. AFP is the specialist response group – 23 personnel, more to go later (the prime minister said up to 50). The first 23 AFP officers left by RAAF plane from Canberra this afternoon. A Victorian anti-corruption commission public hearing scheduled for tomorrow has been cancelled. The hearings started in October as part of Operation Watts, an investigation into the alleged misuse of public funds within the Victorian branch of the Labor party. Former Labor party member, branch president and Somali community leader, Dr Hussein Haraco, was scheduled to give evidence on Friday. But the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission said in a statement on Thursday that he would not be appearing “due to ongoing medical reasons”. Haraco had also been scheduled to give evidence for two days earlier in the investigation. The commission said that while public hearings had concluded for the year, the investigation remained ongoing. That was the first press conference Scott Morrison has held since Monday (which was the first press conference he had held with the Canberra press gallery in three weeks) and yes, it is very important that events in the Solomon Islands are explained. But Morrison took one question on the events of the week, in a parliamentary week which also needs examining. And when a follow up question came, he ended the entire event. Paul Karp now gets his question in. Q: In the last election you promise to protect both gay students and religious Australians from discrimination. Given that both have had to wait three years, why not do both together or one after the other rather than wait 12 months? Scott Morrison: We are waiting for the report from the Australian Law Reform Commission and on the other matter in my view has not changed. Gay students should not be expelled from a religious school and nor should gay teachers who have been employed at those schools be dismissed if they are gay. That has always been my view. And this bill does nothing to enable such a dismissal. It provides no powers for that. And there could be no suggestion that it could because it simply does not. That is dealt with under sex discrimination law. What I introduced today was about religious discrimination and this was about ensuring that people who hold religious beliefs or who choose not to hold religious beliefs, that that is considered a protected attribute like other things that are protected attributes under discrimination law. This brings it into line. There was a gap and that needs to be fixed. (The bill may not allow for LGBTIQ students to be expelled or LGBTIQ teachers to be sacked, but it also has nothing to stop it – which is the point some of the moderate coalition MPs have been making today, which is why they have asked for the sex discrimination act to be changed to put in those specific protections. That won’t happen until the review is finished, in another year) Paul tries to get a follow up, but Morrison ends the press conference. The AFP and ADF will be carrying both non-lethal and lethal weapons as part of the support deployment. Scott Morrison won’t take questions on anything else other than the Solomon Islands. Paul Karp tries to ask a question on what has happened in the parliament today and receives this answer: I already made my comment on those things. But right now Paul I am dealing, with great respect, there are 23 Australian federal police officers who are on a plane going to a part of the Pacific where they are facing civil unrest and they are doing that four weeks out from Christmas. I am happy to answer questions, particularly while we are dealing with those issues. So why don’t we focus on that? I’m going to go around the rest of the press conference. I made statements at the start about how we are standing here before you today because of a security situation that has emerged in the South Pacific and Australians are on their way to provide that support. That is where my focus is right now. Your focus may be somewhere else. Paul points out this is the first time he has held a press conference since it happened (and the first since Monday, which was less than 30 minutes) and asks the PM to commit to coming back to other questions. He does not. Scott Morrison again makes that point (no position on political situation). We are going to provide support and assistance and it is our hope and ambition that our presence will seek to calm the situation in the Solomon Islands. And to restore some peacefulness which will enable the normal peaceful ways of seeking to resolve any issues there. Foreign minister Marise Payne says that Australia is not taking a position on the political situation occurring on the Solomon Islands. Scott Morrison stresses again that Australia AFP and ADF is there to support the Solomon Islands police force. We are there to support them and what they are doing and to provide that backup, particularly in relation to the critical infrastructure that is there and it has been important for us to be quite clear with our Pacific Island nations, in particular with the prime minister, about the nature of our involvement and particularly those of the key infrastructure such as parliament and executive buildings have been directly, including close personal protection for any government and minister, that is been done by the Royal Solomon Islands police force. He says he has been in contact with Anthony Albanese to let him know. Australia’s official travel advice for the Solomon Islands is to ‘reconsider your need to travel’. Following a protest in Honiara on 24 November, a curfew is in place from 7pm, 24 November until 7am, Friday 26 November. Follow the advice of local authorities. The Solomon Islands has resumed incoming passenger services from Australia for passengers approved by the Solomon Islands Government. Flights from Honiara to Brisbane continue to depart every Friday. Follow the Australian High Commission’s social media accounts for further updates. Scott Morrison: Our Pacific family is very dear to us as Australians. It’s very dear to us. And we have always been there to help our Pacific family when they have needed us. And this is such a time. We believe in their sovereignty. We believe in this offer termination messaging me we believe them be able to be resolved these issues and to advance in accordance with their constitutional processes and their democracies and we want to support them and to be able to do this. They are our family. And as a result when they need our help, they will receive it either it’s in relation to natural disasters, when they need our help, or whether it’s been in relation to Covid when they’ve needed vaccines and other support with the rollout. Of the vaccination program. And regrettably, in a situation like this, where there is once again civil unrest, we are there to help them because they are very dear to us as part of our Pacific family. Morrison thanks the leaders of New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and Fiji for their assistance. Scott Morrison stresses that Australia will not be interfering in any processes and are just there in support: Our purpose here is to provide stability and security to enable the normal constitutional processes within the Solomon Islands to be able to deal with various issues that have arisen and that be done in a climate of peace, stability and security. It is not the Australian government’s intention in any way to intervene in the internal affairs of the Solomon Islands. That is for them to resolve. I’ve made that very clear. Our presence there does not indicate any position on the internal issues of the Solomon Islands. It is there in direct response to a request made by the prime minister so we can be present to assist the Solomon Islands police force to be able to ensure that police can provide stability and security, so the normal constitutional processes can be undertaken. We anticipate this will be a deployment for a matter of weeks, but obviously we’ll be assessing this on a very regular basis. And we wish those who are heading out this evening all the best for their safety. I thank them for their service and those who will be joining them tomorrow. The prime minister Scott Morrison starts by speaking about the situation on the Solomon Islands. For those who are unaware, you can catch up with what is happening, here Australia has been asked for help by the prime minister of the Solomon Islands Manasseh Sogavare, and after a meeting with the national security committee, has decided to send support. Morrison says: The Australian government has agreed to respond to that request. And we’ve agreed to send an attachment of 23 AFP personnel who are deploying immediately, in fact, even as we speak, to support riot control and up to 50 further AFP will deployed to support security at critical infrastructure. I note that critical infrastructure does not include the parliament or the executive buildings of the government, that will be dealt with by the Royal Solomon Islands police force. In addition, 43 ADF personnel will join them tomorrow, those initial 23 AFP and they’ll be approved to reinforce AFP to support security at critical infrastructure. In the first instance at the airport, where they will remain. Law firm Slater &amp; Gordon has filed a class action lawsuit against Beach Energy over a significant decline in the oil and gas company’s estimates of how much it could extract from its Western Flank field in South Australia. The claim, filed with the Victorian supreme court, alleges Beach engaged in misleading or deceptive conduct and breached its legal obligation to keep the market fully informed of material developments. Shares in the company fell by 25% after the company announced, on 30 April, that it was withdrawing earlier estimates of how much oil and gas was in Western Flank’s reserves because they were too optimistic. It cut expected production from a range of between 26.5m barrels of oil (or the equivalent in gas) and 27.7m barrels to a range of between 25.2m barrels and 25.7m barrels. Slater &amp; Gordon class action lawyer Eleanor Toohey said the company was on notice that its estimates might not be right because of a largely unsuccessful exploration program, declining reserves at Western Flank and issues with the reliability of its modelling. She said: Investors are entitled to assume that when they purchase shares in a listed company all of the material information relevant to its financial position has been disclosed. The downgrades by Beach Energy during the August 2020 to April 2021 claim period caught the market by surprise and revealed that this had not been the case. Guardian Australia attempted to contact Beach Energy for comment by telephone at its Adelaide office. However, a recorded message said the office closed at 4pm and advised calling back during business hours. The Senate has disallowed rules cracking down on charities’ advocacy work, in a major defeat for the government in the penultimate sitting week. On Thursday afternoon Labor, the Greens and the crossbench combined to support a disallowance moved by independent senator Rex Patrick. One Nation joined the push despite fears they were set to green light powers to investigate and deregister charities. The charities regulations would have allowed the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission to investigate and deregister charities and not-for-profits for engaging in or promoting a range of minor offences. The sector has warned that the changes would threaten entire organisations with deregistration on the mere suspicion of a minor offence – trespass or harassment, for example – and would restrict their ability to engage in protests. News Corp Australia reported on Monday that One Nation, previously undecided on the changes, had struck a deal with the government to support the powers against challenge on the proviso that it better shield churches from the changes. But on Thursday afternoon the Senate voted 24 votes to 19 to scrap the powers, with senators Stirling Griff and Jacqui Lambie voting with Patrick, Labor and the Greens to reject them. One Nation’s two senators were not present for the vote, but were paired to vote with Labor and the crossbench, reducing the government’s tally of votes by two. Patrick told Guardian Australia: “It’s been a long week but in one of the last votes for the Senate, it has done a fantastic service to the charities sector. I thank the Senate.” The report into the amount of labour hire within the public service has been released. You can find it here. It’s a Labor chaired and majority committee and the Coalition senators have sent in a dissenting report, so keep that in mind. The top three recommendations though are that the government scrap the cap on the APS, which has seen departments turn to short-term labour hire to make up the numbers, resulting in delays in areas like veteran’s affairs. The committee recommends that the Australian Government abolish the Average Staffing Level cap and require agencies and departments to manage staffing levels within the funding envelope provided by the Budget. The committee recommends that the principal mode of employment in the Australian Public Service (APS) be direct, permanent employment. Short term peaks in employment requirements should in the first instance be filled with either the redeployment of permanent staff or the direct employment of APS non-ongoing staff. The use of labour hire should only occur where it is not possible to engage non-ongoing staff directly. The committee recommends that the Australian Government:identify where Australian Public Service (APS) work has been contracted out to labour hire companies; anddevelop and report on a strategy to return the work to direct APS employment. The prime minister has called a press conference for 5.15pm – it is in the Blue Room (second most fancy press conference place). AAP has a story on that motion we brought you earlier today, which Greens senator Dorinda Cox brought forward: Indigenous Greens senator Dorinda Cox has secured the Senate’s support for an inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and children in Australia. Cox on Thursday said she knew of 76 missing or murdered Indigenous women across Australia – which was why the national inquiry was necessary. It will investigate the systemic causes of this violence and the vulnerabilities of First Nations women and children. “We have a justice system that does not take seriously the issues of missing and murdered First Nations women and children in this country,” Cox said. “This is linked to family and domestic violence First Nations women face in Australia, which is why we want to understand the framework and social issues that lead to these cases so we can do better.” Senators of all political persuasions spoke about ending domestic violence on the international day for the elimination of violence against women. Labor senator Penny Wong spoke of her frustration giving the same speech on domestic violence for the past two decades with no improvement in the number of women who die or are abused at the hands of partners. A woman is killed by a current or former partner every week on average in Australia. One in five women have been sexually assaulted or threatened. Greens senator Lidia Thorpe, a Gunnai Gunditjmara and Djab Wurrung woman, said her cousin was killed and left dead on the front lawn of her mother’s house. “[She] was carried by her perpetrator and dumped on the front lawn of her mother’s house,” Thorpe told the Senate. “Because there was substance abuse involved in that family, the police response was that they were drunks and no one was held accountable. Women in our family who have been murdered had no justice because they were not important enough for investigations to happen.” Minister for Women Marise Payne said there were too many stories about the abuse of women. “Violence against women and children is never acceptable,” she said. “Gender inequality is the root cause of violence against women and we must work across our society - including with men and boys - to change social norms and attitudes and behaviours.” The Conservation Council of WA wants Western Australian premier Mark McGowan to clarify comments suggesting his government might intervene to assist Woodside if it runs into legal trouble over its $16b Scarborough gas development. Despite the company’s decision to push ahead with the controversial project on Monday, it faces risks - including an ongoing legal challenge from the CCWA that argues the environmental approvals process was not followed. On Tuesday McGoward said that if the supreme court were to find the approvals invalid, his government would “step in”. “Well, if the choices were going to close down all the industry in the state, turn off the lights and not have any jobs, obviously,” he said. “I’m not going to second-guess what the courts do, but obviously government will do what it has to do to keep the state functioning.” A spokesperson for the CCWA described the premier’s comments as “extraordinary” and called on the premier to commit to “upholding Western Australia’s environmental protection laws”. All we are asking is that the environmental impacts of this development are assessed according to the requirements of the law, like any other major project in WA. If Woodside and the EPA can simply ignore our environmental laws, knowing that the premier will step in to facilitate climate wrecking projects like Scarborough then what is the purpose of those laws? Victoria has hit back at a call from Linda Reynolds for the states and territories to take more responsibility for funding the NDIS. The Australian this morning reported Reynolds as saying the states and territories would need to do more to fund the scheme, which she said was “not sustainable” on its current trajectory. The scheme is supposed to be jointly funded 50-50 between the states and territories, but the states’ contribution is capped at a 4% annual increase, and the commonwealth says the scheme is currently growing faster than that. However, Victoria’s disability minister, James Merlino, claimed the commonwealth had previously relied on an underspend to prop up its budget. Victoria claims that in 2018-19 and 2019-20, the state contributed 70% and 58% respectively to the NDIS due to the “commonwealth’s NDIS underspend”. Merlino said in a statement: Throughout the pandemic we have seen the Morrison Government avoid taking responsibility for the wellbeing of Australians - by failing to order enough vaccines and refusing to lead on protecting vulnerable aged care residents. Now they are again refusing to take responsibility on the NDIS - after years of using underspending on the NDIS to prop up their budget, the Commonwealth are again walking away from their responsibility to support Australians with disability. People with disability deserve the NDIS they were promised, and the federal government need to step up and deliver that. Reynolds told the Australian today that states had withdrawn disability funding outside of the NDIS, which was placing pressure on the scheme. “Unfortunately, over time that funding has been withdrawn and so there is more pressure on the NDIS because participants themselves or their families see the NDIS increasingly as what’s been described as an ‘oasis in the desert’,” she said. Reynolds has repeatedly claimed the scheme is becoming unsustainable. The states and territories vetoed an unpopular push to introduce so-called independent eligibility assessments for the scheme earlier this year. That conversation continues: Q: OK, that’s not consistent with what governments do on other pieces of legislation, right? Following my logic here, you don’t always go we only introduce things we’re going to get support for. Regularly you don’t get support? Ruston: It depends very much on the situation. One of the things just as an example around Indigenous recognition in the Voice. We would not want to go to a referendum or do anything in the parliament that would have any likelihood of failure. So it depends on the individual circumstances surrounding the action that’s been taken as to how you would manage it through this place. (The biggest block to the Voice to Parliament is the coalition’s own party room, elements of which still claim it is a ‘third chamber of parliament’ – which it is not.) Q: Do you think the New South Wales Icac is like a kangaroo court? Ruston: Certainly the public nature of that organisation has led to an awful lot of public discourse around particular issues before the person or persons or organisations have the opportunity to be able to defend themselves. And what we have to make sure with any of these organisations is you don’t turn it into, as has been often referred to, a kangaroo court. And people are actually judged to be guilty before they’re afforded natural justice. Then Anne Ruston attempts to defend how far Scott Morrison went in slamming Icac and defending Gladys Berejiklian (who the feds want to run in Warringah, as Sarah Martin reported last month) in parliament today. Q: Just on another issue, the prime minister has likened the New South Wales Independent Commission Against Corruption to a kangaroo court and accused the agency of doing over former premier Gladys Berejiklian. This is of course all in relation to this push for a debate on an integrity commission. Do you understand the frustration of all of those people, including one of your own in the lower house, who just want to see this happen? Ruston: Well, I think one of the things that we need to be careful of when you introduce any new body of this nature, is to make sure it’s designed in such a way that you don’t end up with unintended consequences that allow the court of public opinion to convict or condemn someone before the proper course of justice is allowed to go past*. And that’s why I think we’ve been very clear around the design of any anti-corruption body that we might put in place in the federal arena, that it doesn’t become a kangaroo court and it does deliver on the things that it is designed to deliver. And that unintended negative consequences need to be made sure that they don’t occur by making sure the bill reflects what the outcome is that we’re seeking to achieve. *Icac does not find anyone guilty or not guilty. It does not pass judgement, it does not lay charges. It reports its findings from its investigations, and gives recommendations, which public prosecutors then make decisions on. It also has closed hearings which can not be reported on. Q: We haven’t even seen the bill. This is the issue. There’s no bill. Ruston: My understanding is that the attorney general has been in discussions with the opposition in order to try and achieve a consensus on how we would walk forward on this corruption body, the body they’re proposing, and we’re unable to be able to get the agreement of the opposition to move forward. (Scott Morrison said there was legislation – but there is only an exposure draft at this stage). Q: Well, why wouldn’t you just move forward? If you believe in it, you just, you do on other issues and don’t always get an agreement? You haven’t had an agreement on lots of pieces of legislation? Ruston: We don’t want to put forward a proposal that is not then successful. We would seek to make sure that we had the support of the parliament to bring something in. Because, as you rightly point out, it’s a very important issue. Anne Ruston is on the ABC now, speaking on the religious discrimination bill: Q: The ACTU says the bill will protect people who make discriminatory religious statements of belief, even if they’re offensive, inappropriate and harmful. What’s your response to that, that people could be deliberately making offensive comments? Saying it’s on the basis of their religion but someone is harmed as a result of that? Ruston: I think the attorney general has been very, very clear that that would not be allowed under the bill that is being proposed for legislation. Q: I have to interrupt. I’ve seen the bill. It is possible to do that. It is entirely possible in the bill. If it is, it means someone can be harmed whether it be LBGTIQ community or other minority groups? Ruston: Well, I’m going to have to beg to differ with you there. The attorney general has been very clear that those provisions that the bill does not allow that to happen. But the other issue that we need to be clear here is that under current legislation, some of these provisions already exist and that is why the ARC inquiry is so important is to make sure we can get consistency here, so that people cannot be discriminated in a way that is harmful on them. (Members of the Coalition have raised concerns about this point Patricia Karvelas raises. Today even.) This is worth a listen from Malarndirri McCarthy. Daniel Hurst has a very interesting story here: The Morrison government’s decision to scrap plans to build a 2.7km concrete runway on Antarctica has opened a new round of Coalition divisions, with China hawks blasting the “retrograde” move. The Tasmanian Liberal party senator Eric Abetz criticised the decision, labelling it a “huge disappointment” as Australia risked loosening “our foothold” on Antarctica to China and Russia. The final parliamentary sitting fortnight of the year has been marked by government divisions, with a number of backbenchers either voicing dissent or crossing the floor on issues ranging from a strong integrity commission to vaccine mandates to religious discrimination. The latest flashpoint is Liberal environment minister Sussan Ley’s announcement the government would “protect Antarctica’s pristine wilderness by not proceeding with a decision to build a 2,700m concrete runway at Australia’s Davis research station”. Helen Haines is on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing talking about the integrity commission vote today (which she won on the numbers, but did not have an absolute majority of 76 needed for the motion, so the motion was defeated on what is a technicality). Haines: I’ve been talking to members of parliament for over two years about the importance of a federal integrity commission. We’ve been waiting for the government for three years to introduce one and today felt like the right day to suspend standing orders and call for a debate. We’ve only got a few days left of sitting before we rise for Christmas and I felt very strongly that the nation needs this. They’re calling for it. Nine in 10 Australians want an integrity commission. I have a bill in the House and I felt it was time to call for that debated again. Q: You’ve labelled the technicality which requires an absolute majority undemocratic during the pandemic. Without this, your bill would have been debated. What message does this send about the support for a federal integrity commission? Haines: Well, I think the fact the government lost both votes on the floor of the House today demonstrates that the will of the parliament is to debate my federal integrity commission bill and indeed vote on it. And if things had been different today, we could in fact have a federal integrity commission passed through the House today. This extraordinary situation that we have where the government can lose two votes on the House but still manage to escape through this technicality I think is quite extraordinary for our democracy and I think it’s a real problem. And I would not be surprised if many people across the nation tonight are asking the question how did Scott Morrison get away with that? The Senate has voted in support of Rex Patrick’s motion to disallow the charity changes. Which means the government lost. Again. Paul Karp will have more for you soon. The New South Wales government has released an updated Covid roadmap which will see indoor mask restrictions eased before the busy Christmas shopping period, while QR code check-in systems will no longer be required to enter retail stores. After a Covid subcommittee meeting on Thursday the premier, Dominic Perrottet, announced a raft of changes to the state’s Covid restrictions which will come into place once restrictions on non-vaccinated people ease on 15 December. They include changes that will mean masks are only required on public transport, on planes and and for indoors front-of-house hospitality staff who are not fully vaccinated. Previously the mask rule had been due to apply to all hospitality staff regardless of vaccination status. The government will also scrap density limits previously set to one person per square-metre and make Covid safety plans optional. It will also mean that from 15 December the QR check-in codes that became a staple of the government’s contact tracing efforts will be scrapped in some places. While the QR codes will remain mandatory for a number of “high-risk venues” including hospitals, gyms, places of worship, pubs, nightclubs and hair and beauty salons, other venues, such as retail stores, will no longer need to use the system. Perrottet also announced on Thursday that from next week close contacts of Covid cases at schools and outside school hours care services will no longer need to isolate. Instead, close contacts of a positive case will be required to get a PCR test as soon as possible after being notified of exposure. If the PCR test is negative, the student can return to school immediately, so long as they provide negative rapid test results for the next seven consecutive days, the government said in a statement. In line with community settings, schools will no longer need to close while contact tracing occurs due to successful cohorting of year groups on school sites. The only exception may be if there are multiple cases at a school or complex settings in place,” the government said in its announcement. Mask settings remain the same, meaning they are required for all staff and high school students, and are recommended for primary school students. How Mike Bowers saw question time: In case anyone was wondering about the context of this: In the Senate, Rex Patrick is attempting to disallow the charities amendment, which the charity sector says is a gag stopping organisations from being able to comment on political issues. Despite the declaration of a La Nina this week, parts of Australia can expect above normal bushfire potential through summer. The national council for fire and emergency services - AFAC - has released its fire outlook for summer. Large parts of NSW west of the Great Dividing Range and in the Cooma Monaro region can expect an above average chance of fire due to high grass and crop fuel loads. In Western Australia, southern parts of the state and the Pilbara, Gascoyne and Murchison, the Swan Coastal Plain, Jarrah Forest, and western most parts of the Esperance Plains and Mallee regions also have an above normal potential for fire due to fuel loads in those areas. Increased rainfall and the effects of the 2019-20 bushfires have resulted in a below average chance of fire in coastal areas of NSW, the ACT and much of Victoria. Most of the country, however, is showing normal bushfire potential. The outlook is prepared each year by AFAC, fire authorities and the Bureau of Meteorology and is used by emergency services ahead of the summer fire season. This is especially important as they balance the risk of bushfire this summer with the risks associated with a La Niña event, such as an increased chance of rainfall and the number of tropical cyclones that form,” said AFAC’s Rob Webb. In Senate question time, Labor has asked Richard Colbeck, representing the health minister, whether the government is considering overriding state vaccination mandates. Colbeck said: The Australian government’s position all the way through is that as much as possible, the vaccination program should be a matter of choice, as much as possible.” So Colbeck refused to rule out overriding states’ vaccination mandates. He notes that at times the AHPPC and national cabinet have recommended mandates that were supported by the federal government (ie in aged care). There were a number of objections on relevance, but Colbeck plowed on with statements of general principle that vaccinations should be “voluntary” without addressing the issue of overriding the states. Colbeck said the government’s position is “completely clear” - but I for one am no clearer on whether they are considering overriding the states’ public health orders. Zoe Daniel has confirmed her independent tilt for Goldstein The new speaker, Andrew Wallace, has rejected a fresh bid from Labor to refer Christian Porter to the privileges committee. Earlier this week, Tony Burke had asked for Porter to be referred, citing an interview by Tony Smith that he would’ve voted to refer him, claiming this was new information that should be considered by the lower house. Wallace said he had considered the material but the interview “does not reveal new information” that relates to the subject of the privileges referral (Porter’s disclosure of the Legal Services Trust on his register of interests, but not the source of its funds). Wallace concluded that as the house had recently voted against referring Porter, there was no reason to now give precedence for a motion to do so now. Although Labor’s earlier attempt failed, Guardian Australia revealed earlier in November that the committee is continuing to consider a separate complaint from the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus into Porter. As Paul Karp and Sarah Martin have previously reported, Bob Katter wants changes to the religious discrimination legislation – he wanted the Folau clause back in. He has now said he will try and amend the legislation to include it: The whole intention of this Bill is to protect against religious persecution; people who are being punished because of their religious belief,” Mr. Katter said. Israel Folau was punished with the termination of his Rugby contract for simply posting and reading from the Bible. It is one thing to agree or disagree with the Bible, that is your privilege. It is another thing to start punishing people for expressing their beliefs from the Bible, then you are in big trouble indeed. There is no Folau clause in the Bill, so I don’t know why the Morrison Government is introducing this legislation.” Katter also has an issue with the definition of a religious belief. The definition of religious belief includes a person having religious beliefs and a person not holding a religious belief and not engaging in, or refusing to engage in, religious activity,” Mr. Katter said. The definition is not just contradictory. It contains definition which cannot be reconciled. My concern is that the consequence of this contradictory definition is that the legislation could be used against people of faith and especially small business owners. The legislation tries to be all things to all people. So hypothetically, if I say no, you can’t use our Jewish temple community hall for your homosexual wedding based on my religious beliefs, he can sue me and say I have discriminated against him based on his religious belief, which is that he doesn’t have a religious belief. However, the whole point of this legislation is that someone should not be able to come after me or punish me due to my religious belief.” Andrew Wallace is giving an explanation as to what happened during Helen Haines’ motion vote today and the confusion which followed. The short version is Wallace is saying he did not mess up. Wallace: Over most of the last two years the house has adopted different formulations of certain questions on motions as they are put to a vote. The different formulations have been adopted as a means of reducing movement across the chamber and thereby reducing risks associated with Covid-19. In relation to motions to suspend standing orders, because of the current formulation of the question, in the overwhelming majority of cases, those questions are decided for the ayes in favour of the question that the motion to suspend standing orders be disagreed to. Earlier today, the member for Indi moved a motion to suspend standing orders. Following debate on the suspension motion. The initial question was decided for the nose that is disagreeing to the question that the motion to suspend standing orders be disagreed. A second decision was needed. On a differently formulated question, simply because a decision against a proposal to disagree to a motion is not the same as a decision in favour of emotion. The second question enabled a vote on whether the suspension motion should be agreed to which is the question understanding order 47. That requires an absolute majority in order for it to be carried. If members thought this was unusual, they are correct. As there is usually no need for a second question because of the result of the initial question or regret if members were concerned about having to change sides of the chamber to vote, given the Covid safety arrangements, the house has been operating under. On the other hand, this one exception in almost two years highlights just how successful the arrangements have been. Question time ends. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: The report of the independent review into commonwealth parliamentary workplaces by the Australian Human Rights Commission is due next week. To ensure that there is no delay in any action required to make parliament a safer place to work, will the prime minister commit to releasing the report in parliament on the date in which he receives it? Morrison: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course the government will consider the report. And then we’ll table it in the normal way we consider any reports, Mr Speaker. What I’m pleased to say, over the course of this year, we have worked very closely with Kate Jenkins and I thank her for the work she’s done and I also thank the finance minister. Albanese jumps in with a point of order on relevance, but Andrew Wallace says it has been 40 seconds and Morrison is being relevant to the report/question. Morrison: I said we would continue to report and would release it, as the government does in these occasions always, Mr Speaker. The leader of the opposition may be seeking to try to politicise this again, seeking to try to score political points [amid] all the games he is seeking to play in Canberra this week, I’m not going to be distracted by the political games of a lifetime politician* and the leader of opposition, who is not focused on the issues, Mr Speaker. The issue that is in question is a serious one. (Scott Morrison did have two jobs in tourism/marketing, but he was also the NSW state Liberal party director in 2000-2004 before he ran for preselection for Cook. Anthony Albanese worked in the Commonwealth Bank just after school, before becoming a research assistant for the minister for local government and administrative services, Tom Uren) Morrison: The government has been considering that seriously from day one and we have taken action from day one, work that is done through the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the establishment of the new counselling procedures in the 24/7 core line, the establishment of the independent complaints process a critical part of what was necessary to keep people working in this building safe, and whatever role they work, we have been taking action and putting in place a much improved environment, in this place, and I look forward to receiving the Jenkins review and I look forward to working together to take further action on it. I think that will be important and we will receive that and make a decision about its release as we do with every single report, but I would ask the opposition, if you want to work with us on this don’t play political games in this place. Stuart Robert calls Warren Entsch the “king of the north”. That sound you hear is Bob Katter’s eye twitch. Here is Linda Reynolds speaking to Murph six months ago about the need to bring costs down. Bill Shorten to Scott Morrison: My question is to the prime minister: Eligibility for the National Disability Insurance Scheme requires that a person have a profound and severe lifelong disability. But today on the front page of the Australian his NDIS minister says that the scheme was never intended to be function as a welfare scheme for life. Does the prime minister agree with his minister, that Australians living with a lifetime of profound and severe disability should expect a lifetime of NDIS support? For context, the Australian report Shorten is referencing is on the front page of the paper edition today and reads: States and territories will need to take more responsibility for funding the national disability insurance scheme, with the minister in charge warning that the program was ‘not sustainable’ and never intended to function as a ‘welfare scheme for life’. There does not seem to be a direct quote in the article which uses the same quote. Morrison: The member may not be aware, but that reference in that article has actually been withdrawn by the Australian, as the minister was able to establish, that’s what I’m advised, that statement was not made about referencing welfare. He may not be aware of that, so I understand why he would ask that question on that basis. I don’t believe the NDIS is welfare. I do believe the NDIS, Mr Speaker, is provided to ensure people with permanent disability have as much as possibly can, the same opportunities as other Australians do. I have been a supporter of this initiative from the outset. I have supported it, Mr Speaker, in opposition, when it was brought forward by those opposite when they were in government, I have supported it as a social services minister, I have supported it as a treasurer, and I have supported it as a prime minister. And Mr Speaker, I support it... ... In the previous article, just to assist the member, the statement welfare scheme for life was put in inverted commas, ie to indicate a quote, a quote. That’s not in the updated document. There’s no quote marks in relation to that statement. There is no quote marks in relation to that statement. So the suggestion that the member has made – based on this, is incorrect. But Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker, regardless, let me be very clear, Mr Speaker. ... The NDIS is not welfare. I have never believed it is. And I never will. And I have supported every single day I have been here as it’s been brought into this chamber many years ago, by those opposite, and I believe it should be a matter of bipartisan support, continuing as it was, when it was introduced. As it was when it was introduced. And that is certainly the approach I have taken in opposition and in government, as a minister, a treasurer, and a prime minister. I will continue to. It’s providing Australians with disabilities with opportunities when they were growing up, people of our generation, would never have dreamed of. And I think that says marvellous things about our country. It’s a very demanding scheme in it terms of its fiscal cost and Australians are bearing that cost and we’ll continue to, Mr Speaker, and we need to ensure it’s run efficiently and we need to ensure it isn’t subject, Mr Speaker, to any form of abuse, because by protecting it against abuse, we’re protecting the people who it’s intended to support. So, Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker, let there be no doubt that our government, my government, Mr Speaker, believes in the NDIS and we have demonstrated that by fully funding it every single day and we’ll continue to. Alan Tudge takes a question from Tanya Plibersek on the government’s support for the university sector. He speaks about how universities know that the government is in support of the sector. He doesn’t mention how they were carved out of jobkeeper, while also losing international students. Or that about 40,000 academics lost their jobs across the sector, during the pandemic. Richard Marles to Scott Morrison: Can he confirm this week he has been forced to correct himself twice over the one holiday he took while Australia burned, denied ridiculing electric cars despite saying they would, quote, ruin the weekend, claimed he was not aware he had said Shanghai Sam 17 times? If the prime minister has no regard for what he said in the past, why should Australians have regard for what he is saying now? Morrison: The opposition demonstrates once again just how petty and small they are. Honestly Mr Speaker, if you have a small question to ask, ask the opposition because they only deal with small questions. If you have a big question, about what’s going to happen with the economy, how are we going to guarantee national security, cut taxes and put pressure on the cost of living and get electricity prices down, how we will get more people into trades training and ensure the million people working in manufacturing stay in those jobs, our government has the answers to those. Those opposite, they [think] whinging and whining and sledging is a recipe for getting into government, but it’s not, you have to have policies, you have to have plans, you can’t just stand up every day and have a [whinge and a moan], that’s why we still don’t know what the 2030 target is in the policies, that’s why we can only go on what they have done before. And what have they done before? $387 million of higher taxes, they put a carbon tax on when they were last in government and cut defence spending, they lost control of our borders, Mr Speaker, they lost control of our borders, Mr Speaker and the leader of the opposition was front and centre when the weakness of that government was displayed. Tony Burke: Direct relevance – I’m struggling to work out how this is even remotely close to the question. Andrew Wallace: The question was asked in a manner as to why should Australians listen to the prime minister now? That was the last question. The prime minister is entitled to respond appropriately. Morrison: The other reason I believe and know Australians are listening is because this government knows how to ... stand up to those who would seek to compromise their interests. I know we in our government know how to stand up to those countries not too far from here who would seek to coerce us and interfere in our country and universities, in our laws, and seek to affect us with trade and other forums. We know how to do that, we know how to call out action when it comes to human rights abuses overseas, we are not afraid to do that and stand up to the bullies ... that get on social media and try to troll those of religious faith. We are very happy to stand up whether it is the big banks, the big energy companies, the multinationals and digital platforms, we have had to take them on and we have, we have been prepared to stand up and audit the organised criminal gangs and take them down. We stood up to the people smugglers and will stand up to all of those who seek to compromise the interest and fears and best interests of our nation. It takes strength to lead this country, a strength the leader of the Labor party does not possess. Before I get to the next question and answer, it is probably worth pointing out this exchange between Morrison backer Stuart Robert and Sky News’s Kieran Gilbert on Gilbert’s program yesterday. KG: Have voters lost faith in the prime minister? Robert: Goodness no. Not even remotely close. We started this segment talking about Australia having coming through with some of the world leading results in vaccination, world leading. Our response, whether seen through our unemployment results – [Interrupted] KG: Why is his trust rating so low? Robert: We were the only country in the world really, that had more of its citizens employed. This was pre-Delta of course [rather] than pre-Covid. KG: But why is his trust rating so low then? Robert: As you come towards an election, of course Labor likes to play the man not the ball, all of these things have an impact. But in terms of how the country’s gone, and how our results have been and the economic basis of what we’re doing. I think the results speak for themselves. KG: And finally, you talk about playing the man, not the ball. It looks like the government’s willing to do that now as well. The battle lines are drawn for the election aren’t they? We heard in the parliament: national security; economy; Albanese weak. That’s pretty much where you’re going isn’t it? Robert: Well that is because Mr Albanese is a weak leader. So we’re going to roll that out because it is true and is what we believe. And yes, we’ve got an election coming up and things of course will be phrased in that way, but we’re going to come out and speak the truth on this Kieran. The Australian is reporting former ABC reporter Zoe Daniel will run against Tim Wilson in Goldstein. Daniel will be running as a pro-climate independent. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: My question is to the prime minister. Can he confirm this week five government senators voted for a One Nation bill on vaccines, one government member crossed the floor to vote against government legislation and today another government member twice crossed the floor on a National Integrity Commission, and declare the Morrison and Joyce government a complete shambles? Morrison: The leader of the opposition has been in this place a very long time. The leader of the opposition is obsessed by the games that go on in Canberra. He is totally obsessed with that, absolutely obsessed about it. So focused about what’s going on down here in Canberra, that what he can’t hear, what he fails to hear, is what is going on around the rest of this country, where their focus ... is how is the economic recovery going to be secured, and that’s what our government is focusing on. Our government is focused on ensuring electricity prices have been going down, on making sure we have 217,000 apprentices and trade training places, which is the highest level we have seen on record since they were kept in 1963. Our government has been focused on the fact we now have a million Australians who are working in manufacturing ... our government is focusing on ensuring we have reliable and affordable energy so we are building a gas-fired plant and curry courage to make sure the people of the Hunter Valley can have those jobs and support history and keeping electricity prices down, and the Labor party is opposing that. Our government is focusing on making sure Australians get into home ownership and 320,000 Australians have been able to get into home ownership since I was elected as prime minister three years ago, on the basis of policies we put into this place. Getting Australians into homes, using electricity prices down, getting Australians into jobs and leading them through one of the worst pandemics we have seen for 100 years, one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, one of the strongest economies coming through the pandemic and one of the lowest fatality rates. Then there are the security issues we face in this region which are going on even as we speak right now in our own region. Australia will provide the strength to stand up to those who would seek to coerce, to stand with our allies and partners, to gain answers to the defence technology, which means we can have nuclear powered submarines, which those opposite would never dare to even ask for, let alone understand why it was necessary and have been quibbling over it ever since. A strength the leader of the opposition does not hold and does not understand. Why are we hearing so much defence of Gladys Berejiklian from Scott Morrison today in the parliament? Well, there is a poll in the SMH that found she is as popular as ever. And there is also this story, from Sarah Martin in early October. Morrison hasn’t given up on having Berejiklian run in Warringah, against Zali Steggall. The new speaker Andrew Wallace has said he will allow dixers to include “alternative approaches” as well as “alternative policies”, which frees the government up to attack Labor in its dixers. Tony Smith had been cracking down on that. Catherine King to Scott Morrison: My question is to the prime minister. Is the reason the prime minister is blocking an anti-corruption commission to avoid scrutiny of the forging of documents to discredit the lord mayor of Sydney, the purchase of land in the Leppington Triangle ten times its value, a cabinet minister taking anonymous donations, and the use of colour-coded spreadsheets to [rort] taxpayers’ money? Morrison: Thank you Mr Speaker. The government has a proposal for a commonwealth integrity commission Mr Speaker. The Labor party do not support it. The government has funded nearly $150 million to support the establishment of a commonwealth integrity commission Mr Speaker, and our proposed commission will investigate specified criminal corruption across the whole of the public sector, including parliamentary staff, and it will have two divisions, the law enforcement integrity division, that would have the same function as the public sector integrity division, that would be able to investigate allegations of a criminal conduct in the rest of the commonwealth public sector as well as higher education providers and research bodies that receive commonwealth funding. Our proposed commission will have a full suite of powers to invest corrupt conduct, including to require people to give sworn evidence at hearings, to confiscate people’s passports by court order, to search people’s houses and search their property under warrant and conduct a search of a person under warrant, and when necessary to tap phones and use other surveillance devices, and the commonwealth proposal that we put forward and a law enforcement integrity division will be able to hold public hearings. That is our proposal. Why don’t the Labor party support it? Why don’t they support it? This has been out of public consultation for a long time, even the draft legislation has been there, but they don’t want to have a commonwealth integrity commission, they want a commonwealth kangaroo court. A kangaroo court that can go and find and pursue political vendettas, as we have seen in New South Wales with disgraceful treatment of the former premier of New South Wales Gladys Berejiklian, who was chased out of office* before that even made a finding. Before even a finding. The leader of the Labor party may support what was done to Gladys Berejiklian, but I do not. *Gladys Berejiklian decided to resign, she was not made to resign. In his dixer, Josh Frydenberg, a former Howard and Downer staffer, accuses Jim Chalmers of not being qualified as treasurer, because he is a former Swan staffer. So a former political staffer just accused another political staffer of not being qualified because he was a former political staffer (upside down head emoji). Anthony Albanese asks Scott Morrison to table the legislation he is talking about. Andrew Wallace says it is a public document. Albanese was asking that because it is not legislation as yet – it is an exposure draft, which has not been introduced into the house. You can find it here Tanya Plibersek to Scott Morrison: In December 2018, the prime minister sat next to the member for Pearce and announced he would deliver a national integrity commission, more than a thousand days later the prime minister has not introduced his own legislation and today defies the House of Representatives which demanded an anti-corruption commission. Why did the prime minister say he would create a National Integrity Commission, when he didn’t mean it? Morrison: I did on that proposal, and the draft legislation is out for all to see, and those opposite do not support our proposal for a commonwealth integrity commission. Instead, they want one which does not sufficiently provide procedural fairness to individuals that are investigated for conduct, they want one that would allow the use of significant coercive powers, on low-level misconduct and disciplinary offences, they want one that would not safeguard against baseless, [politically] motivated and time wasting referrals the shadow attorney general is well known for, it has a perfect strike rate of making vexatious claims, which have been refused by proper authorities, which detract from legitimate investigation. They want to support something that does not include mechanisms to protect national security information, it does not include protections for journalists and the sources and would compromise potential prosecutions of corrupt conduct by public investigations. Albanese: Relevance, this is about why the prime minister has not introduced legislation for a National Integrity Commission, which he said he would do a thousand days ago; it is not about Labor policy. Andrew Wallace: The question, the way it is worded, was quite open. In that it was asking why the prime minister hasn’t done it, the prime minister is entitled to answer that. And in doing so, he is entitled to a preamble stop and, with less than a minute, around a minute, into the question, he is entitled to that preamble. I would ask the prime minister to return to the question. Morrison: The proposal for a Commonwealth Integrity Commission, it is set out in the legislation drafted and being circulated, and the Labor party says they don’t support it. If you want to support that legislation and establish that type of integrity commission, great, bring it in, indicate you support such a Commonwealth Integrity Commission and we will have our support to proceed, but I’m not going to get into the political gamesmanship of the Leader of the Opposition who was so interested in theatre of this place he forgets the real issues facing the Australian people. Defence minister Peter Dutton has blasted Liberal party colleague Gerard Rennick for spreading misinformation on social media after the Guardian revealed the Queensland senator had posted dozens of claims about vaccine side-effects on his Facebook page without knowing whether they were true. On Thursday Dutton told the Sydney radio host Ray Hadley that Rennick’s social media presence was “not acceptable”. “He shouldn’t do it, he’s taken [the post] down as he should have but it shouldn’t have gone up in the first place,” Dutton said. It came after the Guardian revealed this week that Rennick had shared content from an anti-vaccination leader who has previously called for the execution of Jacinda Ardern, while also admitting that he hadn’t verified a deluge of claims about vaccine side-effects that he has posted on his own Facebook page. Rennick deleted the post after being contacted by the Guardian, conceding he had realised it to be “fake”. “I try to verify this stuff, I thought it seemed OK,” he said about the post. “I’m a bit annoyed about it.” Rennick told the Guardian he was unaware of the woman’s previous comments about Ardern, and conceded he “should have” checked the source of the letter before sharing it. Speaking to Hadley on his regular Thursday appearance with the self-described “right-wing shock jock”, Dutton said MPs had a “special responsibility” not to spread misinformation. “Particularly at the moment when there’s a lot of disinformation going around,” he said. “These conspiracy theories and other things that spin around on the internet shouldn’t be glorified, they shouldn’t be promoted and they shouldn’t be posted.” Barnaby Joyce is once again trying to make words. We’ll leave that there. That was ... something. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: “A majority of Australians and the majority of their representatives in this House of Representatives, want an anti-corruption commission now. Why has the prime minister refused to act for more than 1,000 days?” Morrison: The legislation that we have released sets out our plan for such a commission, it’s been out there for some time. Those opposite oppose it. They don’t support our plan for a commonwealth integrity commission. They oppose it! The legislation is there for all to see and if the opposition wishes to support that legislation, they should do so and we can legislate it. But those opposite do not support our laws to introduce a commonwealth integrity commission. Instead, those opposite want to support the sort of show in NSW, which has seen the most shameful, the most shameful attacks on the former premier of New South Wales, Gladys Berejiklian. What was done to Gladys Berejiklian, the people of NSW know, was an absolute disgrace. And I’m not going to allow ... I’m not going to allow that sort of a process, which seeks to, Mr Speaker, seeks to public humiliate people on matters that have nothing to do with the issues before such a commission, to see those powers abused, Mr Speaker, and seek to reduce the integrity of people like Gladys Berejiklian. The Australian people know that the former premier of NSW was done over by a bad process, and an abuse ... I’m not going to have a kangaroo court taken into this parliament. ... These things, these matters should be looking at criminal conduct, not who your boyfriend is. That’s what it should be, these things should be looking at criminal conduct, now those opposite know all about criminal conduct because too many of their colleagues in the NSW parliament have ended up in prison. (note: after court cases which were held following Icac investigations) Criminal conduct! Criminal conduct is what this should look at, not chasing down someone’s love life. The first dixer is on the Covid recovery and Scott Morrison speaks about how well Victorians in particular have done. We are back on the national plan and the economic recovery being the most important thing for the government to focus on. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: The prime minister’s government lost two votes on the floor of the house today. Hasn’t the prime minister lost control of the house, lost control of the senators and lost the control of his government? Morrison: No. (That’s the whole answer) The former deputy prime minister is reading a poem based on that “I’ve been everywhere man” song about the government’s blackspot program. This day does not need that. Over in the house, the Labor member for Cowan, Anne Aly, is using her 90 second statement to remind the chamber that she is the actual member for Cowan, not Vince Connolly, who is the Liberal member for Stirling. A boundary re-distribution means that Stirling will not exist as an electorate after the next election so Connolly is now calling himself the “Liberal for Cowan”. Connolly is the Liberal endorsed candidate for Cowan, after losing a challenge to Ian Goodenough in Moore. Is that “twilight in the property boom” about to accelerate? Days after the Commonwealth Bank, the country’s largest mortgage issuer, predicted the slowdown in property price rises would turn into a 10% fall by 2023, there are fresh signs the “seller’s market” may be tilting more in favour of the buyer. Data out today by CoreLogic show the number of scheduled auctions has jumped, with this week’s tally setting records in Sydney, Canberra and Adelaide in the consultants’ 13 years of data. All up, 4,354 capital city homes will be auctioned this week, topping 4,000 for the first time, and beating this year’s current peak of 3990 in March by about 10%. Not surprisingly, much of the traffic is a result of Covid-19 lockdowns easing, with auction numbers rising at a pace of about 10% a week since a nadir of 1,423 in early September. The expected tally is 17% up on last week and double this time a year ago. Somewhat counterintuitively, extra supply doesn’t necessarily translate into lower prices, according to the CBA’s chief Australian economist Gareth Aird. He reckons interest rates (still low but rising in the market) and household income (perhaps picking up if jobless rates keep falling) are more important. Still, having more choice should ease some of that “fear of missing out” that spurred some of the 25%-plus rise in prices over the past year. Whether we see a panic to sell (let’s trademark it as Fear of Remaining In, or FORI), remains to be seen. Economic data out today should reassure many that the economy continues to pick up. Weekly payrolls for the fortnight to 30 October rose 1.4% following a 1.7% gain in the previous two weeks. Westpac economists said the numbers were strong enough to make them consider raising their current forecast for November employment of a 110,000 gain, or a 1.2% rise in original (not seasonally adjusted) terms. Greens senator Dorinda Cox has had this motion pass the Senate from both sides of the chamber: The number of First Nations women and children who are missing and murdered; b) The current and historical practices, including resources, to investigating the deaths and missing person reports of First Nations women and children in each jurisdiction compared to non-First Nations women and children; c) The institutional legislation, policies and practices implemented in response to all forms of violence experienced by First Nations women and children; d) The systemic causes of all forms of violence – including sexual violence – against First Nations women and children, including underlying social, economic, cultural, institutional and historical causes contributing to the ongoing violence and particular vulnerabilities of First Nations women and children; e) The policies, practices and support services that have been effective in reducing violence and increasing safety of First Nations women and children, including self-determined strategies and initiatives; f) The identification of concrete and effective actions that can be taken to remove systemic causes of violence and to increase the safety of First Nations women and children; g) The ways in which missing and murdered First Nations women and children and their families can be honoured and commemorated; and h) Any other related matters. Cox: This inquiry will be the first of its kind in Australia and will investigate the systemic causes of violence including underlying social, economic, cultural, institutional and historical causes contributing to the ongoing violence and particular vulnerabilities of First Nations women and children. Liberal senator Andrew Bragg is backing in his colleague Trent Zimmerman about wanting to fix the sex discrimination act to protect LGBTIQ students. The government has committed to reviewing the sex discrimination act in the next 12 months. He tells the ABC: I just think we need to get on with this. If we are going to go there and say schools are going to have more say over who they hire, which I think is entirely defensible, we need to tidy up discrimination, you wouldn’t sack someone if they were black or Jewish, but people are being sacked because they are gay, what about kids? Q: Can they be expelled because they are gay? Bragg: They can be at the moment, gay teachers and gay students are being discriminated against, we are going to proceed down this path we need to tidy this up as part of the process, it doesn’t need to be a separate process these are relatively simple amendments. AAP has an update on what is happening in the NT: The Australian Defence Force has rejected “wild” social media claims that it’s forcibly vaccinating Indigenous Northern Territorians against Covid-19. The territory detected one new case overnight, bringing the outbreak to 52 cases after a teenager from Binjari Aboriginal community tested positive. “This shows us the hard lockdown is working, and caring for close contacts in quarantine is working,” chief minister Michael Gunner said on Thursday. It comes as the ADF launches a public relations blitz following colourful and false Facebook posts by various groups and individuals about the military’s involvement in the Top End’s pandemic response. Some of the posts allege infected Aboriginal people are being forcibly transferred to quarantine facilities while likening them to the stolen generation. One group of traditional owners also accused ADF personnel of holding down people in some Indigenous communities and injecting them with the vaccine. The misinformation has been shared and reposted to multiple platforms and there are fears it could threaten efforts to contain an outbreak. The ADF has rejected the accusations, saying they are lies. “Defence is aware of social media posts claiming the Australian Defence Force is forcibly vaccinating or detaining members of the Australian community,” a spokesman said in a statement. “These claims are emphatically false.” Colonel Tim Rutherford, the ADF’s NT Covid-19 response commander, said the posts were made by “issue-motivated” groups using Defence’s involvement as a “prop”. “The claims are wild and various,” he told the ABC on Thursday morning. “They’re thoroughly untrue.” Col Rutherford said there had been no complaints from people in the locked-down Aboriginal communities of Binjari and Rockhole, 330km south of Darwin. “On the ground the people in the communities have been great and understand we’re there to support them, to keep them safe, protect country, families and communities,” he said. “They’ve been great ... but it’s creating a stir elsewhere and that’s attracting the attention of some of our coordinating staff who are now having to respond to this misinformation.” He urged members of the public to be aware of the facts before sharing social media posts. It is almost question time – the last one for the week. Let’s see how this one plays out. Remember how the government (apart from five senators) voted against the Pauline Hanson anti-vaccine mandate legislation on Monday? Well, today the government voted for this amendment, which asked for the legislation to be sent to a committee, which is not so far away from what the government opposed earlier in the week. At the end of the motion, add: “and, in respect of the COVID-19 Vaccination Status (Prevention of Discrimination) Bill 2021, the bill be referred immediately to the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee for inquiry and report by 1 February 2022”. The motion was lost after the rest of the crossbench voted with Labor and the Greens. The government tried to send the religious discrimination bill to the government controlled legal affairs committee, when Labor and the crossbench thought it was going to go to a joint committee (both the house and the senate). The bill is still in the house (debate was adjourned until next week) but this was an attempt to get ahead of when it arrives in the senate. So the government tried to send the bill to a committee it controlled and have it report on 1 February. So the vote happened and it was 25 to 25 – which means the government lost the vote (so no inquiry at this stage). What Bridget Archer did today, was actual conviction. Helen Haines: We were prevented by an undemocratic technicality. The prime minister and the government are standing in the way now of not only the will of the people but the will of the parliament. This is an extraordinary moment, I think, in the history of the House of Representatives. That we can have a vote of 66-64 in favour of bringing on debate of the most important bill this nation needs and we were defeated on a technicality, a technicality of the prime minister’s doing. It’s absolutely clear now that this prime minister, this government, does not wish to instigate a federal integrity commission. Right now, if we were not under the absolute majority pandemic rules, we would be debating and voting on my bill. Today you saw, I think, the absolute lioness of the 46th parliament and that woman is the member for Bass, Bridget Archer. Bridget Archer is a true Liberal. Bridget Archer today walked across the aisle for the single most important thing that any parliamentarian could do. She walked across the aisle to vote for integrity in this parliament. She walked across the aisle to make sure that her constituents knew that, that the nation knew, that she stands for accountability, transparency, decency and honour in parliament. She truly is a hero. Helen Haines and members of the crossbench are now holding a press conference about what happened this morning. They are not overly impressed with the government for denying the vote. To be fair, this is me on a fairly regular basis in this place: The house and senate have moved on to more sedate matters. For those counting though, Bridget Archer was the seventh government MP to cross the floor this week across the two houses. The last parliament sitting of the year is always a bit chaotic. And having a new Speaker hasn’t helped. We saw it when the medevac legislation (since repealed) passed against the government’s will though too. The government went on to win the next election. One chaotic sitting does not an election outcome make. Just something to keep in mind. The Australian Catholics Bishop Conference has welcomed the religious discrimination bill. From its statement: Archbishop Peter A Comensoli, chair of the Bishops Commission for Life, Family and Public Engagement, has commended the bill, saying it offers ‘a positive expression of religious freedom’ that will be ‘an important progression towards parity with other anti-discrimination laws in Australia’. “Federal and state anti-discrimination legislation protects Australians from discrimination on the basis of a wide array of attributes,” he said. “However, discrimination on the basis of religious belief or activity is only inconsistently acknowledged and protected against. “All Australian citizens, regardless of their religious belief or activity, should be able to participate fully in our society. They must be entitled to the equal and effective protection of the law and should not be discriminated against on the basis of their religious belief or activities in public life.” Lisa Fitzpatrick says the debate around Victoria’s pandemic bill “has swung into at times toxic political territory focusing on personalities and revenge rather than on protecting Victorians and our health workforce”. Meanwhile beyond exhausted nurses and midwives feel taken for granted while the critics pretend the pandemic is over. We are furious at this self-indulgence. We need our politicians and the community to care for nurses and midwives so they can care for them.” This morning unions representing nurses, midwives, doctors, paramedics and patient transport staff held a press conference to urge Victorian politicians to remember the bill should be about health in their last-minute pandemic bill negotiations. The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation (Victorian Branch), the Australian Medical Association Victoria, the Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Federation and the Victorian Ambulance Union are confident the bill provides the equivalent powers as the legislation of other Australian states. In a statement, the unions said: It provides the health minister with the critical ability to receive expert health advice and to respond quickly and decisively. These decisions cannot be made via a committee and must be entrusted to the elected position rather than a committee. The health unions also believe the bill provides appropriate transparency and accountability. They say without the new pandemic laws the state government will not be able to quickly respond to sharp increases in hospitalisations by pausing or re-introducing some restrictions; require aged care, healthcare workers and others to have the Covid-19 booster; or require Covid-19 positive people to isolate until they no longer pose a risk. It would also be difficult to contain an outbreak in a small town with no mechanism to isolate the population, the union say, or to implement different levels of isolation according to vaccination status. Here is how some of that played out in the house, as seen by Mike Bowers: For those who are confused, an “absolute majority” is 76. Which is why even though the crossbench had the majority, it didn’t have an absolute majority (which is needed under the standing orders to suspend debate). So the vote has been held again, and the crossbench and Labor, with Bridget Archer, win again, but this time Andrew Wallace remembers to say “absolute majority” and so the government loses the vote, but the motion still fails. The independents are sitting around Bridget Archer, like an honour guard. Or protection from some of the looks she is receiving from the government MPs. Hard to say. Anthony Albanese is sitting in the prime minister’s chair, signalling to the photographers to take his photo. Peter Dutton can be seen mouthing the word “hubris”. Scott Morrison has mostly had his back turned and is facing his backbench. So this is very confusing and this may not be entirely right, but what I think is happening is this. Andrew Wallace declared the vote for the Noes which was the crossbench, but without saying they needed an absolute majority. So he gave the win, but without the caveat, and given his rulings determine what the house does, it gave the crossbench and Labor to argue they may have actually won. It just makes it look like chaos on the floor of the parliament, which is why Anthony Albanese currently looks like he just heard the Rabbitohs won the premiership. Bob Katter stands up: “Clearly a lot of us are confused. I don’t know what is happening,” he says. He has no point of order, so he is sat down. Labor is now saying the vote needs to be recommitted. Former speaker Tony Smith is not moving a single facial muscle as this plays out. Tony Burke is pointing out that Andrew Wallace has declared the noes as having won the motion, without having declared the question/outcome. Peter Dutton is now trying to back in Wallace, while telling him what he needs to do. Burke is arguing against him It is, as they say, a complete mess on the floor right now. Kevin Andrews is trying to tell Andrew Wallace what he should be doing. Wallace is checking. Josh Frydenberg had a very long chat with Bridget Archer as she made her way across the chamber to vote with the crossbench. George Christensen voted with the government (he’s voting on his conscience at the moment) so did Llew O’Brien who has previously, publicly said he would consider crossing the floor. Speaker Andrew Wallace is really struggling with what comes next, and what question is being put to the house. Kevin Andrews is trying to seek the call. It’s a bit of a mess. Ayes 63 Noes 66 So the motion to suspend standing orders is defeated. The speaker seems a little confused about what comes next. The entire crossbench, including Craig Kelly is voting to suspend standing orders, along with Labor and Bridget Archer. It looks like Llew O’Brien is on the government benches for this vote. With Bridget Archer on board, the crossbench just needs one more government MP to cross the floor to suspend standing orders to bring on the debate. Both Andrew Wilkie and Bob Katter have interrupted Paul Fletcher to basically say, get on with it, and they want to have a debate on Helen Haines’ bill, not the government one. Fletcher runs out of time to clear up what he says are ‘misconceptions’ with the government bill. The house divides. Bob Katter takes a very round about way to say he will be supporting the suspension of standing orders to bring on the debate. It is, as always, a ride. Paul Fletcher confirms the government WILL NOT be supporting the motion, as it doesn’t believe the Haines bill covers things off. He says the government bill is ready to be introduced (that would be the one that no thinks actually addresses the issue) Rebekha Sharkie is also in support of the bill. She commends Bridget Archer for her move, and says other members of the government who have privately expressed they feel the same way as Archer should show the same courage. Llew O’Brien has previously said publicly he would consider crossing the floor on this issue. Here is Helen Haines on why she is moving this motion now: Bridget Archer did preview she could do this, as Sarah Martin reported: Australia’s overseas spy service has revealed that the former deputy commissioner of the NSW police force, Catherine Burn, is now its deputy director-general. The Australian Secret Intelligence Service (Asis) decided to publicly reveal the identities of its two deputy directors general (previously only the director-general, Paul Simon, was publicly disclosed). Burn’s appointment occurred in April 2018, but has only been revealed now. The Asis website has been updated to say: “Catherine was appointed ASIS’s Deputy-Director General Capability &amp; Corporate Management in April 2018. Prior to this, Catherine had a distinguished career with the New South Wales Police Force (NSWPF) reaching the rank of Deputy Commissioner.” The other Deputy-Director General (for Operations) is Fabio Meloni, a long-time foreign affairs official. A report by the parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security - tabled in parliament this week - explained this disclosure: “For the purposes of the 2019-20 No. 19 Review, the ASIS Director-General advised the Committee of his decision pursuant to s.41(b)(ii) of the IS Act to publicly declare the identities of the two Deputy Directors-General of ASIS. This declaration is reflected in the official witness list for the classified hearings for these reviews from April 2021, and the Committee acknowledges the trust placed in the Administration and Expenditure Review process with the formal identification of Mr Fabio Meloni and Ms Catherine Burn through this mechanism.” Zali Steggall is also pushing for the suspension of standing orders. Labor will also support it. The member for Bass, Bridget Archer, has crossed the floor (a day after George Christensen did it) to allow debate on Helen Haine’s federal Icac bill. Archer says it is isn’t perfect, but it deserves debate. The government defeated a similar motion Rex Patrick made in the Senate yesterday, so Archer’s move is not insignificant, given the numbers in the house. Over in the house, Helen Haines is attempting to suspend standing orders to bring about a debate on her (and the crossbenchers) federal Icac bill. Government backbencher, Bridget Archer has seconded the motion. Scott Morrison in his speech spoke about the need for people of faith to treat others as they would want to be treated. Which is a core tenet of many faiths. Cool. But then, he moved on to “cancel culture” and social media, and how it was impacting people of faith: Many people from various religious traditions are concerned about the lack of religious protection against the prevalence of cancel culture in Australian life. It’s true, it’s there, it’s real. Mr Speaker, the citizens of liberal democracies should never be fearful about what they believe, the lives they lead, or the god they follow if, indeed, they choose to follow one or acknowledge one at all. Australians shouldn’t have to worry about looking over their shoulder, fearful of offending an anonymous person on Twitter, cowardly sitting there, abusing and harassing them for their faith, or transgressing against political or social zeitgeists. We have to veer away from the artificial, phoney conflicts, boycotts, controversies and cancelling created by anonymous and cowardly bots, bigots and bullies. This is from a government that is attempting to whitewash Australia’s history in the school curriculum to focus on the “positives”, while right-wing culture warriors whip up frenzies about school materials designed to make learning environments inclusive and safe. Not to mention what LGBTIQ people, particularly those from the trans community, are subjected to every single day – and not just on social media, but in actual media. This is a country, led by the same Coalition government, which chased a young Muslim woman out of the country for a one-sentence social media post. The “artificial phoney conflicts, boycotts, controversies and cancelling” Morrison is speaking about, overwhelmingly have been in response to attacks on marginalised communities. We know about those who have been “cancelled” because they go on to whine about it on television, columns, radio shows and parliament, while those who are the actual victims of those attacks struggle to have their voices heard. The Australian Academy of Science has elected Prof Chennupati Jagadish as its 20th president. Jagadish, a nanotechnology expert and distinguished professor at the Australian National University, is one of the world’s leading physicists. He has helped develop semi-conductors used in LED lights and has designed some of the world’s smallest lasers. Jagadish arrived in Australia in 1990 to take up a position as a researcher, and will become the AAS’s first president of Indian heritage. After completing his PhD at the University of Delhi, he received 300 rejection letters before landing his first role. In a statement, Jagadish said: I never imagined when I came to Australia with a two-month-old baby and two-year contract 31 years ago, that one day I’d be elected a Fellow of the Academy and then go on to lead the organisation. The AAS, an organisation of Australia’s top research scientists, provides independent scientific advice to parliament. Jagadish will commence the role as president in May 2022. He said: I look forward to leading that work and being a champion for the cause of science and scientific excellence. As a nation, we must adequately invest in research and development to meet national and global challenges, such as climate change and future pandemics. On the flip side the human rights law centre wants the parliament to oppose it: “Our laws should protect people of faith and no faith from discrimination, without granting religious organisations new licence to discriminate against others. Women, LGBTIQ+ communities, people with disability, school students and people of faith should not fear unfair treatment and harm. The Morrison government’s proposed law fails on all fronts,” Adrianne Walters, the centre’s legal director said. The bill has far-reaching implications for all people in Australia. It contains alarming provisions that have never been seen in Australian anti-discrimination laws. It goes far beyond the important goal of protecting people of faith from discrimination and in doing so, it fails to fairly balance the right to equality with the freedom of religion. Of particular concern are provisions that: Allow people to make derogatory, offensive and harmful statements of belief, including in workplaces, schools and health services, and that override federal, state and territory anti-discrimination laws, thereby denying victims an important avenue for justice. Grant unprecedented licence to religious bodies, including schools and charities, to discriminate against people of a different faith or no faith in a range of circumstances. Attempt to override new legislation before the Victorian Parliament that seeks to provide better protections against discrimination for LGBTQ+ people, women and others. The Ai Group is happy with parts of the religious discrimination bill which have been removed: “Industry welcomes the removal from the Religious Discrimination Bill 2021 of the unworkable provisions relating to employer conduct rules concerning employee statements of belief,” Innes Willox, chief executive of the national employer association Ai Group, said today. Ai Group’s submissions on two earlier exposure drafts of the bill raised significant concerns about the previous provisions which would have severely constrained an employer’s ability to maintain appropriate standards of conduct in the workplace in respect of ‘statements of belief’ made by an employee. Employers are rightly focussed on ensuring that their workplaces embrace diversity, inclusion and tolerance and it is important that the rights of all employees are respected. Any statements made in the workplace must meet appropriate standards of conduct. The bill now protects this important principle. Ai Group supports freedom of religion. The bill appropriately outlaws discrimination on the grounds of religious belief or activities (similar to the anti-discrimination laws in most states and territories). We thank the government for its consultative approach as the proposals in the bill evolved. The consultation process turned what would have been impossible proposals for employers into a workable outcome. We look forward to participating in the parliamentary inquiry that will be held into the provisions of the bill. As for George Christensen saying he “abhors violence”, and never called for it, or incited it and “never would”, I guess he has forgotten about the time he posted himself pointing a gun three years ago, with the caption “you gotta ask yourself, do you feel lucky, greenie punks?” When people rightly complained, he fell back on the old sense of humour defence. George Christensen has made a personal explanation to the house about his 90-second speech yesterday [I refer to] reports and claims that I directly compared state premiers to Stalin, Mao, Hitler and Pol Pot. I wish to inform the House I did not. I said the path they’re on was troubling. If there is concern over any misrepresentation that I did say that, then that’s regrettable. Further, there’s been false reports in the Senate, on social media and elsewhere that I called for, and/or incited violence. I did no such thing. Never did. Never would. I abhor violence. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Here is what Christensen said yesterday: The totalitarian regimes responsible for the most heinous atrocities in the 20th century – think Stalin, Mao, Hitler, Pol Pot – didn’t get there overnight. They used fear to control. They excluded the dirty people, softly at first. They justified the exclusion. They moved to harder exclusions and eventually eliminated people either socially or physically. In 21st century Australia state premiers are racing down that familiar path, trying to out-tyrant each other, drunk on power, setting up their own biosecurity police states complete with medical apartheid. Sadly, we have enabled it, refusing to rein them in and, worse, supplying the Australian Immunisation Register data that underpins this medical apartheid. Fear is a justification of choice for coercion and control, with non-vaccinated Australians increasingly demonised, ostracised and socially eradicated. In Queensland the premier tweeted that people not vaccinated raise red flags – not just one, but 22 of them. In the media politicians and health bureaucrats all claim Covid-19 is now a pandemic of the unvaccinated, but there is no justification for such demonisation. In a German study, 55% of symptomatic patients over 60 were fully vaccinated. Gibraltar, where all 34,000 residents are fully vaccinated, is recording 60 new cases a day. The totalitarian path we are unquestionably on has never ended well. The solution is a rediscovery of human dignity, along with – and I don’t say this lightly – civil disobedience. The bill is commended to the House, and the debate is adjourned. Scott Morrison: Sadly, every faith faces its share of bigotry against people of faith. The treasurer and his colleagues, sadly, know too much about this in their own personal lives and in their own communities. And I particularly acknowledge all those of the Jewish faith is a great shame that the treasurer of our country, has to be offered personal protection, not because he’s the treasurer, but because he’s a Jew. (And yet some elements of the anti-vaccine mandate protests seek to fuel that bigotry. The same protests members of the government, including the prime minister, have “both sided”.) Scott Morrison: The bill is about creating a bigger space for everyone in our national lives to be themselves, who they believe, what they believe, free of discrimination, coercion and judgment. That is our Australian way and always has been so. The bill recognises that religious bodies, religious schools must be free to uphold the tenets of their faith, and the ethos that makes this school, a community and is a recognition of the sacrifices parents make to educate their children in accordance with their values and beliefs, and the choices they have made for their children’s education. As many schools schools have said throughout this process, faith is caught not taught. The bill protects the fundamental right for religious schools to hire religious staff to maintain their religious ethos in accordance with a publicly available policy. This protection will be able to override state or territory laws which seeks to interfere with that right … Nothing in this bill, I stress, Mr Speaker, nothing in this bill allows for any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of their sexuality or gender identity. You won’t find anything of that nature in this bill. Such discrimination has no place in our education system. A reminder though, that this bill is going straight to a Senate inquiry. It won’t be passed this sitting. And the conservatives in the Coalition don’t think it goes far enough, and the moderates are uncomfortable with provisions which could override discrimination protections in state laws. So while the speech dresses it up as getting the balance right, there are those in Scott Morrison’s own party room who disagree. So to an inquiry it goes, for more consultation. Scott Morrison is using this speech as another reset – he is on solid ground and speaking directly to the people he believes he needs to reach – a lot of them who live in the NSW electorates the government is desperate to either hold on to or win. Scott Morrison: It is therefore no wonder that people of faith and religion have played such a prominent role in the creation and establishment of free societies. The underpinning principles of our free societies – indeed, the notion of liberty itself, Mr Speaker – draws heavily from the roots of faith, religion and faith and is also about humility and vulnerability. It is about love. It is about compassion. It is about speaking the truth in love as the Scriptures say. It recognises the sanctity and dignity of every single human thing. It is about the heart, Mr Speaker, it’s about the soul, and it’s about the spirit. Scott Morrison: Mr Speaker, a free society is a tolerant society. In a free society, we don’t go around imposing our views on each other or seeking to injure one another with those views. People should not be cancelled, or persecuted or vilified, because their beliefs are different from someone else’s in a free liberal democratic society such as Australia. The whole point of faith, Mr Speaker, is choice. It is the action of free will and is for this reason free societies typically have had a strong tradition of faith. Faith and freedom have been so inseparable in the formation of liberal democracies all around the world. Parliament has begun and Scott Morrison is on his feet, bringing the religious discrimination bill into the House: The protection of what we choose to believe in a free society is essential to our freedom. And so it is only right we should expect what we sincerely believe should be afforded the same protection from discrimination in a free liberal democracy as any protected attributes of our humanity … This bill puts this right, it is sensible and balanced and I commend the attorney on the work she has done in ensuring that it is sensible and balanced. [This bill] is the product of a tolerant and mature society that understands the importance of faith and belief to a free society, while not seeking to impose those beliefs or ever seek to injure others in the expression of those beliefs. Andrew Giles stopped by doors this morning, with one of Labor’s messages for the day: George Christensen made a vile, disgusting and indeed dangerous contribution in the parliament. He compared jurisdictions in Australia to places they simply should not be compared to. And he concluded with an incitement to civil disobedience. Let’s think about the context right now – where we have seen in my home state gallows displayed on Victoria’s parliament. We’ve seen threats to elected officials and their families, including threats to kill. At this moment, Australia’s prime minister should stand up for our democracy. He should stand up for the safety of Australians – whether it’s by supporting unequivocally the vaccine rollout, or supporting unequivocally our democracy and the right of every Australian to safely go about their work. He should call out George Christensen instead of talking in mealy mouthed terms about understanding the frustrations of protesters, and continuing to cuddle up to extremists. We see this in the parliament too, because it’s not just about George Christensen’s behaviour – the prime minister won’t stand up to anyone. He won’t stand up to anyone, so he can’t be trusted to keep Australians safe and to make the decisions that he needs to make. Scott Morrison will soon introduce the religious discrimination bill into the House. Sarah Martin and Paul Karp have the latest on the legislation, here: The Daily Telegraph says Morrison will link the bill to “cancel culture” in his speech. Because that is absolutely an issue outside of conservative minds. More than one-in-two retail workers are experiencing increased hostility and abuse from customers, according to a new report from the Australian National University and the University of Sydney. The report is one of the first to look at the impacts of the pandemic on essential workers thrown into the frontline with little preparation and a high risk of exposure to the virus. Pandemic Pressures: Job Security and Customer Relations for Retail Workers highlights the challenges faced by retail, fast-food and distribution workers during the pandemic and lockdowns, as well as Covid-19’s impact on job security and worker-customer relations. Lead author Prof Ariadne Vromen, from the ANU Crawford school of public policy, said 56% of retail workers had experienced a notable increase in customer abuse during the pandemic. “The experiences and concerns of these workers have tended to be overlooked or underestimated by the media and governments, relative to other frontline workers,” she said. “Questions remain about why there has been continued job insecurity and unpredictable hours in such a significant sector, and why workers were not redeployed into new online sales and warehouse roles. “Women, linguistically diverse people and young people working in retail were also much more likely to report increased customer abuse during the pandemic, while also being much more likely to say they felt stressed enforcing customer Covid-19 safety compliance.” The report is the result of a representative online survey of more than 1,100 retail, fast-food and distribution workers in September during the height of lockdowns in many parts of Australia. The researchers also conducted 30 interviews with senior stakeholders from across the industry. NSW and Victoria have released their Covid reports: The House will sit at 9.30am, for those wondering. A special Victorian Roy Morgan SMS poll shows 76% of Victorians agree that an employed worker in Victoria should not be allowed to enter their employer’s workplace unless fully vaccinated, compared with only 24% that disagree. Agreement with this policy is consistently strong across gender, age and location, although there are significant political differences, the poll found. An almost unanimous 96% of Labor supporters agree with the policy, compared with 91.5% of Greens supporters, 55% of Coalition supporters and just 4% of supporters of Clive Palmer’s United Australia party. Support for the ALP on a two-party-preferred basis increased to 59.5%. The ALP has increased its two-party-preferred lead almost 20 percentage points. Labor is now on 59.5% (up 1.5 points since mid-November 2021), compared with the LNP on 40.5% (down 1.5 points). Approval for Daniel Andrews increased despite protests. The survey found 63.5% of Victorian electors now approve of the way the premier is handling his job, up three points from mid-November 2021 while a minority of 36.5%, down three points, disapprove. Support for the minor parties is largely unchanged from mid-November, with total support at 15.5%, up 0.5 points. Support is highest for Clive Palmer’s United Australia party on 4% (up 1 points) ahead of Derryn Hinch’s Justice party unchanged on 2%, while an unchanged 3.5% of people support other parties. Support for independents is at 6%, down 0.5 points from mid-November. But the bill could still be used as a “sword”, depending on the sexuality of staff. Stoker: Let’s think about how this works in practice. If a teacher applies to work at a school, whether it’s Christian, or Islamic, or whether it’s Jewish or any other, and they apply to work at a school that’s got a clearly stated policy … Kelly: That’s what I’m asking, can that policy say we don’t employ gay teachers? I mean, if this Christian school is looking at the employment of a Christian teacher and their Christian teacher happens to be gay, can that disqualify them from employment? Is that allowed under this bill? Stoker: Look, I think that is something that would depend a great deal upon what that school is prepared to be upfront with the community about now. I’d suggest there would be very few schools that that want to be in a position where they’ve got to say to the community, that this is what we believe and we’re not going to hire people, unless they subscribe to a version of belief that is very, very strict on that front. The “shield, not a sword” line is one Scott Morrison has been using, which has been adopted by almost the entire party room. But the reason it is going to a Senate committee is because not everyone within the Coalition’s own ranks is happy with the bill. Here’s why Trent Zimmerman wants the Sex Discrimination Act loopholes dealt with now. From Amanda Stoker’s interview this morning with Fran Kelly on ABC RN: Kelly: The bill is dense, people are still getting across it. But a lot of the focus, and I know the focus in the discussion your party room is on how gay teachers and students will fare under this legislation. The attorney general has conceded that under the current law, teachers can be sacked because of their sexual discrimination. That’s a sexual orientation, that’s under the sex discrimination law. Will it still be the case, under the religious discrimination bill? Stoker: The religious discrimination bill covers slightly different territory. It provides that it is unlawful to discriminate on the grounds of religious belief or activity or indeed someone’s non-belief in areas like employment, education, provision of goods and services. But what the government has committed to do is to meet the commitment it made some time ago, to work through with the Australian Law Reform Commission, a way forward that involves moving, particularly in relation to students, those provisions in the Sex Discrimination Act that create that risk. Noting that, you know, overwhelmingly, when you talk to faith-based schools have all different kinds of backgrounds, they’re all saying I don’t want to do this to students and teachers, overwhelmingly, they like to include and support pastorally. Kelly: Overwhelmingly they might, but there is evidence that some schools do and teachers have been sacked for their sexuality and the students have been kicked out too. Stoker: Look, I’m not going to split hairs over that. Kelly: That’s not splitting hair, that’s the whole point of this argument that’s happening within your party room. I mean, your colleague, Fiona Martin, who’s a psychologist, works with kids and teenagers, is saying the Sex Discrimination Act should be amended now to stop it happening. Why not get it done now, rather than wait for a review for another year? The prime minister made this promise at a byelection in Wentworth in 2018. That’s, you know, waiting up to a third election since then. Stoker: Look, we’ve made the commitment both to bring in the religious discrimination act, and to deal with those provisions in the Sex Discrimination Act. It’s important we do them well, and that we do them in a way that brings people with us. And so that’s exactly what we’re doing. We also took the religious discrimination act to an election, as you’ll recall. We’ve had an elaborate consultation process and it’s ready to go. But the matters for which colleagues, and different parts of the community seeking change around the Sex Discrimination Act, remain on the table, and they remain matters that we are committed to pursue. And this has to be done in two different pieces. And they are in different acts. That makes sense. But the commitment is clear. We need to make sure that people from a religious perspective, or indeed a right not to believe perspective, don’t face discrimination. And it’s very important that in doing so, we make it clear that we are not permitting or authorising or empowering discrimination on the basis of any other protected attribute. It’s worth thinking of this bill, not as a sword to use against others, but a shield to use to protect from discrimination. Trent Zimmerman, one of the Coalition moderates, wants the government to fix the Sex Discrimination Act – now. It’s in the frame of the religious discrimination bill – moderates, like Zimmerman, want stronger protections for children, no matter their sexuality, and don’t see why there needs to be a year-long wait for the Australian Law Commission to review the law: My view is there’s no earthly reason why we can’t be getting on with this now, rather than putting in place a review that will go for longer than 12 months. Because it is disturbing that still today a school could exercise those rights to expel a student because of their sexuality. As someone who has personally lived through this, that fear of action by your school during that extraordinarily difficult time in your life, when you’re coming to terms with your sexuality is something that can have a profound impact on a young person. Scott Morrison had promised as a “priority” to fix legislation which could see LGBTIQ students discriminated against because of their sexuality in 2018 when it was all about the Wentworth byelection. Here he is in 2018: Three years later we are still talking about it. Amanda Stoker, who lost the preselection battle with James McGrath, despite the prime minister’s support, and has been relegated to the third place on the LNP ticket, is also in a fight to stay in the Senate. She is up against Campbell Newman, who is now a member of the Liberal Democrat party, which is getting support from Clive Palmer’s party (you can bet his advertising dollars will be used to cement that alliance) as well as One Nation and the Greens (presuming the polling is right and Labor’s vote has recovered in Queensland). How worried is Stoker this could be one of her last times in Canberra? Look, I’m not worried about that. I’m worried about delivering for sensible and, and reasonable concerns for Queenslanders. And so I’m getting on with the job. I’m not counting numbers. Queensland senator Amanda Stoker, the assistant minister to the attorney general, was on ABC radio RN talking about the religious discrimination bill, which Scott Morrison will introduce today. She was asked about the statement of belief clause, as well as who schools would be able to hire (and possibly fire) under the protections the bill offers: Statement of belief is the ability of a person to politely and respectfully and, without inciting violence, state what they believe to others, without fear that they will be dragged for a tribunal accused of having discriminated for stating they genuinely held good faith, religious belief. That’s what statement of belief is. The matter in relation to schools is a bit different. I think as a matter of principle, it should be the case that a school who can show that they have a belief set that is justified from the core of their religious beliefs that they are prepared to make public and that they are prepared to be upfront about with people who apply to work in a place should be able to require that people act consistently with it. Now for many people, they’ll look at that and go, ‘Well, you know, that’s, that’s pretty intense. That might not be somewhere I want to work.’ Other people will say, ‘That’s the way I think, and that’s a way that I want to believe.’ But if we look at the big picture here, what these schools do is provide education in a, in an environment in, in a school culture that is shaped by the fact of the way that really just belief is implemented across that community. And if you take away the ability of a school to be able to lever a community that’s based on that, then you might as well just have public schools across the board, because parents and teachers and students won’t be getting anything different from the private school sector. Daniel Hurst also has the latest on where Australia is at with the IP waiver for Covid vaccines: The Australian trade minister is pessimistic about an imminent deal to waive intellectual property on Covid-19 vaccines, as he prepares to fly to Geneva for crucial World Trade Organization talks next week. Dan Tehan’s planned travel comes amid accusations the Australian government has been “trying to have it both ways” by backing the proposed waiver but not co-sponsoring it at the WTO. The idea – proposed by India and South Africa a year ago in a bid to speed up vaccine delivery to low-income countries – would allow for cheaper generic versions to be manufactured in developing nations. But it has yet to be approved, despite support from more than 100 countries including the US. AAP has a bit more on the Byron Bay hostel lockdown: More than 80 backpackers at a Byron Bay hostel on the NSW north coast have been placed into a week-long lockdown after a guest tested positive to COVID-19. The lockdown comes as thousands of celebrating school leavers are due to arrive in Byron Bay and other parts of northern NSW over the next month from this weekend. Ballina MP Tamara Smith posted on Facebook on Wednesday night about the situation at the Aquarius Backpackers. “I’m closely monitoring a situation in Byron Bay this evening where a positive COVID-19 case and 84 close contacts have been identified at Aquarius Backpackers in Byron Bay,” she said. NSW Health has locked down the hostel for seven days, impacting 84 guests. “I’m told [they are] being supported with food, health and support,” Ms Smith said. NSW Police have placed a 24-hour guard on the hostel to ensure compliance. “My thoughts are with everyone in that situation as it will be a tough time,” Ms Smith said. Thousands of HSC students are about to descend on the resort town for schoolies celebrations. Some 80.9 per cent of residents in the Byron Bay local government area are fully vaccinated. Although high, the coverage rate lags the state average of 92 per cent. It’s the last sitting day of the first week of the sitting and probably no one is more excited about the prospect of a small break from parliament than Scott Morrison. What was meant to be a triumphant return to form after three weeks on the quasi-campaign trail has instead been a bit of a horror show for the government. Morrison created an own goal early on in the week by claiming he’d told Anthony Albanese where he was going on holidays during the bushfires, which he doubled down on when Albanese denied it, before finally admitting that no, he hadn’t. That set the tone. Since then he’s been dealing with an increasingly rebellious backbench, senators running amok in the upper house, questions on pairs, lower house MPs threatening to cross the floor/withhold their vote (George Christensen did cross the floor yesterday) and trying to walk both sides of vaccine mandates, while some of his own MPs ramp up public hostilities on the topic. All in all, not a great week for the prime minister. Today he’ll introduce the religious discrimination bill, which started life as an election promise under religious freedoms. But even that won’t be the win it was meant to be just a few short weeks ago. Division in his party room means the bill will be going straight to a Senate committee where it’s unlikely to see the light of day again before an election, especially if the PM decides to go to the polls in March. So that’s one less commitment made and commitment met, as the PM is fond of saying. And it’s one less thing he can try and force Labor (which has its own divides on the issue) into a position on. Meanwhile, Ccovid continues to change people’s realities. A Byron Bay hostel is in lockdown and more information is coming out about what NSW health authorities had asked for earlier on in the NSW outbreak. Victorians are still scarred and Queenslanders are nervous about the coming reopening. The Northern Territory is struggling to get outbreaks in Indigenous communities under control and anti-vaxxers are making it even harder. We’ll bring you all the day’s news. Mike Bowers is out in the corridors and Katharine Murphy, Paul Karp, Sarah Martin Daniel Hurst all have their ears to the ground in Canberra, while the rest of the Guardian team keep you up to date with what’s happening outside of the building. I’m having gingerbread biscuits for breakfast. But only because HR frowns upon breakfast cocktails while working. Ready?The UK government has begun to count the cost of Bulb Energy’s collapse as many begin to wonder whether it is a fair price to pay for policymakers’ failure to spot a looming market breakdown. The life-support scheme set up to allow Bulb to keep supplying gas and electricity to its 1.7 million customers through the winter months could cost taxpayers up to £1.7bn, or £1,000 a customer, according to a court application to hand the company to a special administrator. Officials are understood to be focused on finding a quick exit strategy from the arrangement as early in the new year as possible to help limit the eye-watering costs, as signs of the supplier’s “unsustainable” business model grow clearer. Accounts for the collapsed supplier show a clear trend of growing losses and spiralling debts as it paid heavily to build its book of customers. In 2018, the company was believed to have around 300,000 customers and accounts showed debts of £26m. But by March 2020 Bulb’s dash for growth meant about 1.6 million customers and liabilities of £223m – with debt repayments due by the end of this year. “It looks like Bulb didn’t buy their energy far enough in advance and were surviving hand to mouth on borrowed money. That’s irresponsible, really,” said one source close to the government. There were other signs of trouble for Britain’s fastest-growing energy company, founded in east London in 2015 by entrepreneurs Amit Gudka and Hayden Wood. An industry source pointed to Bulb’s habit of buying energy from the market three months in advance as a large part of its downfall. Bulb was able to benefit from this strategy between late 2018 and last summer as market prices drifted downwards, but the recent hike in markets meant it was paying record-breaking prices to secure winter energy supplies. “Pretty much all the suppliers still able to operate had sourced gas and electricity from the wholesale markets at least a year ahead of time to hedge against a major market shock,” another industry source said. “In short, Bulb came undone because it hadn’t bought its energy in advance, it didn’t have enough investment to cover the costs and the government’s price cap meant it couldn’t push bills higher either,” the source added. The collapse of a company in precarious financial standing is likely to raise broader questions over how the regulator could overlook Bulb’s financial situation and the regulation of the market in the future. Ed Miliband, the Labour party’s shadow business minister, blamed a “failure of regulation” for the spiralling costs of Britain’s energy market, which allowed firms to take “risky bets” to bolster competition in a campaign of deregulation from 2016. Dermot Nolan, the chief executive of Ofgem between 2014 and 2020, told the Guardian it was “clear that energy regulation needs to change” and that Ofgem “needs to go further down the road towards more intervention where the financial stability of energy suppliers is concerned”. Nolan began taking steps to toughen the financial standards for energy suppliers following a flurry of supplier failures in 2018, but there was some debate within the regulator over whether to accept the fall and failure of some companies as an inevitable part of a free market – particularly because the costs of these failures were negligible at the time. “The degree to which things change would bring its own costs and would be far from perfect. But this would be something for Ofgem to consider,” Nolan added. Greg Jackson, the chief executive of Octopus Energy, said: “It’s an interesting regulatory question; how long should you leave a company to sort out its own issues before you take action? I don’t think Bulb was doomed to fail, even at the start of the energy crisis, but by the time higher prices took hold it was too late.” For Bulb, fresh investment and perpetual growth had become necessary for its survival. The company had no shortage of interested suitors, according to sources, but as the energy market crisis deepened the options quickly dwindled. “They were determined to raise money at higher valuations than they were being offered by investors,” said an industry source who asked not to be named. “It was a strategy driven by confidence and maybe even a little greed. Either way, they definitely thought they were worth more than investors did, so instead of raising money prudently they held out. The fallback plan was always a sale. But eventually this was off the table, too.” These same investors may have a chance for a second look at Bulb – at a cheaper rate – in the new year as the government prepares to sell off the company or its customers to new firms. It was “the right outcome” according to Jackson because it would “reduce the cost for bill payers and help to preserve jobs. It should be a smoother process for customers overall”. An Ofgem spokesperson said the regulator has already started to make the market more resilient, but the unprecedented gas prices “show us we need to go further to build an energy market that is more resilient to shocks like this, while continuing to offer dynamism, innovation and choice”.Notwithstanding the wildness of the penultimate sitting week, the circumstances were unusual across the board. A Liberal MP, rather than threatening to cross the floor of parliament, first signalled she would do so, then actually did it. Bridget Archer’s objective seemed simple and clear: shame colleagues into actually proceeding with the federal integrity commission the Coalition had promised, but studiously not delivered, for the best part of three years. Archer lined up with the independent Helen Haines to try to force a debate on the floor of the lower house on Thursday. They failed, but Archer, emotions brimming, had made her point. Scott Morrison sat stoney faced as Labor dragged out Archer’s act of defiance, testing the composure of the new Speaker of the House of Representatives, Andrew Wallace. There was an extended procedural rumble over whether or not Wallace had called the result of the vote to suspend the standing orders correctly. The father of the house, Kevin Andrews – the Liberal who had coveted the Speaker’s chair after Tony Smith stepped out of it this week – chose to rise at one point to guide the man who vanquished him. Smith, ever the diplomat, gazed off into the middle distance. Josh Frydenberg, who had dinner with Archer earlier this week, visited the teary MP at the back of the chamber for a welfare check and invited her to come for a chat afterwards. Anthony Albanese looked like he’d won the lottery. Morrison turned his back on the Labor leader. When MPs crossed the chamber for a division, Albanese settled into Morrison’s chair and motioned to photographers to capture the moment. Across the chamber, Peter Dutton, who wouldn’t mind Morrison’s chair should it suddenly become vacant, chuckled genially and editorialised to the photographers in the gallery above about the perils of hubris. Thursday morning ebbed, and the combatants rolled into question time. Naturally, Labor was minutely interested in the whereabouts of Morrison’s long-promised integrity commission. The prime minister, stroking across the rip of a terrible week, roared like a caged beast. Hellfire and fury rained down. Morrison’s first line of defence was the government’s integrity commission legislation was already “out there”. It certainly is out there in a number of respects – but it’s not yet in the parliament – the only place where it can be turned from concept to reality. Morrison then blamed Labor for opposing the government’s proposal. Things got wilder as the prime minister lunged for a human shield in the form of ex-NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian (who the Liberals hope will run against Zali Steggall in Warringah and help shore up the Coalition vote in the state). The prime minister thundered Labor wanted a replica of the New South Wales Icac. He derided that anti-corruption body as a boyfriend-monitoring “kangaroo court”. Morrison declared what had been “done” to Berejiklian by the Icac was “an absolute disgrace” and the people of NSW knew it. Kangaroo courts pursued “political vendettas, as we have seen in New South Wales with disgraceful treatment of the former premier … who was chased out of office before that even made a finding”. He accused Labor of wanting an integrity commission that would deny procedural fairness to parliamentarians and others under investigation, one that would deploy “coercive powers on low-level misconduct and disciplinary offences”. A body prepared to humiliate politicians in other words. The Horror. But before we go any further, we need to be clear, because facts matter. Berejiklian wasn’t chased out of office. She resigned as premier after Icac revealed it was investigating whether or not she broke the law by failing to report the conduct of her ex-lover – the disgraced former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. Now, it is entirely possible Berejiklian maintains her saintly status despite her recent appearances before the anti-corruption body. Perhaps there is a groundswell of Gladmentum for Morrison to tap into Australia’s most populous state (ironic, really, given by many accounts, the relationship between the two leaders deteriorated substantially during the stresses of the 2019 bushfires and the Delta outbreak). No longer being a resident, or a state-based political reporter, I claim no special insight into whether or not Berejiklian remains the Patron Saint of Sydney and Surrounds – although I really struggle to comprehend why voters would mourn a former premier whose greatest hits include blithely defending pork barrelling and demonstrating during significant moments during the pandemic she was both arrogant and impervious to scrutiny. In any case, the electoral utility of Saint Gladys (Icac and any subsequent processes-willing) is one thing. But extrapolating the ballad of Saint Gladys more broadly seems quite another. It seems a significant stretch that Australian voters would lose sleep agonising over the procedural rights and reputational discomforts of federal politicians as a cohort. It really is strange how often the prime minister projects his own travails or imagined slights and privations directly on to the people. How Morrison assumes his own outrage or inconvenience is the people’s outrage – like he’s a hologram of the quiet Australians, rather than a separate and distinct material form. A prime minister no less. It goes without saying that politicians deserve procedural fairness as much as the rest of us. It is also prudent for legislators to think carefully about the powers and remit of anti-corruption bodies. No reasonable person would dispute that. But I can’t see “woe is us”/“wither our poor reputations” being a cut-through political point when voters are deeply worried about whether or not their politics is clean, and also resent a corrosive culture of one rule for us and another rule for you. Why would people think “poor Scott” when the Coalition has so obviously dragged its heels in setting up a federal anti-corruption body with teeth, and when the government is so very obviously resisting the spectre of an integrity body that would hold public hearings? In simple terms Morrison – a prime minister battling rolling rebellions inside his own ranks at the close of the parliamentary year – on Thursday responded to adversity by declaring war on external scrutiny he can’t control and doesn’t care for. The histrionics only serve to hang a lantern over the inherent conflict of interest associated with parliamentarians deciding the limits of the watchdogs that scrutinise them. Archer said it best on Thursday: “There is a place for politics … but on something as important as trust and confidence in elected officials – that is not it.”If you’re a survivor of male violence, reading Lucy Kirkwood’s “howl of a play” Maryland is a visceral experience. To hear it out loud, I imagine even more so – the Observer’s theatre critic Susannah Clapp described the experience of attending a reading at the Royal Court as “only the second time in 20 years in the stalls that I and another critic (female) have clutched each other in fright”. Maryland was written in two days after the killing of school teacher Sabina Nessa, months after Sarah Everard had been raped and murdered by a police officer and in the year that two Metropolitan police officers pleaded guilty to misconduct after sharing photos of the murdered sisters Nicole Smallman and Bibaa Henry on a Whatsapp group. The officers have now been sacked. Maryland is 30 minutes of pure anger. And what woman hasn’t felt angry this year, about the continued toll that male violence takes upon our lives? Maryland’s chorus of Furies (at least three, but 100 is better, the script advises) could be any one of us. “Not all men,” they chant, “but … if I gave you a box of 10 Maltesers and told you two of them weren’t Maltesers, they were very small balls of human shit, would you feel a bit anxious while you were eating or would you just crack on?” The word “rape”, meanwhile, is obscured by a scarcely human scream, an “unbearable noise”, a metaphor for the unspeakable pain and fear it wreaks on so many women’s lives. Maryland sold out when it was performed in an extended run at the Royal Court in October. Usually with contemporary drama, that would probably be the end of it for a while, but Kirkwood has waived performance rights for November, meaning anybody can perform it this month, with the result that, amazingly, Maryland is being performed all over the country, from Cardiff to Edinburgh, Manchester to Brighton, Newcastle to north Wales, its furious words spoken by many different women, its message ricocheting and resonating across the land in a startling act of resistance. Donations towards survivors’ charities are encouraged in a way that resembles how benefit performances of The Vagina Monologues have been performed globally. Feminist theatre has always had radical potential, prompting as it does what used to be called “consciousness raising”, the hope being that audience members leave a performance determined to enact change, committed to speaking out. “Look how the play has galvanised theatre makers all over Britain,” Bridget Foreman tells me – she is directing the play for York’s Riding Lights Theatre Company, which is staging readings this Friday at the Friargate theatre. “We want to shout, to protest. We want audiences to go out and do the same in their way: in their families, workplaces, friendship groups. We want far more than ripples of applause. We really believe that this play can stir people to change how they think about what is and isn’t acceptable behaviour, and what they can do about it.” Maryland’s furious echoes are a powerful argument for relaxing rights to works that confront social issues, so that they can be seen by diverse and geographically diffuse audiences. At the heart of Kirkwood’s play is an understanding of how male violence and the experience of it can manifest differently among women, with certain lines being reserved for women of colour, such as: “Because if your bruises don’t show like a Caucasian, you are not believed like a Caucasian” and “If I was attacked and left for dead I cannot guarantee that the police would not take photographs/selfies with my dead body.” From its beginnings, feminist theatre appreciated the importance of first-person testimony (Kirkwood says that everything in the play is based on real-life events). In the 1980s my mother was part of the feminist theatre group ReSisters (no relation to the current campaigning group of the same name embroiled in the trans rights debate), a multicultural co-operative of women who used personal experience of male violence to create shows, including with women in refuges. (Some of the self-defence she learned with ReSisters she passed on to me, and in the autumn of 2010, when I was attacked, it saved my life; proof, if you need it, of how such groups can affect change in our lives.) Feminist theatre was thriving then in the 1970s and 80s (in London thanks to funding from the GLC before it was abolished by Margaret Thatcher) and its resonances live on in art and literature. Bernardine Evaristo’s phenomenally successful Girl, Woman, Other draws on that period of activist theatre and on black women’s experiences (the section about the gang rape of a schoolgirl remains one of the most powerful, distressing evocations I have ever read), Rebecca Watson’s novel Little Scratch, about a woman trying to go about her day in the aftermath of a rape, has been adapted into a play at Hampstead theatre. Could we be seeing another wave of resistance? The dissemination of Maryland seems to indicate that we might. These days there is a far more mainstream understanding of the mechanisms and manifestations of police violence than there were even when I was younger, as a result of Black Lives Matter and a number of high-profile cases that have seen women and their allies react in fury. As Foreman says, “Real-world change starts at a grassroots level. If criminals can hide in the police force, then individuals need to come together to raise their voices in outrage and in protest. Theatre helps us imagine such protests. Theatre helps us to imagine change so we can implement and live it.” Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnist and authorThere’s nothing wrong with a bit of melodrama. It was good enough for Daphne du Maurier, who made of it something heady and elemental, and such contemporary virtuosos as Sarah Waters continue to draw on its disreputable traditions. It needn’t alarm us, then, to find that Rose Tremain’s new novel opens with a confession of murder, a stormy night and the rescue – from ravening wolves, no less – of a foundling infant. What’s the point of melodrama, after all, if you can’t turn up the dials a bit? Known for flitting easily between period settings, Tremain takes us this time to the London of the 1860s, where Lily Mortimer, though not yet 17, is setting her affairs in order. The former foundling confesses her crime only to the reader, yet she is certain of her doom. She will soon be discovered and hanged, she believes, and means therefore to set down her testimony – not so that we can judge her for ourselves, but so that she can absolve herself or otherwise. Rescued from the aforementioned wolves by a kindly constable, the infant Lily is consigned to the Foundling Hospital. There she is to be inculcated with humility (her mother being a “shameful sinner”) and fitted in due course for some dismal occupation so that her debt to the upright can be discharged. In keeping with these grimly benevolent principles, she is “christened anew”. Henceforth, she will be Lily Mortimer, named for a high-born benefactress, as if to reinforce her own lowly station. But before Lily’s oppression can begin in earnest, she is whisked off to the Suffolk countryside. It is the hospital’s practice to farm out its charges for the first six years of their lives, presumably to ensure that they are sturdy enough to be properly brutalised. As befits the heroine of a melodrama, the arrangement also entrains a brief reversal of fortune. For at Rookery Farm, the young Lily is positively steeped in bucolic bliss, doted upon by a sweet-natured matriarch and surrounded by “a bright immensity of sky, skeins of thistledown born aloft, birds in the trembling heavens”. All of which is lovely enough, in its way – though thistledown is surely “borne” rather than “born” aloft – but by this point in the proceedings the accretion of familiar elements is growing worrisome. Nellie Buck, the foster mother to whose skirts Lily literally clings, regards the world “over the big shelf of her bosom” and brings those around her “to a contemplation of their best selves”. Such florid archetypes can be put to sly uses, but this one is wheeled out with every appearance of solemnity. Again, melodrama is fine, as long as it’s clear you’re doing it on purpose. Lily is duly heartbroken when she learns that she must return to the hospital, but heartbreak proves to be the least of her sufferings. And in the depiction of these sufferings Tremain finds a surer footing, paring away the histrionics and adopting a flintier register. The Sisters in charge demand not just obedience but gratitude. They don’t get it from Lily, who has known real love and kindness and refuses to play along. For this she is singled out and subjected to escalating cruelties that culminate in outright depravity. Her only friend, meanwhile – a child of just eight – is driven to such despair that when Lily knits her a scarf, she uses it to hang herself. The central murder, by the time it is recounted, seems scarcely to require explanation, let alone absolution. For Lily, “it was as if a tiny hurting part of her brain had turned itself into a compass […] hovering perpetually upon north”. At the heart of this novel, then, is a taut and quietly furious moral drama that sits uneasily amid its more frivolous trappings. Indeed, it seems in the end to be striving to shake them off. Lily leaves her employer, a flamboyant wigmaker who moonlights as a courtesan. In a moment of crisis, she seeks out the kindly constable who once saved her. Now a married superintendent, he responds by making a humid declaration of love; another shabby figure from the stagy romp to which Lily herself no longer belongs. It is puzzling but by no means disastrous that Tremain seems to advertise a lurid entertainment yet ultimately delivers a sombre rumination on wickedness and moral fortitude. The resulting dissonance won’t trouble everyone, and it would take more than that to obscure this old hand’s storytelling prowess. There’s nothing wrong with melodrama, but a simple tale well told will do just as nicely. • Paraic O’Donnell’s most recent novel is The House on Vesper Sands (W&amp;N). Lily: a Tale of Revenge by Rose Tremain is published by Chatto (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Emmanuel Macron has warned Boris Johnson not to use the deaths of dozens of people in the Channel boat tragedy “for political purposes”, the Élysée said. In a conversation with the prime minister on Wednesday night, the French president stressed “the shared responsibility” of France and the UK, according to French reports. France’s government is holding an emergency meeting on Thursday morning to discuss next steps. The British home secretary, Priti Patel, will speak to her French equivalent on Thursday morning about the next steps the two countries can take to halt the small boat crossings, a Home Office minister has confirmed. The immigration minister, Kevin Foster, told BBC Breakfast it was “a dynamic situation”. He added: “The French authorities are investigating and obviously we’re keen to let them get on with their work and we’ve obviously offered any support we can give.” Macron’s comments came as British and French officials traded blame over the deaths of at least 27 people making the perilous Channel crossing in an inflatable boat. Following a meeting of the Cobra emergency committee, Johnson said it was clear that French operations to stop the migrant boats leaving “haven’t been enough” despite £54m of UK support. He said people traffickers were “literally getting away with murder” and that he hoped the French would now find a renewed offer of joint patrols by British and French authorities “acceptable”. But on Thursday, the French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, said Britain, Belgium and Germany needed to do more to help France tackle the migration issue and human trafficking. Darmanin told the French radio station RTL people were “often attracted” by Britain’s labour market. “It’s an international problem … We tell our Belgian, German and British friends they should help us fight traffickers that work at an international level,” he said, adding: “There is bad immigration management (in Britain).” Darmanin said since the start of the year, French police and rescuers had saved 7,800 people in French waters in the Channel. He also revealed a fifth suspect had been arrested in connection with the boat disaster. He said the suspect’s car was registered in Germany and that he had bought inflatable Zodiac boats in Germany. Jean-Marc Puissesseau, the chairman of the ports of Calais and Boulogne, said he had expected the kind of tragedy seen on Wednesday “would happen one day”. He told BBC Breakfast he was “personally very, very, very sad” about the deaths. But, he added: “Between us I can tell you, we thought it would happen one day because these people are taking such an enormous risk to get to your country. “When they leave their country it’s because they are suffering there and they have only one idea and wish – to get to your country. And they are ready to risk their lives, as they did yesterday.” On Thursday morning, more people were brought ashore on the Kent coast after crossing the Channel. A group of people wearing lifejackets and wrapped in blankets were seen huddled onboard an RNLI lifeboat before disembarking in Dover, according to the PA Media news agency.Scott Morrison has said gay teachers should not be fired from religious schools for their sexuality, adding to his longstanding but still unfulfilled commitment to protect gay students from expulsion. After introducing the religious discrimination bill on Thursday, the prime minister told reporters in Canberra that it had “always been [his] view” that gay students should not be expelled and gay teachers should not be sacked from religious schools. In October 2018 during the Wentworth byelection campaign Morrison committed to reform religious exemptions to sex discrimination laws, but the promise was limited to protection of students. On 17 November when the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, wrote to the Australian Law Reform Commission she proposed only that “no child should be suspended or expelled from school” on the basis of sexuality or gender identity, with no mention of teachers. The prime minister’s comments on Thursday were aimed at dampening criticism that the religious discrimination bill’s power for religious education institutions to discriminate on religious “ethos” in hiring will in practice enable discrimination on other grounds. Liberal moderates including MPs Dave Sharma and Trent Zimmerman and senator Andrew Bragg have called for protections for gay teachers and students to be brought forward, not delayed 12 months to wait for an Australian Law Reform Commission review of discrimination laws. Asked why protections for gay students should have to wait, Morrison said the government was waiting for the ALRC report and his view had “not changed”. “Gay students should not be expelled from religious schools and nor should gay teachers who have been employed at those schools be dismissed if they are gay. “That has always been my view. And this bill does nothing to enable such a dismissal. “It provides no powers for that. And there could be no suggestion that it could because it simply does not. That is dealt with under sex discrimination law.” Federal laws already contain an exemption for religious schools to discriminate against teachers based on gender and sexuality, provided it is in accordance with the beliefs of the school and done “in good faith”. The religious discrimination package, introduced on Thursday, will allow schools to discriminate on the grounds of religion in their hiring, provided they publish a public policy explaining their ethos. A new clause would allow the federal government to override a state law on educational institutions’ employment practices by regulation. A separate “consequential amendments” bill that clarifies this section specifically targets mooted changes in Victoria that would limit discrimination in favour of religious people in schools’ hiring to instances where it is an “inherent requirement” of the role. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Earlier on Thursday, the assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, told Radio National she would not “split hairs” over the claim gay students had been expelled and teachers fired for their sexuality. Asked if a Christian school could refuse to hire a gay teacher, Stoker said it would “depend a great deal upon what that school is prepared to be up front with the community about” in their public policy – comments that inadvertently suggested the “ethos” provisions could be used for that purpose. The head of the National Catholic Education Commission, Jacinta Collins, told Guardian Australia state discrimination laws created “the problem of lawfare” whereby teachers may claim they are being discriminated against based on “inherent characteristics” such as sexuality “when it’s actually about something else such as exposure of pornography in class”. Asked how characteristics like sexuality could be protected in law if schools could sack teachers for being in a same-sex relationship, Collins replied she was not aware “of an example like that”. “We expect teachers to respect the religious ethos they’ve chosen to work within – if a teacher has a difficulty with religious ethos of a school, their choice is to work in other sectors. “We have a pluralist education sector, if they have an issue with ethos [they can work elsewhere] … The point of a Catholic school is to have a Catholic school.” Archbishop Peter Comensoli, from the Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, said Catholic institutions “want the freedom to hire people for the sake of our mission, just like other non-faith-based organisations”. “The value of religious organisations to people of faith and wider society is in their religious mission and their ability to embody and pursue that religious mission,” he said in a statement. “Operating religious organisations, such as religious schools, according to their mission includes recognising their ability to hire staff who want to teach and model the vision of the school.”There are moments when the heartbreaking tragedy of those much less fortunate than us should act as a wake-up call to make the world a better place. Yesterday afternoon was one of those. At least 27 men, women and children who, through no fault of their own, were seeking safety in the UK, perished in the cold, unforgiving seas of the Channel – the busiest shipping lane in the world. They had packed themselves into a flimsy unseaworthy dinghy on the French cost on the final leg of what they hoped would be a journey to a new life where they could do what we all take for granted – work, make friends, have fun and be safe from any harm. We don’t yet know their names, their ages, what relation they were to one another or where they were from. But we do know they will have paid vast sums of money to people smugglers who cruelly control a trade in human cargo that exploits the suffering of those who have fled persecution, oppression and terror in other parts of the globe. It is difficult for any of us to imagine what the people arriving across the Channel have been through. I recently met two teenage brothers who had made their way overland from Afghanistan fleeing the Taliban, who at the time were advancing across the country. They too had arrived in a small boat on the beach in Dover. As I sat with them at the Kent Intake Unit, where Refugee Council staff look after them before they are taken into the care of local authorities, they looked vacant, totally disoriented and fearful of what would happen to them next. In broken English, they told me they wanted England to be their new home. Clearly very traumatised, they said they were terrified they could be sent back to Afghanistan. Rather than showing compassion, humanity and understanding to people like the two teenage Afghans, the government has chosen to talk and act tough, adopting an uncompromising stance. Expensive kit has been bought to try to block the boats. Millions have been spent on increasing border controls – much of it handed to the French to deliver. The government says those arriving in small boats are nearly all economic migrants – a claim repeated on Tuesday in the Commons by the home secretary. The reality is different. An analysis by the Refugee Council published last week shows that almost all arrivals in the 18 months to June this year were from 10 countries, including Iran, Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Sudan, Eritrea and Afghanistan, where persecution is not uncommon. More than six out of 10 people from these countries seeking asylum in the UK are granted refugee status or protection. For the top five countries it is higher, at seven out of 10. Anybody who comes here overland has been immediately labelled an “illegal immigrant”. The new nationality and borders bill is designed to create an even more hostile environment, including provisions to offshore people while their asylum claims are processed, and a new status of temporary refugee protection. The plan is also to return people to another country if there is evidence they have passed through a so-called “safe country”. The rationale is that the more hostile and the tougher the policy, the less likely men, women and children are to risk their lives at the hands of people traffickers. It’s a far too simplistic assumption that relies primarily on deterrence, control and enforcement. It will fail because the problem is complex and nuanced. A more sophisticated, intelligent and humane response is required. The government needs to accept that if there were more safe and regular routes in place for people – such as a wide-ranging resettlement programme, humanitarian visas and reformed family reunion rules – fewer people would feel the need to make such dangerous journeys in the first place. Both Labour and Conservative governments have curtailed safe routes in recent decades through more draconian asylum and immigration laws, forcing people to take dangerous journeys instead. An ambitious expansion of safe routes is urgently needed. Many people seeking asylum will have no option other than making a journey by land. In the seven decades since the UK helped establish the UN convention on refugees in 1951, many thousands have fled their home countries – including those escaping ethnic cleansing in the Balkans, torture in Zimbabwe and war in Syria – taking dangerous routes to reach our country. They have been granted a fair hearing on UK soil when they arrive. This principle, upheld by prime ministers since Winston Churchill, should continue today. And to avoid the risky journeys people could be allowed to apply for a humanitarian visa to enable them to travel safely to our shores to claim asylum. People seeking asylum have the right to choose to come to Britain, often because they have family or community connections or speak some English. Far more – three times more in the case of Germany and twice as many in the case of France – seek asylum elsewhere in Europe. As a signatory to the convention, the UK should allow those who choose to make an asylum application here to do so. The movement of people in search of safety is not just a policy challenge for our government but one that Europe and other western nations are facing. Like the climate crisis, it requires a multilateral response – working collaboratively with other countries. This includes working together to address the factors that force people to seek safety. Mechanisms that will stabilise and enrich those parts of the world that people are fleeing are critical. “Global Britain” could seek to play a leading role in addressing this global challenge. The horrific deaths in the Channel require the government to stop and think again. Less empty rhetoric, more intelligent realism, less nationalist posturing, more global leadership – and most importantly, less punitive control. At the end of the day, more compassion is what we really need. • Enver Solomon is chief executive of the Refugee CouncilThe government insists it intends to “proceed at pace” in acting on the Crouch review, but an official response on plans to reform English football will not be forthcoming until the new year. As voices from across the game responded to the review and its 47 recommendations, some dissenting voices began to be heard. But the sports minister, Nigel Huddleston, told parliament that the government welcomed the review and confirmed it accepted “in principle” the creation of an independent regulator. “The final report is a thorough and detailed examination of the challenges facing English football and is clear that reform is needed to solve them,” Huddleston said. “The government will fully and formally respond to this independent report in the new year. The primary recommendation of the review, that football requires a strong independent regulator, is a recommendation that I and the government endorse in principle today.” Later, the minister appeared to go further by suggesting that one of the key powers recommended for the regulator, the ability to monitor the finances of football clubs in real time, would also be adopted by the government. “We could not have an effective regulator without adequate powers and [real-time access] would of course be part of that package,” Huddleston said. Gary Neville, who is part of a group, Our Beautiful Game, which has been lobbying for a regulator, said he expected a pushback against the idea from the top of the professional game. “I’ve no doubt (those in) the corridors of power will meet in the coming weeks and try to come up with a plan to bring forward some proposals which mean that they will suggest that we don’t need an independent regulator in the next 12 months,” he said. “We know what you’re like, you’ve displayed your deficiencies, you’ve proved them over a 30, 40-year period. They do need a referee. They need a mediator. They need someone to bang their heads together and get these very intelligent, passionate people about football to work in unity towards the wider game.” Perhaps one of the voices Neville had in mind was that of the Aston Villa CEO, Christian Purslow, who performed a media round on Thursdayyesterday speaking out against regulation. “My concern is whether the start point for this is really conflating the issue of the Burys of this world with the Super League; that perhaps it’s gone a little bit far,” Purslow told the Today Programme. “The Premier League has always really been the source of funding for the rest of football and the danger here is of course, killing the golden goose if we over-regulate a highly successful financial and commercial operation.”About 30 minutes into playing the Halo: Infinite online beta last week, I had a shocking, almost unbelievable realisation: I am quite good at the game. I’d just vaporised two enemy players with a grenade, which I’d thrown in a perfect arc to catch them together and totally unaware. The brutalist formality of the level design meant that I could come in at an acute angle, skirting their sightlines until the very last moment. I then took up the flag and ran it all the way back to our base, jumping and dodging around incoming fire. It was my third capture of the evening. In modern shooter games such as Call of Duty: Warzone, Fortnite and Apex Legends, older players like me tend to get absolutely destroyed by teenagers. With Halo Infinite’s multiplayer mode, it’s the other way around. In early interviews around the game, developer 343 Industries talked about how they thought of Infinite as a spiritual reboot of and love letter to the first three Halo titles, which were released between 2001 and 2007. We’re playing on our turf now. Old-school Halo’s design aim wasn’t realism or even variety: it was fun and feel. You were given a limited number of perfectly balanced weapons and abilities, so you didn’t have to worry about perks, stats, builds or loadouts. Instead, all the complexity came from the ways the weapons worked perfectly together with the game’s physics and environments to offer an array of emergent possibilities. The holy trinity of gun, grenade and melee actually provided a vast arsenal of attack options, just like the basic kick/punch moves did in many a quality old 2D fighting game. This is something Halo Infinite’s combat perfectly recalls. All the complexity is systemic rather than inventorial. “Every player starts with the same loadout and there are no abilities on cooldown,” says game designer and Halo veteran Dan Pearce, my favourite person to speak to about shooter games. “Whatever tools you have access to, the other team has access to as well. There are no surprises, you don’t have to think about whether or not you’d have landed that kill if you’d had the same weapon attachments as your opponent.” “So no matter how a match is going, there is always some new way you can think on your feet and maybe turn the tide. Obliterating someone who’s stolen your flag with a rocket launcher not only feels fair, but smart. Both you and the enemy had equal claim to that weapon, you were the one who decided to grab it first, and now that choice will inform rest of the match.” This careful revisionism extends to the way players move through the world. In classic Halo multiplayer, the pacing comes down to where objectives are rather than how fast characters actually run and jump – something the series lost sight of in recent years. As Pearce explains, “Halo 5 radically expanded and sped up the movement options for the player … It was extremely dense with options in a way that I feel distracted from the core combat loop that Halo as a series is known for. Spartans in Halos 1 through 3 are a lot floatier than I think a lot of people remember. There is a slow deliberateness to the way players had to move in those earlier games that modern shooters don’t really demand.” This, I think, is why older players are doing so well with Halo Infinite. It reignites the muscle memory of those first Halo games, the way their pacing wouldn’t let you rely purely on instinct and lightning-fast reaction speeds. Encounters tend to be more involved and more multifaceted than the bulletfests of Warzone and Apex Legends, where face-offs are over before you can blink. Halo Infinite also recalls the classic competitive multiplayer map design from the early 2000s. The environments are totally artificial – they are not designed to resemble genuine locations, they are self-reflexive play spaces constructed to provide exciting, varied encounters. Excellent new maps such as Recharge, Streets and Bazaar are like shopping malls in the way they use levels, sightlines and differing ceiling heights to generate intrigue and keep people moving. These are the spaces I remember, not just from Halo, but from the earliest days of competitive first-person shooters: the likes of Unreal Tournament and Quake Arena. “I cut my game design teeth back on Halo 3’s Forge mode back in the day,” says Pearce. “It was a very simple map editor, which for the most part gave players access to only very basic objects and geometry. Thousands of incredible maps came out of those tools because Halo is at its best when the maps are clean, simple and balanced.” Importantly, most of the new features added to Halo infinite fit in perfectly with the classic play style – such as dynamo grenades, which create a damaging electric field and shut down passing vehicles. Meanwhile the grapple hook, inspired perhaps by Titanfall, is a whole new way to get around, allowing you to latch on to walls, vehicles and other players and then zoom over to them. It’s faster than the conventional Halo jump, yet the way it opens up emergent tactical possibilities is typical of classic Halo design. As Pearce says, “when you grapple on to an enemy vehicle and kick the driver out, stealing it for yourself, you cannot tell me that isn’t Halo right down to the marrow.” Eventually, of course, the teenagers are going to catch on and learn the old ways of the Halo warriors. They’ll understand that in this universe, it’s not all about combining dozens of gun parts into highly personal weapon loadouts, obsessing over damage-per-second ratings and then turbo-jumping through a series of millisecond-long encounters in an absurd African village level. Halo is about what the players bring into the experience themselves with their experimentation, accuracy and forethought; it’s about how all the systems can come together in explosive 30-second fights. These are the things I remember from thrilling all-night Halo 2 and Quake Arena sessions long, long ago. It is fun to be back there but also to be right here in the present, where the old quirks and visual limitations are ironed out, and where there are a lot more players to surprise with perfectly flung grenades. Halo Infinite’s multiplayer is free to play and available now on Xbox and PC; the single-player game is released on 8 December.It was a family ramble through fields during lockdown last year that led to an “oh wow moment”: the discovery of a Roman villa complex containing a rare mosaic depicting Homer’s The Iliad, now thought to be one of the most remarkable and significant finds of its kind in Britain. The mosaic – the first example found in the UK displaying scenes from the Greek epic poem, and only one of a handful from across Europe – was found beneath a farmer’s field in Rutland. It is now protected by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) on the advice of Historic England. The site was discovered by Jim Irvine, son of the landowner, Brian Naylor, during the 2020 lockdown, and has been investigated by archaeologists from the University of Leicester in partnership with Historic England and Rutland county council. Their investigation revealed the mosaic lies within an elaborate villa complex encompassing a host of other structures and buildings. It is likely to have been occupied by a wealthy individual from the late Roman period, sometime between the 3rd and 4th century AD. “A ramble through the fields with the family turned into an incredible discovery,” Irvine said. “Finding some unusual pottery among the wheat piqued my interest and prompted some further investigative work. “Later, looking at the satellite imagery I spotted a very clear crop mark, as if someone had drawn on my computer screen with a piece of chalk. This really was the ‘oh wow’ moment, and the beginning of the story.” The remains of the mosaic measure 11m by almost 7m and form the floor of what is thought to be a large dining or entertaining area. Though mosaics were used in a variety of private and public buildings across the Roman empire, and often featured famous figures from history and mythology, there are only a handful of depictions of Achilles’ battle with Hector at the conclusion of the Trojan war. The villa is surrounded by what appear to be aisled barns, circular structures and a possible bath house. Human remains were also found in the rubble covering the mosaic, which were likely interred after the building was no longer occupied. John Thomas, deputy director of University of Leicester Archaeological Services and project manager on the excavations, called it “the most exciting Roman mosaic discovery in the UK in the last century”. “It gives us fresh perspectives on the attitudes of people at the time, their links to classical literature,” he said. “This [the villa’s owner] is someone with a knowledge of the classics, who had the money to commission a piece of such detail, and it’s the very first depiction of these stories that we’ve ever found in Britain.” Duncan Wilson, chief executive of Historic England, added that discoveries like this were “so important in helping us piece together our shared history”.The pub and restaurant group Mitchells &amp; Butlers has warned that problems caused by Brexit and rising costs will hurt the hospitality sector, just as businesses return to profit after the easing of pandemic restrictions. The company, which owns pub chains including O’Neill’s and restaurant brands such as Harvester, said Brexit was still “an important event for the market” and had created risks for the sector, most notably around the supply and cost of products and workforce shortages. It said higher energy bills and increased staff wages were also weighing on the sector. Mitchells &amp; Butlers – which also runs All Bar One, Toby Carvery and Miller &amp; Carter – said customers began to return to its 1,600 UK venues when lockdown restrictions were relaxed in the spring. Its sales bounced back in August and September and it is now receiving bookings for Christmas parties. Announcing its annual results, the group said its suburban locations were trading better than those in city centres, as continued home working meant people visited their local rather than a branch near their workplace. Footfall in major cities has been slowly increasing in recent months, a trend the company expects to continue. Pub and restaurant-goers want to socialise with others in a way they cannot at home following pandemic restrictions, the group said, as it reported a pre-tax loss of £42m for the year to 25 September, compared with £123m a year earlier. Mitchells &amp; Butlers said it had returned to profitability in recent months and its like-for-like sales were 2.7% higher than pre-Covid levels during the past eight weeks. Christmas bookings at its venues had begun later than in previous years, but were now coming in, said Phil Urban, the company’s chief executive, although this year’s get-togethers look to be smaller than usual. “We are seeing bookings in the cities and the suburbs, right across all our portfolio,” he said. “We have some big venues, particularly in London, that can take some big size parties and what we are probably seeing less of so far, is a company coming in and saying can we take your whole venue for a night. But that’s not to say they won’t be replaced by people having smaller-sized parties. We are encouraged on bookings”. On Wednesday, wine and spirits companies warned there could be alcohol shortages in the UK over the festive season, as a result of the lack of HGV drivers. Mitchells &amp; Butlers said it had several medium-sized Mercedes-Benz Sprinter vans on standby, ready to collect goods from depots in the event of a missed delivery by lorry. “We have product in the supply chain, but either the supplier can’t get it to the depot or from the depot to the site. It’s a localised issue. The problem is we don’t know where it will be until it doesn’t turn up,” Urban said. He added he was able in some cases to send vans to depots to collect supplies, “rather than wait for our logistics to reschedule”. Mitchells &amp; Butlers said it was working to offset the impact of rising costs, but warned they would have a residual impact on its performance in the current financial year. Higher utility bills remain a concern for the company, while it will also have to pay its staff more from next April as they benefit from the rise in the “national living wage” to £9.50 an hour for workers aged 23 and over. Amid rising costs, the company called for the government to extend the temporary reduction in the rate of VAT on food and sales of non-alcoholic drinks, which currently stands at 12.5% but is due to return to the pre-Covid 20% level next April. The company said the temporary tax cut was worth £81m to the business during the year to September.Some of cleanest water in the world fell to the ground about 70 years ago, passing through smoggy skies that stuffed the droplets full of ash, soot, vehicle exhaust, chemicals and heavy metals. It percolated through gravel, glacial silt and permeable rock and eventually gushed from a hose and into a pitcher held by Bonnie Pauzé. The water shimmers in the morning sunlight as she pours a glass. “This is some of the best stuff on the planet,” she says, taking a gulp. Moments later, she holds up a jar of turbid water. “And this is what it looks like when the companies start washing gravel.” After years of careful analysis, scientists believe the Ontario townships of Tiny and Tay – just an hour and a half north of Toronto – have some of the purest water on the planet. But the quirk of geology believed to have produced this water is also coveted by gravel mining companies, which have announced plans to expand operations. In recent months, the region has found itself at the centre of a mounting conflict, pitting the preservation of the water supply against the growing power of resource extraction companies. Gravel quarries have operated in the area for more than a decade, but residents fear a planned expansion could prove disastrous to the region’s groundwater. The new 13.5-hectare Teedon Pit quarry atop French’s Hill – the towering mass of silt, gravel, alluvial soil and trees that scientist believe is the secret to the area’s pristine water – would see the soil and gravel layer stripped away by heavy machinery and trucked off to feed the construction boom in large cities. Since 2009, Pauzé has collected samples in mason jars, documenting changes to the water that she and other residents say dovetails with the expansion of mining in the area. Some samples contain tiny flakes of silt suspended in water; others turn inky black when shaken. A hydrogeologist commissioned by Pauzé and her husband, Jake, shares their belief the water-intensive process of washing gravel is responsible for intermittently tainting the groundwater with silt. That claim is disputed by the province’s ministry of environment, which suggests she has problems with her well. In a statement to the Guardian, Dufferin Aggregates, part of Dublin-based CHG, said all operations “are conducted in line with all legal and environmental compliance requirements, including minimising water use through reduction, reuse, and recycling measures wherever possible”. But such certainty is misplaced, said William Shotyk, a geochemist at the University of Alberta, whose family farm sits in the shadow of French’s Hill. “The world’s leading authorities don’t fully understand the water,” said Shotyk, the first scientist to quantify the purity of the water. “And yet, we have aggregate companies saying they won’t affect the quality of the water.” Until recently, the purest water in the world was believed to be that trapped thousands of years ago in Arctic ice. But in 2006, Shotyk and colleagues discovered water from his farm had a lead concentration five times lower than Arctic core samples – a result he still finds mind-boggling. At the time, there were only a handful of facilities in the world that could measure a lead concentration so low. “This is not great water. This is not excellent water. This water is absolutely unique. This is a miracle of nature,” he said. “But we don’t understand how much water is there, where it’s coming from, how quickly it’s moving, where it’s going to and how Mother Nature created it.” Today, Shotyk has a carefully designed facility to better understand the water. Researchers from all over have travelled to his small cabin to take samples. The team washes the equipment in acid, uses polypropylene plastics and have enclosed the spigots in glass cases to ensure ambient air doesn’t contaminate the samples. Subsequent testing has found the water has incredibly low concentrations of chloride and is devoid of any organic contaminants from nearby farms. John Cherry, a leading expert on hydrogeology and founder of the Groundwater Project, speculates it could be a mixture of Pleistocene-era water trapped in clay deposits, as well as rainwater filtered down from French’s Hill and trapped in a handful of artesian aquifers, like on Pauzé’s farm. But he fears the ecosystem could be altered before scientists can fully understand the phenomenon. “The last place that a civilized society should be doing aggregate mining is an area where the most pristine waters are found,” he said. “A lot of what we do that’s stupid – and aggregate mining on top of pristine water is quite stupid – is because groundwater suffers from more ignorance than any other of the water resources – [because] we don’t see it.” With so many unknowns surrounding the groundwater of Tiny and Tay, scientists are pleading for five years to study the water and surrounding ecosystem before quarry expansion begins. “We’re told that Canada has more freshwater per capita than any other country in the world and that we live in this wonderful freshwater haven. Water is cheap and so it’s very rare that we actually do anything as a society to protect our water resources for the future,” said Cherry. Residents in the area have won previous fights. In 2009, the 50-acre (20-hectare) Site 41 landfill was scrapped after widespread public opposition, a victory made possible only with help from neighbouring First Nations. Those Indigenous communities are now closely watching the fight against gravel quarries – and preparing for another battle. “I do this for my grandchildren,” said Beth Elson of the nearby Beausoleil First Nation. “Knowing they’ll need clear water is plenty of motivation. Water is just part of us. And it’s to be looked after.” Elson was a central figure in the fight over the failed landfill project, and travels often from her home on the pristine shores of Georgian Bay to perform water ceremonies in the area. “You lift the water, you say prayers and sing songs and honour the water. We give some to Mother Earth, some to the fire and then we pass the water around. Everyone has a little taste to help us all connect.” But she worries that this battle feels different from Site 41. “I don’t know when [Indigenous peoples] will get to play our part in here … As neighbours, we’re just watching, but we’re often called on at the 11th hour,” she said. “We should have been blocking roads right off the bat. Not waiting until they’ve dug the holes. We should have gone in right when the first tree was cut.” Pauzé says the faltering momentum of the fight, worsened by public health restrictions, has demoralized the community. On a fall afternoon, walking beneath the maple, beech and hemlock stands that blanket the top of French’s Hill, Pauzé and local resident Kate Harries listen to the chatter of grackles swarming overhead – and the distant hum of the aggregate operations in the distance. “We just want a pause on all this to really know what’s at stake,” said Pauzé. “We want to know why this water is so special.” Harries agrees. “If only for the history books.”For the 19th time since 1934 the Chicago Bears will square off against the Detroit Lions on Thanksgiving in a game that could charitably be dubbed the Tryptophan Bowl. On one side, you have a listless Bears team that just broke their best quarterback prospect in 40 years. On the other, a dismal Lions squad seemingly hellbent on booking their second winless season in little more than a decade. The only upset possibility here is to our stomachs. But if there were one man who could make this matchup halfway appetizing it was John Madden, still the NFL’s most colorful commentator more than a decade after he called his last game. Before the Minnesota native was synonymous with the league’s star-crossed video game franchise Madden was football’s fun uncle – a two-way lineman who found his way to coaching after a training camp knee injury nipped his pro career in the bud, only to wind up leading the Oakland Raiders to victory in Super Bowl XI at the record young age of 40. That he never suffered a losing season and remains the franchise’s most successful coach, with a career win percentage that tops Vince Lombardi’s, is as much a testament to Madden’s sharp mind as the Raiders fickle leadership. After 10 full seasons on the Raiders sideline – where his mountainous stature, disheveled mien and laissez-faire management flawlessly meshed with a team of proud rebels – Madden retired from coaching and shuffled on to a broadcast career at CBS, churning through a slew of men in crested blazers before matching with Pat Summerall, Madden’s booth soulmate. Where Summerall was deadpan and laconic describing the action, Madden was freewheeling and bombastic, a gridiron onomatopoet who salivated over seal blocks and blitz pickups while his peers waxed on about the fruits of that dirty work – the high-arching completion or breakaway run. That is, when he wasn’t godding up a certain gunslinging Green Bay Packers QB. But that’s not to say Madden only spoke in Booms, Pows and Favres. His live, improvised Maddenisms were as delightful as anything that tumbled from the mouth of Yogi Berra. They ran the gamut from football axioms (“If he’s even,” Madden would say of a receiver chasing down a long ball while running shoulder to shoulder with a defender, “he’s leavin’”) to insights on the business (“Cheap and available … you never want that as your nickname”) to general observations (“There’s no dog that has more fun than a golden retriever”) to delicious nonsense (“Butkus could have been a Belushi or Belushi could have been a Butkus.”) That wit not only keyed Madden’s prosperity across four networks, but it also scored him tons of money pitching beer and video games and, late in his career, made him ripe for send-ups from master mimic Frank Caliendo. Apparently, the only thing Madden disliked more than those impersonations was air travel. His habit of crisscrossing the country to his TV assignments via coach-bus – aka the Madden Cruiser – only made him more endearing and his games extra important. (He famously never called a Pro Bowl while it was permanently in residence in Hawaii, nor did he anchor any preseason games outside the contiguous 48.) But Thanksgiving was confirmation that Madden’s everyman persona was no act. If Madden drew that assignment, it meant there’d be more than just a late-season triumph on the line. There would also be food. Madden is probably more responsible for introducing the world to a quintessentially American delicacy called turducken – which is exactly what it sounds like: a chicken cooked inside a duck cooked inside a turkey. While Madden’s Thanksgiving game unfolded, cameras would cut back to the feast being prepared inside the Cruiser for the big man and his TV entourage. At the end of the game Madden would give away drumsticks from a six-legged turkey to the standout performers on the winning side. As a Chicago native who was cursed to grow up a Bears fan, it always felt like it would be either Barry Sanders or Calvin Johnson who’d wind up leaving me and mine hungry. It’s been 13 years since Madden departed the booth to spend more time with his family. But Fox – which, in 1994, scooped Madden up in free agency and paid him more than any pro player – hasn’t forgotten the man who gave their then-fledgling NFL coverage instant credibility. For the past few Thursdays, the network has dropped tasters for All Madden – a biographical documentary slated for release on Christmas Day, with everyone from Troy Aikman to Michael Vick heaping due praise and respect. That many of the players who delighted Madden in their heyday wound up following him into the booth is no fluke. Mostly, they serve as a reminder of Madden’s singular flair for the job. In fact, NFL fans have yet to see a color man who can fill his crested blazer. Matt Millen, a four-time Super Bowl-winning linebacker, looked poised to become Madden’s heir apparent at Fox before destroying his credibility in the Lions front office, assembling their infamous 0-16 team. Jon Gruden aped the everyman to excess on Monday Night Football while firing off bigoted emails to friends and colleagues. Aikman is a bit too stuffy, Cris Collinsworth overly sarcastic; Tony Romo is the class nerd who can’t wait to tell you how perfectly he anticipated every question on the test. Only the ManningCast comes close to Madden’s fun uncle football energy. That it takes two, and a steady stream of guest stars, says everything. In retirement the 85-year-old Madden has become an increasingly distant figure, popping up from his NorCal home like a tackle eligible to make the odd interview or statement. (Overall, Madden wasn’t really built for today’s hot take ecosystem; the closest he came to roasting anything was to call regular Thursday night games a mistake back in the day.) Still, Madden’s absence looms large, especially on this holiday. And in a league where pretensions are known to boil over, NFL fans should be grateful that they had an authority who didn’t take himself too seriously for as long as they did. It’ll be good to see him again in the Fox doc and be reminded of this: If Madden isn’t the game’s best-ever broadcaster, he’s easily its ultimate Thanksgiving chef. Which is to say: no one brought more spice to the snoozer that is Bears versus Lions, a matchup that’s still a big fat turkey.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has accused critics of wanting a “kangaroo court” to oversee federal parliament after he faced an internal revolt over the Coalition’s failure to establish a commonwealth integrity commission. On Thursday morning, the Tasmanian Liberal MP Bridget Archer crossed the floor to support independent MP Helen Haines’ push to establish a federal integrity commission. Archer had told Guardian Australia she was frustrated with the government’s “inertia” on the issue. Archer’s decision – she was the seventh government MP or senator to cross the floor this week – gave Haines majority support for her bill. But because MPs are paired and absent from Canberra because of Covid-19, she could not secure the absolute majority required. The move thrust the government’s failure to fulfil its election commitment back into the spotlight, putting Morrison on the back foot over the issue. When asked why he had “refused to act for more than 1,000 days” to establish the commission, which was promised before the last election, Morrison pointed to the government’s draft bill which was released in February this year. He also took aim at the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption (Icac) and its inquiry into the former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian, indicating the Coalition would not support a federal integrity commission that allowed public hearings. “These matters should be looking at criminal conduct, not who your boyfriend is,” Morrison said. “The premier of NSW was done over by a bad process, an abuse … I’m not going to have a kangaroo court taken into this parliament.” Morrison suggested the Labor party could support the government’s proposed bill that has drawn criticism for the softness of its approach and is yet to be introduced into parliament. “The legislation is there for all to see and if the opposition wishes to support that legislation, they should do so and we can legislate it,” Morrison said. “But those opposite do not support our laws to introduce a commonwealth integrity commission. Instead, those opposite want to support the sort of show in NSW, which has seen the most shameful, the most shameful attacks on the former premier. “What was done to Gladys Berejiklian, the people of NSW know, was an absolute disgrace, and I’m not going to allow that sort of a process, which seeks to … publicly humiliate people on matters that have nothing to do with the issues before such a commission, to see those powers abused [and] seek to reduce the integrity of people like Gladys Berejiklian.” Icac is investigating whether Berejiklian failed to declare a conflict of interest due to her secret relationship with Maguire when she awarded lucrative grants to Maguire’s electorate as treasurer and later as premier. Morrison’s remarks were seen as further encouragement to Berejiklian to run for the Liberal party in the next federal election, with the former premier being courted to run in Warringah to try to unseat independent MP Zali Steggall. Polling published in the Sydney Morning Herald on Thursday suggested that Berejiklian’s approval rating has rebounded since the Icac hearings concluded. Steggall has been a vocal advocate for the establishment of a federal integrity commission and, along with the rest of the crossbench, she voted in support of Haines’s bill on Thursday. After the vote, which was mired in confusion as a result of the Covid changes that were being managed by the new Speaker, Haines hailed Archer as the “lioness of the 46th parliament” for taking a principled stance. She also pledged to continue working with government MPs to try to bring the bill on for debate. “This is far from over,” she said. “The nation can take some comfort in knowing that despite what the prime minister is doing … the majority want an integrity commission.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Archer previously told Guardian Australia she was considering crossing the floor over her concerns the government had not progressed the bill, saying she was “perplexed” by the delay given consultations had been undertaken over the past year. “I really have a strong view that this is the most important thing we need to do,” Archer said. The new attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has been consulting on the bill over the past six months, and as recently as mid-October said the government “intends for the legislation to be introduced into parliament in 2021”. Moderate MPs have been pushing for the government to toughen up its proposed model, pushing for public hearings and reports, and for the anti-corruption body to have a broader remit. Haines has accused the government of breaking its election commitment saying it is now a “near impossibility” to introduce and pass it before the 2022 election, which is due by mid-May.It was a welcome fit for a president. Republican Guards at the Élysée Palace. A standing ovation at the European parliament. A front-page interview in Spain’s top newspaper in which the visiting dignitary was hailed as a “cyclone” of energy. “C’est un grand monsieur,” gushed the mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, as she treated her “dear” foreign friend to a brasserie lunch on the east side of France’s capital. The visitor was not a president, however – at least not since 2010, when Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva stepped down as Brazil’s leader with an approval rating of almost 90%. Instead, Lula is now the leading candidate to unseat Brazil’s incumbent president, the rightwing populist Jair Bolsonaro, and was in Europe as part of a global effort to restore his reputation – and that of his country – after a torrid few years for both. “I must come back to help Brazil recover its international prestige,” Lula, who is expected to challenge, and beat, Bolsonaro in next year’s election, told El País at the end of his week-long tour of Belgium, France, Germany and Spain. Besides a contentious remark about Nicaragua’s authoritarian leader Daniel Ortega, Lula’s mission, which ended on Saturday, was widely seen as a triumph. In Germany, the 76-year-old received a fist bump from Angela Merkel’s successor, Olaf Scholz, who Bolsonaro had shunned a few weeks earlier at the G20. “I am delighted by our good discussions,” Scholz tweeted after meeting Lula, whose political comeback was enabled by the quashing of corruption convictions that saw him jailed for 580 days. In France, Lula’s reception was even warmer, with Emmanuel Macron inviting the leftist to his palace in an unmistakable snub to Bolsonaro, with whom he has clashed over the dramatic acceleration of deforestation in the Amazon. Lula’s former foreign minister, Celso Amorim, said that in almost six decades of diplomacy he could not recall such an honour being bestowed in similar circumstances. “I never saw a former president and a potential candidate being received by the president of France the way he was,” said Amorim, who traveled with Lula and felt moved by the “affection” heaped on his friend and former boss. Amorim claimed European leaders – including Macron, the Spanish prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, and the EU foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell – had treated Lula “as if he were a leader in power”. “I think if they could vote, they would vote for Lula,” said Amorim, adding that he believed their hosts yearned for stability after Bolsonaro’s haywire tenure. Lula’s continued renown stands in stark contrast to Bolsonaro’s international isolation, which deepened last week with claims Brazil had withheld figures showing a surge in Amazon deforestation during the Cop26 climate summit. During his three years in power, Bolsonaro has alienated a succession of foreign partners, including China’s Communist party leaders, the US president, Joe Biden, and European leaders such as Macron and Merkel. At October’s G20 Bolsonaro received a frosty reception and was filmed drifting aimlessly around the summit trying to engage waiters in conversation. “It’s been an unprecedented diplomatic disaster,” said Celso Rocha de Barros, a pundit for the Folha de São Paulo newspaper. Barros said Lula’s “absurd” Nicaragua comments had taken some of the shine off an otherwise successful tour and showed the Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers party) needed to reflect on its stance towards leftist authoritarianism in Latin America. Speaking to El País, Lula had cautioned against leaders becoming “little dictators” but wondered why Angela Merkel could stay in power for 16 years but not Daniel Ortega, who oversaw a deadly 2018 crackdown on protesters and jailed dozens of rivals before Nicaragua’s recent presidential election. Even so, Barros thought Europe was desperate for a return to rationality in Brazil under “a normal politician” like Lula. By embracing Lula, European leaders were sending a message to Bolsonaro: “Look, we prefer this guy.” “Lula represents a Brazil that had many problems – and still does – but that was at least trying to fix them,” Barros said.The launch of the $10bn (£7.5bn) James Webb space telescope has been delayed again, after an incident during the final preparations to place the telescope on top of its launch vehicle. The spacecraft was scheduled to be sent into orbit on 18 December but now it will not launch before 22 December. The space telescope is at Europe’s spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana, where it will be launched using an Ariane 5 rocket supplied by the European Space Agency (Esa). The project is an international partnership between Nasa, Esa and the Canadian Space Agency. The incident took place as technicians were preparing to attach Webb to the launch vehicle adaptor, which would then be used to fix the telescope to the upper stage of the rocket. According to Nasa, “a sudden, unplanned release of a clamp band” took place. The clamp band fixes the spacecraft to the launch adaptor and then releases in orbit, allowing the spacecraft to separate from the rocket. This unplanned release caused a vibration to travel through the telescope. To be absolutely certain the spacecraft remains in perfect shape, Nasa has convened an anomaly board to investigate and perform additional tests on the spacecraft to ensure nothing has been damaged. Once this is finished, assuming no damage, launch preparations will resume.The increasing ruthlessness of life in the top tier of English women’s football was emphasised again on Thursday as Jonathan Morgan left his post as manager of Leicester City and Emile Heskey took temporary charge. Morgan led Leicester to promotion as Championship winners last season and signed a new contract in July but his team are bottom of the Women’s Super League without a point from eight games. That dismal recent record dictates that last season’s Women’s LMA Championship manager of the year ended his seven-year Leicester tenure, with Michael Makoni, Morgan’s assistant, and the manager’s sister, Holly Morgan, the first-team coach, also departing. Heskey, the former England striker turned Leicester’s head of women’s football development, will supervise training before Sunday’s meeting with Manchester United in the League Cup. In a statement Leicester said they were “undertaking the process of appointing a new manager” and that “retention of WSL status is central to the club’s vision for the long-term development of women’s football in the city”. Given that the team have scored only three times in the league and conceded 19 goals, remaining in the 12-club top flight will not be straightforward. Morgan walked away with an amalgam of disappointment and pride. “This club has been part of mine and my family’s life from when my sister Holly joined as a young player,” he said. “To have taken Leicester from the Midlands Division One to a WSL club gives me nothing but pride. “This season has been disappointing, with injuries contributing to a difficult start but we haven’t achieved the results we had hoped for. I wish the club, the staff and the players, the very best.” Last week Birmingham, Leicester’s key relegation rivals, sacked Scott Booth and placed Darren Carter and Marcus Bignot in interim charge. Birmingham remain one point and one place ahead of Leicester, whom they face in the WSL on 19 December in their final league fixture before the Christmas break. In mid-October mid-table Everton dismissed Willie Kirk, replacing him with the former Lyon head coach Jean-Luc Vasseur, and the Manchester City manager, Gareth Taylor, remains under pressure after his injury-hit side’s underwhelming start which has left City seventh on 10 points.From calls in Virginia to burn “sexually explicit” books in a school library to a wave of challenges to titles by authors ranging from Toni Morrison to Alison Bechdel, the American Library Association is charting an unprecedented rise in attempts to ban books in libraries – many of which it believes are fuelled by organised conservative campaigns. “It’s a volume of challenges I’ve never seen in my time at the ALA – the last 20 years. We’ve never had a time when we’ve gotten four or five reports a day for days on end, sometimes as many as eight in a day,” says ALA director Deborah Caldwell-Stone. “Social media is amplifying local challenges and they’re going viral, but we’ve also been observing a number of organisations activating local members to go to school board meetings and challenge books. We’re seeing what appears to be a campaign to remove books, particularly books dealing with LGBTQIA themes and books dealing with racism.” Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye has been removed from school libraries in Utah over its “explicit” content; in Virginia, the Nobel laureate’s Beloved has been challenged for similar reasons. Bechdel’s Fun Home, the acclaimed graphic memoir about her father’s sexuality and her own, was pulled from shelves in North Kansas over its LGBTQ themes, while a southern Pennsylvania district banned a lengthy list of titles almost entirely by or about people of colour, by acclaimed authors including Jacqueline Woodson, Ijeoma Oluo and Ibram X Kendi. (The all-white school board said it was coincidence that almost all the material banned was by or about people of colour.) Maia Kobabe’s award-winning graphic novel memoir Gender Queer has been challenged in several states. “Removing or restricting queer books in libraries and schools is like cutting a lifeline for queer youth, who might not yet even know what terms to ask Google to find out more about their own identities, bodies and health,” wrote Kobabe in the Washington Post last month. In Texas earlier this month, governor Greg Abbott wrote to the education agency commissioner asking to be notified of any “instance of pornography being provided to minors under the age of 18 for prosecution to the fullest extent of the law”. Abbott cited in particular Gender Queer, which was pulled from some Texas classrooms after complaints, and In the Dream House by Carmen Maria Machado, which details the author’s abusive same-sex relationship. In Spotsylvania in Fredericksburg, Virginia, meanwhile, parents have protested about the availability of LGBTQIA fiction to children. One school board member called for the offending books to be burned. “I think we should throw those books in a fire,” he said. “I guess we live in a world now that our public schools would rather have kids read about gay pornography than Christ.” The school board subsequently ordered that “sexually explicit” books be removed from district libraries. Caldwell-Stone pointed to conservative grassroots organisations such as Heritage Action and the Heritage Foundation, which she said were driving the attempts to censor materials dealing with racism and Black American history, as well as materials “they deem to be inappropriate for minors, which seems to encompass the entire canon of books dealing with LGBTQIA themes”. “We’ve seen a number of these parents’ rights groups that have arisen in the last year get involved in these challenges, and their local chapters are turning out to attend school board meetings and challenge books. It really has sparked a rise in challenges,” she said. “When you have organisations like Heritage Foundation and Family Policy Alliance publishing materials that instruct parents on how to challenge books in the school library or the public library, right down to a challenge form enclosed in the booklet so they can just fill it out, you’re seeing a challenge to our democratic values of free speech, freedom of thought, freedom of belief.” Caldwell-Stone said she was particularly concerned about the fact that elected officials were now pursuing the same agenda – “officials who in theory are bound by first amendment, who are forbidden from engaging in official government censorship of ideas or viewpoints, but you have the governors of Texas and South Carolina declaring that they’re going to scrub school libraries of pornography without defining what they mean by that.” Librarians are fighting back against challenges. The Spotsylvania school board last week voted to rescind its order on “sexually explicit” books, and the ban in Pennsylvania’s Central York school district was reversed in September after widespread protests. However, Caldwell-Stone said the number of attacks was having a “chilling effect”. Last year, the ALA reported more than 273 attempts to ban or challenge books. It anticipates the figure will be considerably higher in 2021. “You may find school boards, library boards, pulling those books proactively to avoid controversy. We’re seeing school boards and library boards ignore their policies, because somebody pops up and makes the claim that a book is obscene,” she said. “It’s easy to claim that a few words, a paragraph, an image in a graphic novel is somehow obscene or pornographic. But when you evaluate the work as a whole, you end up with Toni Morrison’s Beloved, for example, which has been such a flash point in the gubernational election in Virginia.” An advert released by the Republican candidate for governor of Virginia last month featured a mother who tried to have Beloved banned from her son’s English curriculum. “He’s gone from banning a woman’s right to choose to banning books by a Pulitzer prize-winning author,” said president Joe Biden at the time of the candidate, Glenn Youngkin, who is now governor-elect of Virginia. “We’re seeing a disregard for policy and a kind of a moral panic over a number of novels and graphic novels that are in school libraries that are intended for adolescents to access and read, without regard for the agency or first amendment rights of the young adults involved, or the choices of parents who may make different choices about what books they would like students to be able to read and access in libraries,” said Caldwell-Stone. “We’re seeing censorship to impose particular agendas, representing particular political or religious beliefs. It’s really disheartening.”One of the American south’s greatest ever rappers returns. Big Boi’s new album The Big Sleepover is released next month and to mark it, he will be answering Guardian readers’ questions about the record and anything else in his long career, which you can post in the comments section below. The Big Sleepover pairs the Atlantan born Antwan Patton not with his most famous partner – André 3000 in Outkast – but another longtime foil, the vocalist and producer Sleepy Brown. Their collaborations stretch back to the early days of Outkast, when Brown sang the chorus to their breakthrough 1993 hit Player’s Ball. The track showcased what would become the signature Outkast sound, that would in turn influence an entire region: funk-driven, somewhat psychedelic, sometimes laidback, but absolutely rooted in the crisp, alert percussion of hip-hop. Across a run of truly classic albums – Southernplayalisticadillacmusik, ATLiens, Aquemini and Stankonia – Big Boi and André 3000 became rap’s defining double act, each matching the other for propulsive metre and satisfying rhyme schemes. The pair each went solo on the conjoined double album Speakerboxxx/The Love Below – which won the 2004 Grammy for album of the year, and featured the signature Big Boi and Sleepy Brown track, and US No 1 single, The Way You Move – then teamed back up for the underrated album Idlewild (its Brown-enhanced single Morris Brown is a joyous gem). Aside from a world tour in 2014, Outkast have been on hiatus since then, but Big Boi has released three solo albums, interspersed with the occasional acting role – the slapstick golf comedy Who’s Your Caddy? is, oddly enough, a favourite of Bill Clinton’s. Bringing his technical mastery and left-brained imagination to commercial rap has resulted in some of the genre’s most distinctive hits over the years: Ms Jackson, BOB, Rosa Parks and so many more for Outkast, plus other collaborations including UGK’s International Players Anthem, Missy Elliott’s All N My Grill, Killer Mike’s ADIDAS, and tracks with Beyoncé, Janelle Monáe, George Clinton and Gucci Mane. After a pandemic period he said was spent “sharpening our craft and spending time with the family and learning how to cook”, he created The Big Sleepover, which will be released on 10 December. Post your questions about it and anything else in his life and artistry in the comments below, before 6pm on Tuesday 30 November. We will publish his answers on 3 December in print in the Film &amp; Music section, and also online.David Bowie began the 90s by rashly announcing that he would never play his greatest hits again. Fans could vote for their favourites via a phone line, the setlist for his upcoming tour would be based on the results, and then that would be that. “By the time I’m in my late 40s, I will have built up a whole new repertoire,” he bullishly announced. As everyone knows, it didn’t work out like that. In fact, Bowie spent a lot of the ensuing decade dealing in an intriguing brand of self-referentiality, as evidenced by Brilliant Adventure (1992-2001), the fifth multi-album box set in a series covering almost his entire career. 1993’s Black Tie White Noise – a largely dreadful album that some critics had the chutzpah to claim was an incredible return to form – opened with an instrumental called The Wedding, which appeared to reference the sax solo on Sound and Vision. Later the same year, his soundtrack to a BBC adaptation of The Buddha of Suburbia (which struggled to No 87 on the UK chart, despite being markedly superior to anything Bowie had released in a decade), opened with a title track that not only quoted Space Oddity and All the Madmen, but conjured a mood of bittersweet autobiographical nostalgia that Bowie would revisit on his grand 00s comeback single Where Are We Now? 1995’s 1 Outside reanimated his late-70s collaboration with Brian Eno, while an abundance of 12-string acoustic guitar meant 1999’s Hours… carried a noticeable, if superficial, whiff of Hunky Dory. Even his most defiantly modern album of the decade, Earthling, bore echoes of his history: it was an attempt to Bowie-ise 90s dance music, including drum’n’bass, just as he had once Bowie-ised mid-70s soul; something about its broiling din of breakbeats, industrial synths and noisy guitars recalled the racket of Scary Monsters and Heroes. It was a tendency that reached its zenith with Brilliant Adventure’s jewel: the previously unreleased but much-bootlegged album Toy, recorded in 2000, on which Bowie delved deeper into his past than ever before. Its obvious highlight is Shadow Man, an impossibly beautiful piano ballad that dated from the Ziggy Stardust era and that, lyrically at least, could easily have slipped into that album’s concept: “Look into his eyes and see your reflection / look into the stars and see his eyes”. But it largely contains fresh versions of songs that had once dogged their author. In the 70s and 80s, you were never far from a new release repackaging Bowie’s pre-fame 60s material, usually with a cover photograph that deceptively implied the contents were contemporary rather than archival. Toy offers a more tasteful sampling of that era. It includes the two best songs Bowie wrote before Space Oddity: there’s a great version of Let Me Sleep Beside You, but The London Boys loses something of its grimy kitchen-sink drama quality amid the new distorted guitar and synth arrangement. It rescues Space Oddity’s B-side Conversation Piece, a bleak pen portrait of Bowie the late 60s also-ran – “invisible and dumb, and no one will recall me” – from underserved obscurity, amplifying its brooding mood by slowing its tempo and lowering the vocal register. It might be the definitive version of the song. Toy leans noticeably heavier on mod Bowie than the purveyor of Anthony Newley-inspired whimsy who recorded his eponymous 1967 debut album, which seems a shame. Bowie is clearly having a high old time roaring through his old freakbeat single Can’t Help Thinking About Me, but the revamp work on Silly Boy Blue is more striking, transforming the stagey original into something stately and anthemic. It might have been more interesting to hear Bowie try similarly repurposing We Are Hungry Men or The Gospel According to Tony Day rather than updating Baby Loves That Way, a nice enough song that nevertheless betrays its inspiration – Smokey Robinson’s You Really Got a Hold On Me – a little too obviously. Shadow Man and Conversation Piece aside, it’s an enjoyable curiosity rather than a major release. The other late 60s obscurity, Hole in the Ground, is charming but slight; the title track, a new song spurred by Bowie’s rummaging through his early years, is good rather than revelatory. In a sense, Toy was a dead end. Bowie would finally rediscover the kind of inspiration that had powered him through the 1970s by abandoning his past rather than picking through it. His 2002 album Heathen was fresh, gripping and highly accessible, and by his final set, Blackstar, he really had reached the long-promised return to prime form – it bore almost no relation to anything he had previously attempted. But in a strange way, Toy was also prescient. After his death, Bowie’s estate embarked on one of the most extensive archive excavations in recent memory, of which the Brilliant Adventure box and this version of Toy forms a part. There have been umpteen live releases, reconstructions of “lost” albums and lavish box sets of demos and unreleased recordings: ephemera, outtakes and juvenilia recast as something more essential. That’s effectively what Bowie himself did on Toy. As was so often the case, he got there first. The 11CD or 18LP box set Brilliant Adventure (1992-2001), featuring Toy on CD or 2LP, is released 26 November. A 3CD or 6 x 10-inch vinyl box set of Toy featuring the album alongside alternate mixes and unplugged versions, entitled Toy: Box, is released 7 January. What Alexis listened to this week Bruise – Theme Another belated discovery via best of 2021 lists: a phenomenal collision of insistent acid lines, breakbeats and potent, epic synth.I have been a wheelchair user for a number of years, due to a progressive condition. I have been a rape survivor for four. These things are more connected than you might think. I first met Alex (not his real name) four years ago. We were at a house party. He was drunk and I was sober; this would become a running theme. I remember thinking how gorgeous he was. Months passed and we fell out of touch, apart from the odd message, until one night, quite unexpectedly, he came to my apartment. I had messaged him earlier in the day, hoping to catch up in the coming weeks over a coffee. Hours later, he messaged me saying he was out and wanted to talk. I had already taken my makeup off and was in my pyjamas, so I said he could come over for a bit instead. He was very drunk; I was sober. Even so, I was in my own home, in my pyjamas; I don’t remember feeling unsafe. We were friends. Alex was intriguing and intelligent, but I can honestly say that I wanted and expected no more than a chat that night. He had other things on his mind. After we had chatted for a while, he picked me up from my wheelchair, carried me to my room and put me on my bed. I joked about getting an early night. He took his clothes off and straddled me, his arms either side of me. I froze. “Come on, it’s just a bit of fun,” he said, adding: “We’re both adults; it doesn’t have to mean anything,” as he urged me to let him go down on me. I can’t remember how many objections I put up, but when they didn’t work, I gave up, fearing violence if I persisted, and resigned myself to what was to happen: my “friend” was going to have sex with me without my consent – to rape me. Afterwards he had me weighed down under an arm and a leg, so when he passed out, I couldn’t move. I lay there until he rolled over and fell back asleep. I wriggled to the side of the bed, slid to the floor and crawled to the kitchen to get my wheelchair. I didn’t sleep, instead focusing on how dry and chapped my lips were. Since then, I haven’t been able to sleep without applying lip balm. The next day, I was confused. I texted my friends. Half of them encouraged me to be happy; I used to have a crush on him, after all. The other half pointed out the red flags I had been so willing to ignore when he showed up to my apartment stinking of wine. I messaged him and we met to talk about it in person a few days later. He cried, worried about how this was going to affect his career prospects. I felt bad for him, so I decided to protect him by not reporting it. I thought that, if I tried to forget about it, in a week or so it would be over. I tried to find a way to soothe the feelings I had that somehow I was guilty for what had happened. In my mind, sexual assaults were things that happened between strangers in dark alleyways, not between two friends at home. I didn’t fit the black-and-white image of a sexual assault survivor – I use a wheelchair, after all – and this only added to my confusion. A week later, I was still sad and confused and experiencing pain and tenderness between my legs, so I went to the emergency room. There, the nurse referred me to the sexual assault treatment unit, where I finally realised that I had been sexually assaulted. The doctors used a mirror to show me what I couldn’t see. My vulva and my inner thighs were bruised black and blue. I wince just thinking about it now. It finally dawned on me that he had always meant to force himself on me. Outside of this small, white hospital room, the whole world was talking about sexual assault. The #MeToo movement was at its peak. Women were being praised and encouraged to come forward with their stories. But those who did were Hollywood actors who had suffered assault at the hands of their directors or co-stars, or employees who had endured countless advances by their bosses. There was never any mention of people with disabilities. Yet disabled women are almost twice as likely to have experienced sexual assault as non-disabled women. They are also more than five times as likely to have experienced sexual assault as disabled men. I know that my story is not the only one of its kind out there, even if it feels as if it is. But I didn’t think my ego could stand another blow by admitting I was more of a victim than I wanted to be. My disability automatically made me a victim; how could I be a sexual assault victim, too? The fear of not being believed deters reporting in many cases of sexual assault. But I was preoccupied with the idea that my case would be questioned because of my disability. More than one person I considered to be a friend asked about my sexual ability when I confided in them about the assault, as though this was the most important question. If my friends reacted this way, how could I expect others to be compassionate? Some days I feel determined to share my story, and report it, for all the disabled women who can’t. Some days I just want to forget the whole thing and continue with my life. But forgetting seems impossible. I wonder if he is as haunted by it as I am.Amy Kavanagh is as happy as anyone else that the world is opening up – but there is one thing she is not thrilled to be experiencing again. “As much as I’m excited to be getting out and socialising again, it comes at a cost,” she says. Kavanagh is blind and sexual harassment is as frequent in her everyday life as it is disturbing. “I get harassed in public, on the street, in shops, on public transport, in cabs and even in professional environments. Pre-pandemic, I experienced inappropriate sexual touching at least once a month,” she says. While there has been a renewed focus on women’s safety since the deaths of Sarah Everard and Sabina Nessa, little attention has been paid to the harassment and violence faced by disabled women. Yet women with a disability are almost twice as likely to have experienced sexual assault (5%) as women without a disability (2.8%), according to ONS data for the two years to March 2020. This is not an anomaly; in the previous three years, the figure was 5.7%. In 2021, a survey of more than 1,000 disabled women carried out by the Trades Union Congress found that 68% had experienced sexual harassment at work. The figures constitute a hidden blight on disabled women’s lives. Kavanagh says men often target her under the guise of assistance. “A typical experience is that someone offers to help me cross a road and, whether or not I accept, they grab me by the arm and refuse to let go. Often they will use this opportunity to touch my breasts, make inappropriate comments about my sexuality or physical appearance, or ask me personal questions about my body,” she says. She is certain that men target her because she is blind. “I can’t easily identify them, I can’t see them coming or know if they are following me or watching me.” In response, Kavanagh started a Twitter campaign under the hashtag #JustAskDontGrab. There were hundreds of responses – including deaf people sharing how people “get their attention” with inappropriate touching and wheelchair users being moved without their consent. One woman, a wheelchair user, shared an experience of a man pushing her, without warning, during a trip to a shopping centre. She said she was grateful for a woman passing by who had seen this and was “outraged”, yet the man had claimed he was just trying to help. While the campaign’s message seems clear, Kavanagh says “disabled people often face hostility if they don’t accept help”. This could be verbal abuse, physical violence or even sexual assault. “This is why it’s so important to listen to disabled people when you offer help, as we don’t know whether your intentions are good or if you are the next person who might hurt or assault us.” Katie, a wheelchair user, has also faced harassment and assault in public. She has a six-month-old daughter, so hasn’t been clubbing for a while, but when she did it lurked on every dancefloor: “Pretty much every time I went out, you’d have someone grab your breasts. That was quite common.” She says the groping was “people walking past, taking an opportunity … Because I’m sat down, I think it is more anonymous.” If she went for a date in a bar, being seated in a booth came with risks, too. “People put their hands under my clothes, things that I have not consented to. And, obviously, I am marginally more vulnerable than other women. I can’t just quickly get up.” If, in a busy venue, she transferred out of her wheelchair into another chair, it created an extra level of vulnerability, as she couldn’t get away. “When you protest, it feels dangerous; you never know how they’re going to react. So you feel like you can’t say no.” Both women say the problem is reinforced by the ableist narrative that disabled women are not attractive – and therefore won’t be on the receiving end of sexual harassment or violence. Kavanagh says this means that, when she talks about harassment, “the first reaction I always get is disbelief. People simply can’t believe that a blind woman gets groped. Disabled women are desexualised and infantilised, so people don’t think we experience anything sexual, including unwanted negative sexual experiences.” Katie says she would now report any harassment, but “back then I would say: ‘Well, this is just what happens.’ Part of the reason for that was that people would say: ‘Well, why are they doing that to you? Because who’s going to see you as a sexual being? Anyway, you’ve probably misinterpreted their behaviour,’ or: ‘You should be grateful.’ I’ve had both those things said to me before – by friends.” Also, perceived vulnerability runs through the stories of all the disabled women I speak to. Sarah (not her real name) is autistic and works as a journalist. Asked to describe her experience of sexual harassment, she says: “Where do I even begin? Creepy propositions, overly sexualised comments, being invited into hotel rooms … It is very disheartening,” she says. Sarah says the problems can start when people disclose that she is autistic to others without her consent. “People take this as: ‘Oh look – they are vulnerable,’” she says. Predators can see autistic and other disabled people as not quite people, which makes it easier to justify harassment (if only to themselves). There is often an implicit assumption that these women don’t have the intellectual capacity to recognise harassment – or to stop it. Sometimes women find their disabilities are actively used against them, such as hypersensitivity to noise being used to justify a meeting in a hotel room, rather than the lobby. “I also find reading intentions from faces very difficult,” Sarah says. Many people, she says, are aware that this is a common feature of autism and manipulate their facial expressions in a deliberate attempt to confuse disabled women about their intentions. When an autistic woman finds she has been misled, she can be made to feel this is her fault. “I take safety extremely seriously for this reason,” Sarah says. It has made her suspicious and sometimes fearful. For the Paralympian Anne Wafula Strike, it is hard to tell if harassers who make lewd comments about her body target her because she is a wheelchair user, a woman of colour or both. Her experience, she says, differs “depending on how I’m wearing my hair – if I want to look very African in the way I do my hair; stuff like that. And I think that, being a woman of colour, people push boundaries more, definitely.” Disabled women of colour are seen as “easy targets”, she says. While Wafula Strike is confident that she can tell the difference between “a man who is genuinely interested in me, with good intentions, and others that take advantage”, she worries that less outgoing or younger women may not. Despite the statistics and testimonies from women such as Wafula Strike, Kavanagh and Sarah, none of the major women’s organisations I speak to say they can comment on the particular problems faced by disabled women. Instead, I speak to Dr Hannah Morgan, a senior lecturer at Lancaster University’s Centre for Disability Research. Disabled women face “neglect” by mainstream women’s services and anti-harassment efforts, she says. “The impact and legacy of overprotective services” prevent disabled women from exploring their sexuality on their own terms, and separate them from the peer networks that build the confidence and knowledge to challenge inappropriate behaviour. There is also “strong evidence that disabled women have been less likely to be believed or seen as credible witnesses in a prosecution, and the false assumption that disabled women are ‘safe’ from forms of sexual harassment … because they may deviate from socially constructed norms about beauty and sexual attractiveness”. Often, she explains, disabled women have to choose between freedom from harassment and freedom in general. What do you do if you are groped by the taxi driver who represents your only access to the high street, or the barman who puts out a pub’s portable ramp for you to meet your friends? Morgan agrees with all the other women to whom I speak: disabled women are subject to “assumptions about their ‘inherent vulnerability’ and a greater assumption that the perpetrator will get away with it”. It can become unbearable – and has real social effects, too. “The psycho-emotional impact, or emotional toll, can lead some disabled women to reduce their potential exposure by limiting their social activities or participation in work or education,” Morgan says. In a world where inaccessibility and ableist attitudes keep disabled people out of society, sexual harassment is one more horrible reason to just stay at home. With attitudes to disability so entrenched in society, the hope for change can seem minimal. But as we have seen this year, sharing stories can start new conversations and spark change. If we are truly to take on harassment culture, it is time to place disabled women’s experiences front and centre. • This article was amended on 26 November 2021 to remove some personal details.In September, the popular Lake Tahoe ski resort Squaw Valley announced it would change its name, recognizing that the term was “derogatory and offensive”. It became official with a press release and a new sign. But that’s not the end of the name in California. Hundreds of miles south in Fresno county, near Kings Canyon national park, there is another Squaw Valley. The central California town of about 3,500 people dates back to the 19th century, and is one of nearly 100 places in California to use the controversial term in its name. Derived from the Algonquin language, the word “squaw” is believed to have once meant “woman”, however, it has become a misogynistic and racist term used to disparage Indigenous women. It’s also a commonly used placename in the US – more than 650 federal sites include it in their names. After 2020’s historic protests against racism and white supremacy in the US after the murder of George Floyd, cities, schools and parks across the US began reconsidering controversial names with racist histories. A California commission renamed a park that had been named for a white settler accused of murdering Indigenous people. The Placer county board of supervisors voted to change a racist street name in north Lake Tahoe in response to concerns from residents. This month Deb Haaland, the interior secretary, announced she would take steps to remove the misogynist and racist term from federal lands across the US. The renaming efforts in Fresno county accelerated after the Tahoe ski resort first announced its planned change. Roman Rain Tree, a member of the local Dunlap Band of Mono Indians and Choinumni tribes who lives 30 miles away from the land he calls S-Valley, hoped the Tahoe decision would convince officials in Fresno county that it was time for a change there, too, and do away with a name that he says “memorializes the sexualized and genocidal acts that early settlers have perpetrated on Indigenous people in this country”. But the effort has turned into a sometimes tense battle between activists such as Rain Tree and officials in this conservative region, who argue that the name is part of the area’s identity and any plan to change it must come from residents themselves. “The process has to be driven by the community,” said Nathan Magsig, the Fresno county supervisor who represents the area. “A name is not just something on a piece of paper. Names are identity.” When Rain Tree tried to meet with the board of supervisors, he says, he was told he would first need to show there was support for a name change. Rain Tree started an online petition, which has since gathered nearly 20,000 signatures from people across the US. He and other activists have since held panels and released public service announcements about the name. They have also started working with the ACLU, who say evaluating names, and who and what they honor, is important. “There is no reason why there continue to be placenames that are racial and misogynist slurs,” said Tedde Simon, an Indigenous justice advocate with the ACLU of northern California. That message has resonated with Linda Tubach, who has lived in the rural Fresno county outpost for 10 years. During that time, the retired high school social studies teacher has been embarrassed to tell colleagues and friends where she lives. When her husband was introduced at a recent event, the host didn’t want to say where the couple lived. “It’s embarrassing to even put my return address on envelopes,” she said. “Words send a message and that’s something that I understand as a social studies teacher.” Tubach and her husband, Bob McCloskey, have wanted to see the name change for years, but this is the first time there’s been an organized effort to do so, the couple said. They have written to the county supervisors to express their support for the change and have started writing “S… Valley” on their mail. “There’s plenty of local residents that are horrified by the name and would prefer a different name,” Tubach said. “It’s not just the area that residents are affected by this, it’s everybody throughout California,” McCloskey added. But not everyone supports the change. The “overwhelming” majority of correspondence Magsig says he has received is from residents opposed to changing the name, he said. Among those is Lonnie Work, a fifth-generation Fresno county resident, who owns a realty company and motel named for the town. Work said he was concerned that the effort didn’t originate with someone who currently lives in the community. “I am not against the name being changed to something, if it’s something that the people that live here want to do. I am against people using it for a political agenda,” Work said. “Regardless, I’m not going to change the name of my business.” Rain Tree is open about the fact that he and some other activists don’t live in the town, but says that is due, in part, to racist policies that pushed their ancestors out. He and others have been treated as outsiders rather than people with ties to the area, he said. Simon, the ACLU advocate, said county officials have tried to paint the movement as being driven by the organization. “One of the things we’ve heard lobbed back from the board of supervisors is we are outside agitators. ‘This is to cancel culture,’” Simon said. “It’s being led by local Indigenous people and blaming the ACLU is a way of silencing and devaluing local Indigenous leadership.” When Rain Tree drives past the town’s sign as he visits, it serves as a grim reminder of the atrocities Indigenous people have suffered, and the disproportionate rates of missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls. “Besides it being repugnant, it’s a reminder of how much I kind of feel like people want the Indigenous people to go away and ‘get rid of the Indian problem’,” Rain Tree said. “‘Let’s just glorify our version of history.’” Doing away with the name will require educating residents about its history, he said, and the pain it brings for many Indigenous people. But local officials haven’t taken the effort seriously, he said. Activists recently held a protest outside the board of supervisors meeting where Rain Tree was escorted out while offering public comment. While speaking he had turned his back on the board to demonstrate how he felt the supervisors were treating activists. Magsig, who represents the area, said he is open to changing the name if that’s what residents want, but that it wouldn’t undo the past, and could cause harm. “Would you be willing to change your name? Or does [it] have significance to you?” he said. “There are names and things which were very hurtful in the past but by changing a name it doesn’t erase the past but it does cause harm. To the extent there are wounds attached to a name, for healing what needs to be done is to talk about these things more.” Despite the lack of support from local officials, Rain Tree is hopeful that one day the town will be known by a different name. He and other activists have suggested Nim Valley, which means human, or Bear Mountain Valley, a name shared by the local library. “The spirit of the community is not defined in the name,” he said. “The spirit of the community is defined by how people come together and how people respond in adverse moments that challenge the community as a whole. This is one of those moments.”In the past year, opposition to critical race theory has become a conservative rallying cry at school board meetings across the US. And it recently spurred white voter turnout in Virginia’s gubernatorial election. Critical race theory, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society, isn’t taught in American public schools, yet white conservatives have turned it into a catch-all phrase for teaching about race and racism. Rallying parents around concepts that aren’t taught in textbooks isn’t a new political strategy for the American right – it’s a fundamental part of how Republicans have rebranded themselves over the past 50 years, according to Carol Mason, a professor at the University of Kentucky and the author of Reading Appalachia from Left to Right: Conservatives and the 1974 Kanawha County Textbook Controversy. Mason’s book takes readers to small-town West Virginia where a school board meeting on textbook selection quickly escalated into violent protests that saw the Ku Klux Klan marching in the streets, school buses shot up and a kindergarten classroom dynamited. While many of the protesters had no idea what was actually in the books they were protesting against, they had been successfully incited by thinktanks such as the Heritage Foundation, a key source for misinformation on critical race theory today, into violence that captured national media attention. More importantly, the moment taught conservative power brokers how to successfully co-opt the protest culture of the left to rebrand the right, Mason said in an interview with the Guardian. No longer would the Republican party be the party of eggheads like William F Buckley Jr. Instead it would be loud and in the streets, all while masking white supremacy with working-class values. And nowhere was the ground more fertile than West Virginia, where labor strikes, led predominantly by poor white people, were a daily part of life. What happened on the ground in West Virginia in 1974? In April 1974 the Kanawha county board of education gathered for a routine meeting in Charleston. The textbook selection committee dutifully described the books they chose for a new language arts curriculum and their procedures for ensuring that the books met a state-sanctioned mandate to include multi-ethnic and multiracial literature in the new curriculum. Everyone seemed surprised when an objection came from the only female board member, Alice Moore, who after moving to West Virginia from Mississippi several years earlier had campaigned to join the board on an anti-sex education platform. Moore succeeded in delaying but not stopping the purchase of the curriculum. Throughout the spring and summer, thousands of protesters mobilized, objecting to the books as well to as the board’s selection process. At a board of education hearing on 27 June 1974, more than 1,000 citizens showed up to debate the new textbooks. After listening to them for nearly three hours, the school board voted 3-2 to purchase the books. Protesters felt ignored by the board’s June decision to purchase the curriculum and kept mobilizing Kanawha county residents throughout the summer. When the academic year began in the fall, organized protests increased, including sympathy strikes by coalminers. In October and November, tensions were so high that members of both sides of the controversy issued threats and committed acts of violence. In January 1975, Ku Klux Klan leaders made a media splash on the West Virginia capitol steps and legal hearings regarding October bombings of schools began. When spring came, the coal strikes were over, the big rallies were gone, and the books were in the classrooms. What political organizations were involved in the protests? The textbook controversy drew from a rich array of conservative, populist and even revolutionary concepts expressed by organizations including John Birch Society, Citizen Councils, the American Party, the Ku Klux Klan, the Heritage Foundation, National Alliance and the Christian Crusade. The Heritage Foundation’s involvement was especially influential for later politics. What impact has this event had on conservative efforts to thwart public education in America? Examining how stakeholders in the 1974 textbook controversy changed their arguments during and because of that protest shows how conservatives shifted away from an old-right anti-communist stance that denounced educational reforms as Stalinist conspiracies to brainwash students or as sinister Black Power attempts to convert them into revolutionary militancy. That old-right rhetoric against public education was prominent in the beginning of the textbook controversy and was exemplified by Gordon Drake’s 1968 Blackboard Power, which was published by the same organization that spearheaded earlier anti–sex education campaigns, hosted Alice Moore for a speech in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and fundraised in the name of supporting West Virginia protesters. But by 1975, the publicly prevailing arguments against the books were not about race or communism explicitly. The later arguments were framed more as a populist matter of protecting “our heritage” and “our children”, who were purportedly at the mercy of a new bogeyman called secular humanism promoted by elitist educators who shouldn’t be allowed to tell parents what their kids learn. This stance was solidified for a national audience by Heritage Foundation strategist Connie Marshner, who wrote up the lessons she learned from West Virginia in a book called Blackboard Tyranny, which was a call to arms as well as a how-to handbook for parents so that they would back off from John Birch Society–style conspiracism and focus on effecting political change at the local level. What were lasting political impacts for the Republican party? For the burgeoning new right that was fashioning the Republican party as one of cultural conservatism, the textbook controversy marked a shift from playing the race card, so to speak, to playing the mommy card. Scholars such as Jean Hardisty, Michelle Nickerson and Lisa McGirr have shown how women in the 1950s and 60s were highly effective organizers who shaped the postwar right. These “kitchen table activists”, “housewife populists” and “suburban warriors” were indeed “mothers of conservatism” whose behind-the-scenes letter and voter registration campaigns bolstered the conservative movement. Racial identity was a fundamental issue for conservatives emerging from the civil rights era, as Connie Marshner makes clear in her explanation of why to care about school curricula in the first place. “Ours is an age of neo-ethnicity,” she wrote. “Blacks are proud to be blacks, and want their public education system to foster that pride in their offspring; Chicanos want Chicano language, customs and attitudes taught to their children. Middle-class whites do not agitate for ‘white studies’ courses; the equivalent demand is for traditional American and Christian values,” she wrote. For Marshner and the new right, traditional American and Christian values equaled the “neo-ethnicity” of whiteness without calling it white. This, then, is one of the West Virginia textbook conflict’s legacies for the Republican party. It taught them how to fight against inclusive, culturally diverse and multi-ethnic education without saying you are fighting for a white-oriented, white-dominated and white-privileging curriculum. What about other legacies for rightwing America? For the far right, the 1974 textbook controversy brought together neo-Nazis and Ku Klux Klan members in a way they hadn’t been in the 1960s. Several years before the birth of Aryan Nations, the textbook controversy gave common cause to competing Klan factions and neo-Nazi groups. It was an occasion for them to collaborate, to hash out whether Jews or Blacks were the white man’s more powerful enemy, and to recruit kindred spirits into populist campaigns, such as the Boston anti-busing protests, and into an emerging paramilitary white power movement. Indeed, one local West Virginian, a German immigrant and publisher of rightwing materials that circulated far-right arguments against the textbooks during the controversy, went on to launch the White Power Report and to create the first white supremacist electronic bulletin board. His involvement with the textbook controversy coincided with his decision to leave the John Birch Society and launch more overtly white supremacist ventures. As historian Kathleen Belew has shown, militant white supremacists were gaining momentum in the 1970s. Those writing about, living through and recruiting in the West Virginia textbook controversy were of no small significance to the growing white power movement. What political ground do conservatives win by going after public education? The textbook controversy demonstrated how to use campaigns against education to shift political dissent from the left to the right, from blue to red, from progressive to conservative causes. At the beginning of the 1970s, the protest culture in West Virginia and Appalachia generally was leftist as workers organized against energy conglomerations. Say “protesters” in the early 1970s and you thought of labor unions fighting corporations for better wages and safety measures on the job and for the community. The 1972 Buffalo Creek disaster, in which more than a 100m gallons of surging black slurry waste decimated coal towns along a southern West Virginia hollow, killed 125, injured over 1,000, and left 4,000 people homeless. The 1974 Kanawha county textbook controversy demonstrated how a moral panic over education could turn protest ire and populist rage in favor of rightwing causes. It showed conservatives, who throughout the 1960s had been seen as aloof elitists like William F Buckley, how going after public education could channel actual working-class discontent to their side and change their image from blue blood to blue collar. Why are we seeing resistance to discussions of race in public schools today? It is tempting to draw a bright, direct line from the Heritage Foundation’s early years and their involvement in the textbook controversy to their central role today in creating a moral panic over critical race theory. In both instances, then and now, the Heritage Foundation put in a concerted effort to fan the flames of discontent by offering legal help to local dissenters and shaping the message about some supposedly poisonous school curriculum. While such actions are certainly consistent, to point only to the Heritage Foundation as the villain of this story misses opportunities for more nuanced analysis. The push to thwart discussions of race in public schools is clearly a backlash against the movement for Black lives, calls for reform of racist policing practices and personnel and campaigns to remove statuary celebrating white supremacism from the American public sphere. Offering the bogeyman of critical race theory as explanation for Black Lives Matter protests and related actions suggests there is a magic bullet for ending legitimate protests against racial profiling, white supremacist terror, and structural inequalities built into the criminal justice system. Any last thoughts on what the textbook controversy can teach us? Most US residents are anticipating with dread or hope the election year of 2024. I have no doubt that the West Virginia textbook controversy will be resurrected in service to politics as its 50th anniversary is commemorated and analyzed the same year. To understand the extent to which the textbook war of 1974 is a precursor to current and recent populist protests, it is imperative to address multiple influences and not to fall into old stereotypes about Appalachians, such as their supposed inherent violence, intolerance and hillbilly penchant for feuding. Equally important is to avoid more romantic stereotypes that glorify Appalachians as noble frontiersmen and courageous resisters to modern corruptions. In 1974 a multi-ethnic language arts curriculum was offered up as the corruption to be fought. In 2024 the supposed corruptions will have multiplied. And this time, as opposed to the 1960s and 70s when white poverty was seen as something that could be addressed with social programs, rural white poverty is now pathologized much as Black urban poverty was before: as a matter of laziness and improper family formations. Rightwing forces – from mainstream conservatives to militant insurrectionists – again are in a state of transition and, if the textbook controversy was any harbinger of what works for rightwing America – they will surely use moral panics over education and conflicts in Appalachia to their advantage. This interview has been edited for length and clarityIt’s shocking that Travis McMichael, Gregory McMichael, and William Bryan were found guilty of murdering Ahmaud Arbery in Brunswick, Georgia. Yet the shock doesn’t stem out of any miscarriage of justice. On the contrary, the jury in Glynn county deliberated and reached the correct decision. Stalking an innocent Black man, chasing him, cornering him, and then killing him must come with criminal consequences in this country, and each of the three murderers now faces the possibility of a life sentence. But the shock is that justice was served in a case where it seemed the criminal justice system and substantial portions of media coverage were doing all they could to exonerate these men. In fact, everything about this case illustrates how difficult it is to get justice for Black people in this country, starting with how often Fox News and other media outlets referred to the case as “the Arbery trial”, as if Ahmaud Arbery were the perpetrator here and not the victim. The facts of the case have never been in dispute, and yet they were also often distorted or ignored to aid the defense. The McMichaels claimed they were trying to make a citizen’s arrest of Arbery, an avid athlete who had been out jogging a mere three miles from his home that day. Father and son McMichael found Arbery suspicious, they told police, because there had been “several break-ins in the neighborhood”. This statement has been repeated so often in the last year that it has assumed the status of fact. And yet, according to the local Brunswick News, there had been just one burglary reported to county police between 1 January and 23 February 2020, the day of Arbery’s murder. That singular incident referred to property taken from a Satilla Shores vehicle – Travis McMichael’s truck. (McMichael reported a theft because, after he left his truck unlocked, his gun had been taken, he said at trial.) While surveillance video also captured an unidentified white couple possibly taking some property belonging to Larry English, a man building a home in the area, English testified that nothing had been stolen from the construction site of his second home, where Arbery stopped directly before being chased by the McMichaels. And during the trial, we heard that in all of 2019, there had been only four reported car break-ins. So, yeah, hardly a runaway crime spree. Then why did it keep getting reported this way? There’s more, of course. It took almost three months for the Georgia bureau of investigation, which took over the case, to arrest Travis and Gregory McMichael. (Bryan was arrested months later.) The elder McMichael had been a police officer and investigator for the district attorney’s office. The favoritism shown the men ran deep, so deep that the Brunswick district attorney, Jackie Johnson, who first oversaw the case, was later indicted on charges of violating her oath as a public officer and obstructing a police officer, as she was accused of “showing favor and affection to Greg McMichael during the investigation”, according to the indictment. Like Johnson, the next prosecutor, George E Barnhill, was also forced to recuse himself from the case. His son had previously worked with McMichael in what again was a clear conflict of interest. Barnhill wrote a letter to the police department explaining his recusal. “It appears Travis McMichael, Greg McMichael, and Bryan William [sic] were following, in ‘hot pursuit’, a burglary suspect, with solid first-hand probable cause, in their neighborhood,” he wrote. We now know just how completely and utterly false this account of events was. By the time the trial began, jury selection was also looking highly problematic. The population of Glynn county is over a quarter Black, and yet the seated jury for the trial was overwhelmingly white, with only one Black juror selected. Even the judge acknowledged the appearance of “intentional discrimination” in this outcome, as defense attorneys struck virtually every Black potential juror from serving on the jury. Defense attorneys also used every tool at their disposal to dehumanize Ahmaud Arbery. Laura Hogue, lawyer for Greg McMichael, characterized Arbery as a “recurring night-time intruder” whose presence was “frightening and unsettling”, as if adopting every stereotype of “the dangerous young Black man” she could find. It got even worse when she told the jury that Arbery had “long, dirty toenails”. What a morally bankrupt and shameless statement, but such are the lengths that this system will go to preserve its ill-gotten power. Any honest student of the history of this country will recognize what was happening in this case and in this trial. On display was nothing short of an American fear in all its guises. First, there is the irrational and racist fear of Black people that has motivated so much white vigilantism. It’s no mere coincidence that Georgia’s (now-defunct) self-defense statute dates to the civil war era. As Carol Anderson, Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz, and many others have shown, the violence at the heart of the American system begins with a fundamental fear of Black and Indigenous people. Then there’s the establishment’s fear that its power will be exposed for what it too often is, a precarious system that serves and protects not the public but its own interests through its prejudices and favoritisms. And finally, there’s the fear that those who don’t look like us will stand in judgment. Thus a system of power built on racial hierarchy will seek its own self-preservation. The good news, heard in the courtroom, is that the rest of us are not afraid. The mostly white jury was not afraid to return the proper verdict. The assistant district attorney Linda Dunikoski was not afraid (and was completely convincing) in her prosecution. The attorney S Lee Merritt was fearless and eloquent in his advocacy for justice. But the bravest, most fearless, most admirable person in this saga has to be Wanda Cooper-Jones, Arbery’s mother. It’s hard to believe that justice would have prevailed here were it not for Cooper-Jones’ indefatigable efforts to push and challenge prosecutors like Johnson and Barnhill and the whole damn system at every turn. She pushed Georgia’s legislature to pass a hate crimes bill. She filed the federal lawsuit against the men now convicted of killing her son. She even met with the then president Donald Trump to discuss police reform. Cooper-Jones is a real hero, both for her son and in the fight for a truly just society. She was willing and able to fight a system that, if the past be a guide, was more than willing to exonerate itself. But here’s the problem: what happens when there is no Cooper-Jones? Why should our rights depend on grieving mothers fighting for the rights of their murdered children? What kind of justice system is that? I’m thankful that people like Wanda Cooper-Jones exist, but what we really need is more than that. We need a justice system that isn’t afraid of power. We need a justice system that isn’t afraid of doing what’s right. What we really need is a justice system that doesn’t depend on grieving mothers at all. Moustafa Bayoumi is the author of the award-winning books How Does It Feel To Be a Problem?: Being Young and Arab in America and This Muslim American Life: Dispatches from the War on Terror. He is Professor of English at Brooklyn College, City University of New YorkWinning tip: An elevator to fabulous views After a morning’s sightseeing in the historic centre, my favourite place in Lisbon is an uplifting experience: the Santa Justa elevator links downtown Lisbon to the Chiado district up the hill. I simply love the beautiful wrought iron of this 100-year-old neo-Gothic tower, created by Raul Mesnier de Pondard, a student of Gustave Eiffel. At the top you can enjoy the fabulous 360-degree views over the Baixa, before relaxing on the terrace with a cool drink and visiting the impressive ruins of the 14th-century Carmo Convent, which was destroyed in the great All Saints’ Day earthquake of 1755. Susanna Virtuoso performance and design Of all the things we have done in Portugal, our visit to the Palacio Foz is one of the most memorable. Always on the lookout for cheap entertainment, we found a flyer for a free piano concert by the then 17-year-old prodigy Bernardo Santos. Our amazement at the pianist’s skill was equalled by our amazement at the venue – a sumptuous 18th-century gilded and glittering baroque palace, with painted ceilings, marble pillars, multiple mirrors and wrought-iron balustrades. Situated in the main square, its relatively restrained pink exterior gives no hint of the excess within. Apparently the tourist office has now moved in and there are guided tours, but I think our way of visiting was more interesting. Barbara Forbes Feast for the senses The Confeitaria Nacional, on Praça da Figueira, was established in 1829. In Lisbon’s Baixa district, it provides a feast for the eyes as much as for the stomach, with its gold fittings, marble counter and mirrored ceiling. Confectionery items include pastel de nata (custard tarts) and the shop’s signature Christmas cake, bolo rei. Hidden away up the sweeping mahogany staircase is our favourite lunch stop, popular with locals. We eat in style under chandeliers and stucco ceiling. Local dishes such as cod with creamed vegetables, accompanied by vinho verde, can be savoured for less than the cost of a fast-food burger. Rod This bar deserves a medal For a truly unique bar I recommend the Pavilhão Chinês in Principe Real (Rua Dom Pedro V, 89/91). Originally a grocery shop bought to house and display a collection of curios, it feels as if you’re going for a drink in a museum. Knock on the door to be personally welcomed by the waiter and admire the five rooms filled with thousands of military artefacts, medals and miniature dolls spanning the past two centuries. The extensive cocktail list is in an erotic art book and there is also a pool table, but the collection takes centre stage and is where your eyes will be drawn. Ursula Watson Local brews Sample some of Lisbon’s finest locally brewed craft beer at the Duque brew pub. Set on Calçada do Duque, a few minutes’ walk from the Carmo Convent in the Chiado district, Duque offers a regularly updated selection of delicious bottled and draught brews from its onsite microbrewery as well as offerings from across Portugal’s burgeoning craft beer scene, including the distinctive creations of multi-award winner Cervejeira Dois Corvos. Work your way through a flight of taster servings in the stripped-down bar, or watch life in the Chiado go by from a table overlooking the cobbled steps outside. Louise Stunning vista The Unesco Belém Tower, Jerónimos Monastery and Monument to the Discoveries are all brilliant to visit, but if you think you’ve “done” Belém once you’ve seen them, you may be surprised, as we were, to discover several more queue-free delights. The Church of Santa Maria de Belém is stunning (and free). You get panoramic views of the 25 de Abril Bridge and riverfront from the top of the newly opened MAAT, (Museum of Art, Architecture and Technology). Entry on to the huge roof is free and it’s especially spectacular at sunset with the play of light on water and white tiles. Louise Caipirinha, Brazilian style Rendezvous – More than Wine on Rua de São Vicente is the best. Having given up on exploring the Castelo de São Jorge during an unexpected October heatwave we chanced upon this small, friendly oasis. It has great service, delicious food and eclectic decor and we felt pleased with ourselves for making this little discovery. Our tapas lunch was extremely tasty, my homemade limonada was refreshing, but the highlight was the generous caipirinha my son ordered – for €6. The alcohol content was almost visible and, seeing my concerned look, the waitress smiled winningly and just said “Brazilian style”! Our winding walk afterwards down through the beautiful narrow streets of Alfama was greatly enhanced by my son’s ebullient mood. Sherry Santer Kong is the king of vegan restaurants Visiting Portugal as a vegan, I missed out on trying many traditional local dishes. That was until I discovered Kong, an intimate restaurant on Rua do Cruxifixo in central Lisbon that offers meat-free versions of the Portuguese classics. Its reasonably priced menu features vegan renditions of the francesinha, a meat sandwich doused in tomato sauce and cheese, the octopus dish polvo à lagareiro, and sausage croquettes, among others. The place is not to be missed by veggies and vegans, and could even turn the head of a carnivore. Mains €9.50-€12.50, open Monday-Saturday 12.30pm-10.30pm Laura Paterson Park panorama If you’re looking for a sweeping view of Lisbon, it doesn’t get much better than the Panorâmico de Monsanto. Monsanto is a large forested park to the north-west of the city, and if you walk to the highest point you get a 360º view out over Lisbon and the river Tejo. The Panorâmico itself is a huge, round, concrete structure that feels a little like a multi-storey car park, and it has an colourful history: once a successful restaurant, it got into financial difficulties and was abandoned in 2001 and closed off to the public for years. The intrigue around this belvedere – once a pearl of Lisbon, now gathering dust and graffiti – only grew, giving it something of a cult status. The building still contains original artwork, including painted murals by Luís Dourdil, and beautiful ceramic-and-tile panels. Sadie Dark history Near the cathedral, the Museu do Aljube, which opened in 2015, sheds a fascinating, if disturbing, light on the life of political prisoners held there during the long dictatorship of António de Oliveira Salazar from 1926-74. You can learn about the role of the secret police and see the torture rooms and isolation cells endured by those incarcerated here. Visitors can experience an underground meeting, where revolutionary pamphlets were tapped out on a typewriter sheathed with a wooden shield to muffle its sound. End on a positive note, viewing the exhibition celebrating liberation on the 25 April 1974. €3, open from Tuesday to Sunday from 10.00am-6.00 pm M AshleyWelcome once again to the Thursday quiz, the moment that I like to think signals the beginning of the end of the middle of the week. No anagrams for you this time, but your other regular and beloved features are all here: Kate Bush, Ron from Sparks, and a particularly tricky hidden Doctor Who reference to spot. It is just for fun. Honestly, there has been no thought put into awarding prizes at all. Let us know how you get on in the comments. The Thursday quiz, No 31 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and you don’t want to be like the many people who emailed him last week to haughtily point out that Kansas City was not in the state of Kansas but in Missouri without taking two seconds to check first whether Kansas City, Kansas also existed. Which it does.Human rights activists have accused Turkey of using its role as host of Interpol’s general assembly to push for a crackdown on critics and political opponents who have fled the country. The alert came after the Turkish interior minister, Süleyman Soylu, said his government would use the three-day event in Istanbul to persuade the international criminal police organisation’s officials and delegates to find, arrest and extradite Turkish dissident citizens – particularly those it labels terrorists – abroad. Campaigners have long accused authoritarian regimes of abusing Interpol’s “red notice” system used to hunt down criminals at large, including drug smugglers, people traffickers, war crime suspects and terrorists. Turkish authorities have been accused of repeatedly swamping the police organisation with requests targeting political opponents. There have also been growing concerns about politically motivated abuse of Interpol in the US Senate where a new bill aimed at ending the organisations’ misuse to “pursue, harass or persecute political opponents and dissidents with trumped up criminal charges” was introduced in July. There has been angry reaction to the appointment of Ahmed Nasser al-Raisi, an Emirati general accused of torture, as the new president of Interpol. Al-Raisi was elected to the position on Thursday despite the alarm being raised over his candidacy by foreign leaders. The UAE has also been accused of abusing the red notice system to pursue dissidents. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, told the opening session of the 89th Interpol general assembly on Tuesday that he expected “strong cooperation” in the extradition of people suspected of following the US-based Islamic preacher Fethullah Gülen and the PKK, the Kurdish movement. On Wednesday, Interpol secretary general Jürgen Stock told journalists the organisation would not act on requests motivated by anything other than policing issues. “If member countries decide to use Interpol they have to apply to our rules and standards. If a red notice has a predominantly political background we don’t take any action. If it’s political we’re out … we respect and protect human rights,” Stock said. Interpol has rejected almost 800 red notice requests from Turkey in the past five years, an Interpol spokesperson told the Guardian, insisting that each request was rigorously checked. But critics from the Turkish Democracy Project claim some exiles have been unjustly threatened with arrest and extradition by the organisation. “We are a policing organisation not a political one but we’re not blind to issues of geopolitics,” Interpol said. “The committee carefully checks applications from countries where we know there might be a problem. We have a taskforce that reviews every single red notice request from every member country to make sure its compliant. We put a lot of resources and effort into making sure the red notice system is respected.” In August, the Stockholm Center for Freedom, a non-profit advocacy organisation promoting the rule of law, democracy and human rights and focusing on Turkey, accused the Erdoğan regime of having “weaponised” Interpol for its wider campaign of repression against critics, human rights activists and ethnic or religious minorities abroad. It added: “Turkey abuses Interpol in various ways. The International Notice System, such as red notices and diffusions, are used to target political opponents who have committed no crime other than being critical of President Erdoğan’s government. “Turkey is also accused of manipulating Interpol’s Stolen and Lost Travel Documents database (SLTD) by filing tens of thousands of cases for critics and opponents who, in many instances, are not even aware that their passports have been invalidated.” Campaigners are also concerned about Syria’s recent readmission to Interpol after it was banned for human rights abuses and war crimes fearing the Damascus regime will attempt to sabotage legitimate asylum claims abroad. Russia, China and Iran have also been accused of misusing Interpol’s red notices. Interpol was set up in 1923 mainly to ensure criminals could not with impunity flee the country where their crime was committed. The organisation enables law enforcement agencies from its 194 member states to share data on crimes and criminals and issue arrest warrants. Madeleine Joelson, executive director of the Turkish Democracy Project, said: “Interpol – once a bastion of law and order – has become a tool of transnational repression. Erdoğan, along with Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping, continues to abuse and degrade the liberal international order – distorting its true purpose and undermining its credibility.”It just wouldn’t be Christmas without another celebrity children’s book adaptation for the stage. Some projects feel a tad cynical but The Bolds, based onJulian Clary’s popular series, isn’t a bad bet. It’s a quirky story about a family of hyenas who escape a national park in Africa and wind up living as humans in a semi-detached in Teddington. There’s plenty of fun physical comedy, endless jokes (Mr Bold writes them for a living) and – thanks to the hyenas – lots of laughter. Director Lee Lyford conjures up a likable family, led by the Del Boy-esque Mr Bold (David Ahmad) and a pleasingly non-mumsy Mrs Bold (Amanda Gordon). A pack of screeching creatures could have been hard work but there’s lots of warmth and affection here, among the family members – but also in the kindness the Bolds show to young Minnie and surly Scottish neighbour Mr McNumpty (a wonderfully hammy Sam Pay). The show hums with an easy sense of playfulness, with the young audience happily shouting out comments and warnings as the adventure unfolds. Mae Munuo and Sam Swann scamper tirelessly about the stage as young Betty and Bobby Bold, munching on pens, papers and chairs, rubbing their bottoms on props and, of course, rolling about on the floor with laughter. James Button’s vibrant set, splashed in bold prints, has a slapdash dynamism to it. When the Bolds visit a safari park in an attempt to get back to their “animal roots”, they scoot about in a cleverly designed car, which seems to glide about the stage with miraculously little effort (but is propelled by the actors’ furiously pedalling feet). It’s all very jolly but the energy eventually lags. Running at two hours, Clary’s script is far too long and a bit shapeless. The songs, penned by Clary and Simon Wallace, are written in an unforgivingly low register and don’t feel entirely necessary – but are just about rescued by a delightfully daft duet in the closing stages, infused with a music-hall sense of mischief. At the Unicorn theatre, London, until 31 DecemberPriti Patel is facing three legal challenges over her controversial plans to push back refugees on small boats in the Channel who are trying to reach the UK. Several charities including Care4Calais and Channel Rescue are involved in two linked challenges arguing that Patel’s plans are unlawful under human rights and maritime laws. Freedom from Torture is involved in a third challenge. The Guardian has revealed that government lawyers have warned Patel she is likely to lose any legal challenge against her pushbacks policy. The first legal challenge, from Care4Calais and another charity, focuses on whether the Home Office has actually formulated a policy on pushbacks. It argues that if such a policy exists it should be published so it can be scrutinised. The second challenge, from Channel Rescue, a human rights organisation that monitors the situation for refugees crossing the Channel in small boats, focuses on alleged breaches of maritime law – the requirement under the UN convention on the law of the sea is for vessels to provide assistance to those in danger or distress at sea. The third argues that the turnback policy has no legal basis, authorises unlawful conduct by UK officials and is forbidden by the refugee convention. Government sources briefed some media outlets in September that a Border Force team had been training for months in preparation for the start of the operation. Days later Channel Rescue volunteers witnessed Border Force officials on jet skis practising turning around dinghies off the coast of Kingsdown in Kent. Jeremy Bloom, a solicitor at Duncan Lewis representing the charities in the first challenge, said: “The Home Office has widely briefed the press and parliament to say that they have a policy in place that allows them to force boats carrying asylum seekers to leave UK territorial waters. The claimants in this challenge are of the view that any policy is likely to breach the UK’s obligations under international and domestic law, and that any attempts to push back boats may well put the lives of asylum seekers and refugees in real danger.” Clare Moseley, the founder of Care4Calais, said: “Pushbacks prioritise politics over people’s lives. Refugees are innocent people who were simply unfortunate enough to be born in the wrong place. They are asking for our help. It is inhumane to punish them for this.” Kim Bryan of Channel Rescue said its volunteers witnessed a practice run by Border Force officials using jet skis to surround a dinghy on both sides and push it from the back. “We believe this is life-threatening and unlawful,” said Bryan. “We have given Home Office until 29 November to respond to our pre-action protocol letter. If we don’t receive a response by then we will issue judicial review proceedings.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “To protect lives and break the business model of criminal gangs facilitating these crossings it is right that we continue to evaluate and test a range of safe and legal options to find ways of stopping small boats making this dangerous and unnecessary journey.”HM Revenue and Customs has struck a deal to relocate tax officials into a new office complex in Newcastle owned by major Conservative party donors through an offshore company based in a tax haven, the Guardian can reveal. The department’s planned new home in the north-east of England is part of a regeneration scheme developed by a British Virgin Islands (BVI) entity controlled by the billionaire property tycoons David and Simon Reuben. The deal will see officials at the government department responsible for preventing tax avoidance working from a site owned by a subsidiary of a company based in a secretive offshore tax jurisdiction. The Reuben brothers, their family members and businesses have donated a combined £1.9m to the Tories. Earlier this week, the brothers are reported to have shared a table with Boris Johnson at an exclusive Tory party fundraising dinner. On Tuesday, officials including the Cabinet Office minister Steve Barclay announced HMRC had agreed the 25-year lease with one of the Reuben brothers’ companies. The brothers are the second richest family in the UK, according to the Sunday Times’s rich list. David Reuben’s son, Jamie, is a close ally of the prime minister and has served as a Tory party treasurer. He has donated more than £750,000 to the party since Johnson entered Downing Street. The Reuben family has built a significant presence in Newcastle in recent years and is part of the controversial Saudi Arabia-led consortium that acquired Newcastle United football club in October. Company filings show the family has frequently used BVI companies to hold its UK business interests, which include a luxury London property portfolio and a string of racecourses. A spokesperson for HMRC said the office complex in Newcastle is owned and will be developed by a UK company, Reuben Brothers (Newcastle) Limited. However, Companies House filings show the company’s sole shareholder when it was incorporated earlier this year was Taras Properties Limited in the BVI. Taras Properties first acquired the site in 2013 and transferred ownership of the land to the UK company in June this year for £10m, according to Land Registry records. The BVI company owns multiple large plots of land in central Newcastle in the area surrounding HMRC’s planned offices. A spokesperson for the Reuben brothers confirmed the UK company is held by Taras Properties, but insisted the subsidiary “operates and pays taxes as a UK company”. HMRC’s spokesperson insisted the Reuben brothers’ company would be subject to normal UK tax regulation. “The lease payments and any gains on the sale are subject to UK tax,” they said. “HMRC is satisfied the deal represents the best value for money for the taxpayer.” There is no suggestion of any wrongdoing by the Reuben brothers and owning UK property through offshore companies is perfectly legal. But the government’s decision to move 9,000 HMRC staff to the site comes as it faces calls to honour a commitment to introduce a register of overseas companies owning UK properties. The draft bill, first published in 2018, is designed to crack down on the use of offshore companies to obscure owners’ identities and their source of funds. Combatting offshore tax evasion and avoidance is described as one of HMRC’s priorities and earlier this year the department unveiled plans to crack down on offshore tax avoidance by targeting UK-based entities facilitating the sale of avoidance schemes using tax havens. Responding to the move, Dame Margaret Hodge, a Labour MP and chair of the cross-party parliamentary group on anti-corruption and responsible tax, said: “It’s outrageous that HMRC should be using taxpayers’ money to benefit somebody that relies on offshore structures based in tax havens.”We talk of Damon Runyon’s New York, James Joyce’s Dublin and Irvine Welsh’s Edinburgh. To that list, perhaps we should add Hannah Sowerby’s Penrith – although not until the end of this delightful one-woman show does the writer-performer admit to the romantic tug of the Cumbrian market town. As Sowerby presents it, Penrith is less the beauty spot of Lake District myth than the soul-destroying meeting place of boorish farmers, deluded shelf-stackers and patronising new mothers. Glamorous it is not. Worse: for a girl growing up “10% gay”, there seem only to be two lesbians in the whole place. That is the lot of Sowerby’s Jodie Bell, a 19-year-old in urgent need of direction in this coming-of-age tale. Lucky to get so much as a glimpse of Ullswater, Jodie lives with her gran above a kebab shop. The one friend she had has left for university. Dreaming of a literary life – and only dreaming – she lands a job in Sainsbury’s and tries to develop an interest in the crisp aisle. It sounds bleak, especially given the apparent connection between the town’s dullness and Jodie’s poor mental health. But in Sowerby’s hands, it is anything but. She has something of the deadpan irony of a young Victoria Wood, getting laughs from matter-of-fact minutiae, whether it be pork scratchings or thrush. Her work as a standup has clearly honed her gift for rhythm. She remains likable and funny even as she draws us into Jodie’s depressive inertia and suicidal thoughts. For much of the play, the young woman is defeated by the challenge to come up with “10 things to do in a small Cumbrian town,” but some life force propels her on. In the most touching moment, she accepts there are many more than 10. Directed by Jonluke McKie, Sowerby performs on Anna Robinson’s set of cardboard boxes which cleverly morph from bedroom table to small-town landscape, beauty emerging from the mundane. If it could do with a second actor to mop up the supporting characters who are relegated to voiceovers and filmed segments, it is no less tender a reflection on the love-hate relationship between personality and place. At Alphabetti theatre, Newcastle, until 11 DecemberAny parent of a newborn knows it’s hard to stay awake, let alone focus on anything else. Maternity leave matters – it’s good for our health, our children and our economy. It is a peculiarity of our legislature that as an MP, I don’t have any employment rights – we might make laws, but we don’t impose these particular ones on ourselves. Consequently, I found myself high on morphine speaking to ministers about Afghanistan, having just given birth to my second child, to ensure my constituents’ concerns could be heard. Although it is illegal to require a woman to work in the first two weeks after childbirth, no maternity cover meant that, with three murders, heavy flooding and a cost-of-living crisis, it was simply not possible to switch off my email or my phone. Parliament denied me maternity cover on the basis that democracy demands no one else can substitute for me. With little support from the authorities or indeed my own political party, I have worked as best I can while managing the needs of my now 13-week-old son. That’s why I was baffled to be told I could not take him into parliament with me. While my son slept blissfully, calmed by the excitement only discussion of financial regulation can generate, his presence at a debate clearly vexed some in an institution that had previously seemed relaxed about such matters. It now transpires the newly revised Commons rule book specifies children cannot go into the chambers – thus parliament has, to date, put more effort into writing rules about this than second jobs. Some argue it is a privilege to take your kids to the office and it is out of touch to suggest this should be acceptable, whatever the effect of being denied this flexibility. Others recognise this as making an already difficult combination of caring commitments near impossible. Whether the provision of maternity cover, or rules about where children can go – with some MPs berated for taking toddlers into the tea room between votes – these “courtesies and customs” have evolved, rather than been designed to meet modern times. It’s a chicken-and-egg situation – few mothers of young children get elected, meaning there is little need to reconsider these rules in the first place. Challenging this is not about me – frankly it is too late to recoup the precious early weeks with my son. Those who suffer the most are the residents of my Walthamstow constituency – denied a voice in parliament by antiquated rules, met by a tired and frazzled mum in their constituency. So, too, the brilliant women who decide either to delay their political careers or abandon them so that our politics misses a source of talent while we accept this status quo. Were I to have employment rights I could invoke my legal right not to be discriminated against while breastfeeding, and to have appropriate maternity cover, meaning I could take maternity leave. Yet such rights are no guarantee employers will uphold them. During the pandemic many mothers, especially those on low incomes and from minority community backgrounds, were the first to be furloughed or made redundant and are now struggling to find childcare as providers have gone out of business. It is welcome that the Speaker has asked the procedures committee to investigate, but it is not clear yet how long that will take or indeed what its remit will be. Meanwhile, political parties are gearing up to select candidates for the next general election – offering the opportunity to ensure more mothers have a seat at the decision-making table. Together with the charity Pregnant then Screwed, we have set up the This Mum Votes project to champion policies to help parents in all workplaces – including paid parental leave and universal childcare – and to fund mothers to stand for office to argue for them. It doesn’t have to be like this. Whether in New Zealand, Canada or in Europe, parliaments around the world have shown a family-friendly legislature is possible. There are thousands of mothers out there who have something valuable to add to our politics, and they want to run. For now they see the mother of all parliaments discouraging mothers and rightly wonder if they will be welcome. • Stella Creasy is the Labour MP for WalthamstowIt would count as one of the more seismic shocks in modern chess history if Magnus Carlsen were to lose his world title over the next three weeks here in Dubai. Yet when his Russian opponent Ian Nepomniachtchi plays the first move of their 14-game match on Friday he will be armed with two potentially intriguing advantages. The first is that Nepomniachtchi – or Nepo as he is widely known – holds a 4-1 record in classical chess over Carlsen, dating back to when they first met as promising 12-year-olds. The second? He also has one of Russia’s fastest supercomputers, originally built for machine learning and artificial intelligence, as part of his team. After qualifying to face Carlsen by winning the Fide candidates tournament in Yekaterinburg this year, Nepomniachtchi credited the Zhores supercomputer, based in the Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology in Moscow, as helping him and his team evaluate tens of millions of positions per second. This week the Russian confirmed to the Guardian that he was using it again to prepare for Carlsen. “It can’t harm my chances,” he said. “And this particular supercomputer, because it is a huge data centre which can be used for scientific research, is hopefully more effective than others.” The use of computers is hardly new at top level chess. But having a machine that can calculate much faster – and potentially see deeper – than others can potentially help players come up with surprise opening novelties or better evaluate positions they may face on the board. “You’re more sure that your analysis is good when you see 500 million node positions than, say 100 million,” added the 30-year-old, before downplaying how much having a supercomputer on call 24/7 might actually help. “In general all the top players have access to something similar. And it’s the chess engines, such as Stockfish and Leela Chess Zero, which are the main tool in helping us prepare. Everyone has those.” Another juicy subplot to all this is that the chairman of the Skolkovo foundation is Arkady Dvorkovich, who also happens to be the president of chess’s world governing body, Fide, who are organising the Carlsen v Nepomniachtchi match. Nepomniachtchi makes for good company, and he is also happy to expand on the long history between him and Carlsen. “The first time we met was in the European under-12 championships,” he says. “He played quite well, but I didn’t feel like he was something spectacular. And he was from Norway, which is not a chess country, so I didn’t really take that much notice. But when we played again not long after, and we finished top two at the under-12 world championships, it was clear he was a strong player. “In general I think it makes some difference if you’ve played a person before and been successful,” he adds. “But some of our games were played nearly 20 years ago. So while it is good the score is in my favour, it would be quite foolish to rely on this alone.” Instead Nepomniachtchi credits a change in mindset from turning him from a brilliant but erratic player into a true challenger for the crown. “Before I was maybe the least hard working person out of the world’s top 20,” he admits. “Normally if chess players have a week or two between tournaments, they prepare for the next one. But I would be going to the football pitch three times a week or watching Marvel movies. And when the new season of Game of Thrones came out, I thought: ‘Come on, this is pretty nice!’ But eventually I understood that soon I was going to be 30 and I wasn’t being serious, and had done nothing really special. “At some point you have to choose if you want your life to be full of joy – and probably you’re not choosing to achieve too much – or you sacrifice something and then maybe you can move forward. But it took me quite some time to take off with this new approach.” Another problem, he admits, is that sometimes he was too overconfident. “This was an issue which hounded me for years” he says. “It was like: ‘I don’t really care who I play, I am going to beat them.’ Sometimes I lacked respect for my opponents. But after I corrected my mindset my results became better.” Nepomniachtchi’s change in mindset is also reflected in the fact he has recently lost 10kg from training camps which typically consisted of playing sports in the morning, before working on his chess for four to five hours from 3pm, followed by more exercise in the evening. “The schedule was quite boring,” he says, smiling. “But it helped.” Meanwhile Carlsen also appears fit and in good form, following a recent training camp in Cadiz. Usually players spend the last couple of months before a world title encounter squirrelled away. However he has surprised observers by crushing all-comers in a series of one-minute bullet and three-minute blitz games online this month. Asked by the Guardian to explain his unusual preparation, Carlsen replied: “I would say it’s a few different factors. Mostly it was because I had a cold and I couldn’t really go outside much, or do anything. But I also think that any practice you can get is useful, especially in blitz.” So who will win? The general view is Carlsen is a warm favourite, but Nepomniachtchi is talented enough that if he hits a hot streak anything could happen. As Vishy Anand, who held the title between 2007 and 2013, puts it: “Nepo is the one guy who doesn’t seem scared of Magnus. That is important. Because you cannot give him that respect. You have to believe you can beat him. Nepo does.” However Anand concedes that Norwegian remains the clear favourite, with his Fide rating of 2855 being 73 points clear of his Russian opponent. “Magnus doesn’t stop,” he adds. “That’s probably the thing that intimidates most people. And he doesn’t make glaring mistakes, which means his opponents have to keep the level really high, and sustain it, to land a hit. “That doesn’t mean Magnus can’t collapse sometimes. And there are certain kinds of positions that he dislikes. But it’s much harder to catch him out.”Labour is calling for an investigation into the conduct and honesty of the Conservative peer Michelle Mone after she repeatedly denied any association with a PPE (personal protective equipment) company it has since emerged she recommended to the government. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) recently revealed that Lady Mone referred the company, PPE Medpro Ltd, as a potential supplier during the coronavirus pandemic. It was then entered into a “VIP” fast-track, high priority lane for firms with political connections before being awarded two contracts, for face masks and surgical gowns, valued in total at £203m. Formed on 12 May last year, PPE Medpro was administered and provided with directors by Knox House Trust (KHT), an Isle of Man corporate services firm run by Mone’s husband, Douglas Barrowman. In extensive correspondence over six weeks last year, the Guardian repeatedly asked Mone about her connection to PPE Medpro. She was also asked whether she had had any discussions with government officials about the firm. Meanwhile, PPE Medpro was asked if anybody involved in the company had discussions with any peers as part of its approach to the government. In their responses, neither Mone nor PPE Medpro disclosed that she had referred the company to Lord Agnew, a Cabinet Office minister. At the time of the correspondence, Mone’s lawyers repeatedly denied that she had any connection or association with the company, or any role in how it secured the contracts. One of the responses stated Mone and Barrowman “never had any role or function in PPE Medpro, nor in the process by which contracts were awarded to PPE Medpro”. Her lawyers said Mone was “not connected in any way with PPE Medpro” and added “any suggestion of an association” between their client and PPE Medpro would be “both inaccurate and misleading”. The lawyers also said that “with reference to the ‘high priority lane’ … any suggestion that either [Mone or Barrowman] played any role in how the PPE Medpro contract was processed would be wholly inaccurate and misleading”. However, last week the DHSC disclosed that Mone had played a seemingly crucial role in the process, by making the initial recommendation to Agnew. After her referral, Agnew recommended the company to the “VIP” lane for companies referred by ministers, MPs or peers. At that time, the government was awarding contracts with no competitive tender under emergency Covid regulations. Companies referred to the VIP lane were 10 times more likely to be awarded a contract, according to a National Audit Office report. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, called for the government – or the cabinet secretary if the government declined – to publish all correspondence, documents, meeting minutes and notes related to all contracts awarded through the VIP process. Rayner said: “There are serious questions that Baroness Mone must answer about whether she was telling the truth when she said that she played no role in the awarding of £200m of taxpayers’ money to PPE Medpro. Boris Johnson and the Conservative party also have serious questions to answer about Baroness Mone’s position if she is found to have lied about her role in these contracts and the VIP fast-track lane. “If Baroness Mone wasn’t telling the truth about her role in these contracts, then she has clearly failed to uphold the Nolan principles and there are further questions to answer about whether she has breached the House of Lords code of conduct. Baroness Mone should refer herself to the House of Lords commissioners for investigation if she is confident she has done nothing wrong and has nothing to hide.” The code of conduct for members of the House of Lords states that they “should observe the seven general principles of conduct identified by the Committee on Standards in Public Life”, known as the Nolan principles. These include integrity, accountability, openness and honesty, and a positive duty of leadership, which requires members to “actively promote and robustly support the principles”. Mone’s role in the process was revealed after the DHSC published the list of 47 companies awarded contracts through the VIP lane after a freedom of information request pursued by the Good Law Project, which is challenging the propriety of some government contracts. There is no evidence that Mone played any part in PPE Medpro securing its contracts last year, beyond her initial referral. However, this week the Financial Times reported that Mone had also lobbied officials working for the government’s test-and-trace programme, apparently on behalf of PPE Medpro. Jacqui Rock, a senior official, emailed colleagues on 10 February, saying: “Baroness Mone is going to Michael Gove and Matt Hancock today as she is incandescent with rage on the way she believes Medpro have been treating [sic] in the matter.” Mone’s representatives told the FT that: “In relation to test and trace, she has advocated to government that all companies tendering for UK contracts be treated fairly and that a transparent process is adopted by DHSC in the award of contracts.” In response to questions from the Guardian, Mone’s lawyers said: “Baroness Mone does not deny the simple act of referring PPE Medpro as a potential supplier of PPE to the office of Lord Agnew.”. However, they said Mone strongly denied that any of her previous statements were untrue or misleading, saying that they denied her being connected, associated or having a role in PPE Medpro, in the “commercial meaning” of those words. They described Mone’s referral of the company to Agnew as a “very simple, solitary and brief step”, which she did as a contribution to the Covid emergency response. The Guardian is still awaiting a response from Mone’s lawyers about why the peer initially chose not to disclose her referral of PPE Medpro.Book now If you’ve always wanted to pick up a pen to write a novel but are daunted about where to start, or you have been writing for some time but feel like you’ve lost your way, this event will provide insights into the creative process of novel-writing from two global bestselling award-winning authors. Together they will discuss writing techniques to help you to begin your narrative – how to come up with a character, develop your plot and differentiate between character and author voice. Through a blend of short talks, discussions, easy-to-follow exercises, informal feedback, and an audience Q&amp;A, this masterclass will help you to develop skills that you can embed into your own writing, strengthening your work – and giving you the confidence to take it forward. Course content: Kate Mosse will discuss how to develop a character and create a plot. Maggie O’Farrell will address the use of point of view, the opening pages of a novel, and the difference between an author’s voice and a character’s voice This course is for… Beginners and writers wanting to develop their fiction skills. More established writers looking for an opportunity to refine their authorial voice, and locate their place in the publishing world. Tutor profiles A champion of women’s creativity, Kate Mosse is the Founder Director of the Women’s Prize for Fiction – the largest annual celebration of women’s writing in the world. She was awarded an OBE in 2013 for services to literature and women and was named Woman of the Year for her service to the arts in the Everywoman Awards. Kate is the author of eight novels &amp; short story collections, including the No 1 bestselling The Burning Chambers Series – The Burning Chambers and The City of Tears – as well as the multimillion selling Languedoc Trilogy – Labyrinth, Sepulchre and Citadel – and No 1 bestselling Gothic fiction including The Winter Ghosts and The Taxidermist’s Daughter, which she has adapted for the stage. Her books have been translated into 38 languages and published in more than 40 countries. She has also written four works of non-fiction – including An Extra Pair of Hands (Wellcome Collection, 2021) – four plays, contributed essays and introductions to classic novels and collections. She is a regular guest on book and arts shows on radio and television. She also writes and presents documentaries. The City of Tears by Kate Moss is published by Mantle. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply Maggie O’Farrell was born in Northern Ireland in 1972, grew up in Wales and Scotland, and currently lives in Edinburgh. Previously a journalist, she is now the author of eight novels: After You’d Gone, which won a Betty Trask Award, My Lover’s Lover, The Distance Between Us, which won a Somerset Maugham Award, The Vanishing Act of Esme Lennox, The Hand That First Held Mine, which won the 2010 Costa Novel Award, Instructions for A Heatwave, which was shortlisted for the 2013 Costa Novel Award, This Must Be the Place, which was published by Headline in 2016 and shortlisted for the Costa Novel Award. Maggie’s memoir I Am, I Am, I Am was published in 2017 and became a number one Sunday Times bestseller. Her eighth novel Hamnet won the 2020 Women’s Prize for Fiction, the 2020 NBCC Award for Fiction, the 2020 Waterstones’ Book of the Year, and was the Fiction Book of the Year at the 2021 British Book Awards. Her first book for children, Where Snow Angels Go, is published by Walker Books. Maggie became a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 2021. Hamnet by Maggie O’Farrell is published by Tinder Press. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. You will be sent a link to the webinar 1hr before the start time of 7pm (BST). This masterclass is brought to you in partnership with the Women’s Prize Trust. To find out more about the Women’s Prize Trust and Prize, or to sign up for their newsletter, please visit the Women’s Prize Trust website. If you live in the UK, you can purchase a ticket with a copy of The Women’s Prize for Fiction Journal at checkout for the combined price of £61.29 including postage and packing (RRP £14.99). The journal features beautiful colour illustrations as well as inspirational quotes and exclusive writing tips from previous winners, and space for notes to help you find your own voice. Details Book now Date: Monday 21 March 2022 Times: 7pm-9pm GMT Price: £49 (plus £2.66 booking fee) or £61.29 for journal + ticket (plus £3.18 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 7pm GMT | 8pm CET | 11am PST | 2.00pm EST Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. You may also be interested in… Ways into writing: How to begin your story with Cathy Rentzenbrink A masterclass in characterisation with Sophie Mackintosh Writing your first novel: A six-week online creative writing programme with Ross Raisin Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible – but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.Thirty-three years ago – in musical terms, an epoch – Debbie Gibson was the most famous American teen pop star on Earth. At 17 she was as loved by teenagers as Billie Eilish was at 17, in polar opposite ways. Gibson, uncool and critically dismissed, was the wholesome, toothsome innocent who sang upbeat, unapologetically weedy songs about adolescent love. Eilish, peerlessly cool and critically sacred, remains a sad-eyed cynic singing unapologetically disturbing songs about death, sex and generational neuroses. If popular culture is unrecognisable from 1988, as it should be, one aspect remains identical: the constant judgment of female public figures over their physicality, as Eilish always is and Gibson still is, harangued on social media for being “too thin” since her 2013 Lyme disease diagnosis. “I hope Billie is handling all the pressure as beautifully as she appears to be handling it,” ponders Gibson today. “She seems a wise old soul. Everyone changes, you lose weight, gain weight, dye your hair, change your aesthetic … life just happens. But with social media, there’s unsolicited feedback coming from everywhere. You need a backbone of steel, like the Kardashians. Young minds are not wired to process that. The price of fame these days is definitely high. Look, even I have a therapist on speed dial!” At 51, Gibson is a significantly more effervescent personality than she was at 17, describing her oddly sensible teenage self as “an adult as a kid”, who employed 100 people, even if she did wear double denim, a porkpie hat and two Swatch watches. Her first two albums Out of the Blue and Electric Youth – rereleased this autumn as deluxe editions – showcase her enormous, self-written and produced hit singles, time capsules of twinkly, cheery, sax-parping synth-pop and whimsical balladeering (from the tot-pop jamboree Only in My Dreams to the teen-dream colossus Lost in Your Eyes). With Foolish Beat she became the youngest-ever female to top the US charts with a song she wrote, performed and produced herself, a record that stands today. No wonder she has been a staple on heritage pop tours since the mid 00s, including 55 dates in 2019 alongside New Kids on the Block, Salt-N-Pepa and her supposedly deadly 80s rival, flame-haired Tiffany (they’ve been pals for ever). This autumn, she shimmered through a Las Vegas residency duetting with New Kids’ Joey McIntyre. “People want to reconnect with a more innocent time that made them feel free,” she decides, calling from her Las Vegas home on an old-school, non-visual landline. “Especially right now, with all the problems in the world.” She, however, has never lived in the past – “I feel the pulse of the world now” – and this August released her first original album in 20 years, The Body Remembers, her signature jaunty sound now evolved into disco-thrill bangers, featuring clubby 90s beats and sophisticated atmospherics. Visually, where once she defined the now-antique term “squeaky clean”, she’s a glammed-up Vegas vision in sequinned frocks, as cartoon camp as Mariah Carey. “I’ve finally grown into the me I’ve always felt was somewhere inside but I was maybe … afraid to own?” she muses. She says that even in her post-pop decades doing theatre, “I was a little … unsexual, unglamorous. I still feel socially awkward at times, but I have a rock’n’roll spirit and the outside now matches the inside. It just took me longer than most!” She was a geeky, Brooklynite school kid and a classically trained pianist with a home studio at 14, who idolised Donny and Marie Osmond, Madonna, Olivia Newton-John, Billy Joel and Elton (she never chased cool). “I was weirdly confusing to the executive,” she notes. “A singer-songwriter who wasn’t doing singer-songwriter-ish music; I wasn’t joining the Lilith Fair tour. My music sounded like it was crafted by an older male putting together a teen-pop act. I was prepared. And when preparation meets opportunity, that’s the definition of luck.” Gibson credits her manager mum, in fact, as the true 80s pioneer. “My mom was a badass,” she announces. “I was ignorantly blissful, doing what I loved. She was a fairly young female manager, launching a young girl into superstardom and had three other girls – four daughters – to protect.” Gibson needed protecting: behind shiniest pop scenes she endured the menace of several stalkers for years, was sent death threats via letters and faxes, targeted by a man convicted of murdering the actor Rebecca Shaeffer in 1989 (a wall in his home was papered in posters of Gibson and Tiffany). She cites “humour” as her coping mechanism. “I was threatened with being shot and my teenage brain couldn’t process it,” she reflects today. “It’s what’s happened with young female stars since the beginning of time: the older man thinks: ‘If I can’t have you no one can’. They become psychotic, it’s a paedophilia thing, it’s deep. I remember being on stage and saying to the band: ‘OK, we’re in the city where such and such a stalker is, just to be on the safe side you’re gonna see me dance really hard, I’m gonna be like a moving target …’” She laughs uproariously, an unexpectedly filthy cackle. Since the 1990s, as the US cultural gears shifted towards grunge, Gibson took the smart approach, adapt or die, emulating her hero Newton-John by playing Sandy in Grease in London’s West End in 1993. Ever since she has been a showbiz presence: musical theatre, movies, talent shows and prime-time celebrity reality TV. An appearance on Oprah Winfrey’s Where Are They Now? YouTube series in 2016 was as close as Gibson has come to a showbiz scandal: asked about the recent death of Prince, she empathised, detailing her own prescription drug dependence and the drugs’ performance-related use throughout “90%” of the entertainment industry, especially Broadway (after negative headlines, out of context, she posted a video clarifying her thoughts and apologising to her beloved theatre community). Debbie Gibson, it turned out, mainstream America’s cheerleader-in-chief, had struggled with panic attacks since aged 16 and used Xanax and Tylenol PM through her 20s to help her through the rigours of the theatre road. “There is a trait to being young and female in the business, and wanting to please, we’re called ‘troupers’,” she says. “‘You’re such a trouper!’, right? Pushing yourself to death’s doorstep for the sake of your art. We’re conditioned like that. Now? I do the amount of work my wellbeing can put up with. You can medicate and mask but eventually you have to stop. Or you will die.” This week she saw an Instagram post from the Tony-winning Broadway actor Laura Benanti, now 42, who recalled how, aged 22, while starring in a pratfall-heavy theatre role, she cracked a rib and broke her neck, her injuries downplayed by a theatre doctor, then carrying on working for seven years through “intense pain” because she was a “good girl” who didn’t want to appear “weak or difficult”. Today, she’s a “grown-ass woman”, angrily speaking up on behalf of younger actors today. The response was overwhelmingly supportive. “I thought of Oprah and the backlash I got,” muses Gibson, “and felt: ‘Ah, progress has been made’. I’m very much about conversations that actually help people.” Gibson has lived with Lyme disease since 2013, a tick-transmitted bacterial illness that causes, for her, severe exhaustion, chronic pain, memory loss, chills, fever, nerve tremors and migraines, some of which is triggered by food (sugar, starch, caffeine, certain oils), some by stress. She manages the condition through clean eating, acupuncture, yoga and calls it, heroically, “a gift – any disease is a wake-up call and I know, now, how to avoid what takes me down”. Today she lives in Las Vegas with her three dachshunds Joey, Levi and the pointedly named Trouper, is wise owl “Aunt Deborah” to 10 nieces and nephews and, after a decade-long relationship ended in 2019, is single and very happily so. “Listen, someone’s gotta come and knock me over to break up this party right now!” she hoots, merrily. “I’m not missing anything. At 51 my life is focused, uncomplicated, joyous, free.” The evolution of both her music and life uncannily echoes her equivalent in the UK charts, Kylie Minogue: from perky 80s teen pop through chequered career choices, creative triumphs, trouper traumas, relationship disappointments, serious illness and profound fulfilment as she sashayed into her 50s. “A thousand per cent!” hollers Gibson. “I see Kylie from afar and think: ‘It’s my long-lost sister’. We’re both survivors. Warrior women.” At least two teen pop stars, then, after 35 years in reality-warping showbiz, have survived psychologically intact. Things may just turn out OK for Eilish, after all. “I look at the stamina of Taylor Swift, the Weeknd, Ed Sheeran, and think wow, there’s a superhuman element,” she decides. “Younger artists have their own wisdom; they’re going through different things. I don’t sit on the sidelines waiting for the other shoe to drop, I think rock on! “All entertainers have to stay on top of their mental health,” she concludes. “I never wanted to be that bratty showbiz kid, and I don’t wanna be that grown-up female diva who abuses people because I don’t have a sense of reality. I do have a sense of reality. Because I’ve lived through real life. My family instilled in me respect for people. We’re all just people, doing our thing.” • The Body Remembers is out now on Stargirl Records. A 3CD+DVD reissue of Out of the Blue is out now on Cherry Red.Mikel Arteta would like Arsène Wenger to return to Arsenal in some capacity, saying he is keen for the former manager to become “much closer” and that the club would benefit from his presence. Wenger has not been back to the Emirates since his departure in 2018, which ended a 22-year tenure that brought Arsenal’s most successful spell of modern times, and has been Fifa’s chief of global football development since November 2019. He signed Arteta from Everton in 2011 and the midfielder became his captain before succeeding Unai Emery in the manager’s role two years ago; the pair have been in contact, notably when both attending a screening of a documentary film about Wenger this month, and Arteta intends to ensure they are in close proximity more often. “There has been communication, and I saw him and talked to him when we went to see the film,” Arteta said. “It was incredibly pleasant to see him and chat to him. Hopefully we can bring him close, because I think he will have a great time just seeing the environment he can create around him and around this place. Because of the respect and admiration that everybody at the club has for what he’s done, and as well for what he represents as a person in this club.” Questioned on what a role for Wenger may entail, Arteta replied: “I cannot tell you now, but what I can say is that I would like him to be much closer personally to me. Because I think it would be a great help, and it would be a great help for the club. Things take time and I think he has to dictate those timings. What I can say is from my side and I can talk, I think, on behalf of everybody that we would be delighted to have him much closer.” Another midfielder and former captain signed by Wenger, Granit Xhaka, is in line for an early return from the injury to his medial knee ligament sustained in September. Xhaka was expected to be out until January but, while Saturday’s top-flight meeting with Newcastle comes far too soon, Arteta said he could still play in 2021. “I hope so, yes,” he said when asked whether Xhaka could come back before the end of the year. “Hopefully he will be a little bit sooner than expected, he is training and pushing himself and all the staff so hard like he always does. He is in a good place.”The past is a foreign country, and we could all use a holiday right now. The Guardian can’t offer an all-expenses-paid trip abroad, that would be costly and a bit weird, but we can guide you towards a happy(ish) place, where things are done very differently: English cricket at the end of the last century. The 80s and 90s Cricket Show was created by Mark Sellek to celebrate an era that, for reasons our therapists are still trying to unpick, we all remember so fondly. Everyone had so much fun doing the first series that they decided to come back for another. Series two has five episodes, which might be an unconscious nod to the five-out-all-out collapses that we remember so fondly. The podcast is hosted by Gary Naylor, with guests including former England cricketers, press-box royalty and 1990s teenagers. You can subscribe in the usual places – Apple Podcasts, Acast and Spotify – as well as following on Twitter. There are two parts to each episode – a player of the week followed by a longer discussion of a series or competition. Here’s what we were chatting about in season two. Episode 1: Jack Russell + the 1990-91 Ashes Gary Naylor is joined by Peter Hayter, Mike Selvey and Pat Murphy to discuss the eccentric wicketkeeper Jack Russell, an artist on and off the field. Then they remember a strange kind of thrashing – the 1990-91 Ashes, in which England were often the equal of Australia yet found a way to lose 3-0. And yes, all the off-field stuff – the Tiger Moth, Kerry Packer’s casino – is there too. Episode 2: Angus Fraser + England v West Indies 1991 Gary is joined by Mike Selvey, Derek Pringle and Rob Smyth to give the old warhorse, Angus Fraser, another canter round the paddock. In the second innings, they look back to one of English cricket’s great forgotten series, a topsy-turvy draw with the West Indies in 1991. They discuss why Graham Gooch’s 154 not out is possibly the greatest innings of all time, get under the wide brim of Richie Richardson’s sunhat and just, just don’t quite, get their leg over. Episode 3: 1989 Nehru Cup + England Nearly Men XIs Gary is joined by Derek Pringle and the two Robs, Steen and Smyth, to revisit the 1989 Nehru Cup, a seven-nation event that gave us a glimpse of cricket’s future, even if we didn’t realise it at the time. In the second innings, the panel go off-piste and choose their England Nearly Men XIs, discussing the players who didn’t quite make it at Test level or weren’t given a chance. Will your favourite get a mention? Episode 4: Devon Malcolm + the 1999 World Cup Gary is joined by Peter Hayter, Emma John and Rob Smyth to profile the history man himself, Devon Malcolm. They discuss how England could have managed Malcolm better and recall some blistering spells, one in particular. Then it’s on to the 1999 World Cup, a tournament that was – depending on your perspective – compelling and brilliant, a total shambles or both. Episode 5: Phil DeFreitas + the 1985 Ashes Gary is joined by Pat Murphy, Mike Selvey and the man who held up the urn at the Oval, the one and only David Gower. They reflect on a famous Ashes battle in 1985, when Ian Botham swung the bat, Richard Ellison swung the ball, Gower scored gazillions of runs and we thought it might always be this way. The player of the week is Phil DeFreitas, another supremely gifted cricketer who was in and out of the England team. The 80s and 90s Cricket Show is available on Apple Podcasts, Acast and Spotify, and you can follow the podcast on Twitter.Purely in terms of the dancing, the physical mastery, the jaw-dropping shape-shifting, you will not see a more impressive performance this year. The speed at which the dancers in Akram Khan’s Outwitting the Devil scroll through the space or across the floor – it is as if they’re another species. James Vu Anh Pham’s body whips and whorls, deftly cutting the air and leaving no trace. There’s the weightless virtuosity of the mercurial Jasper Narvaez, his spine peeling back in long curves, and Luke Jessop performing a sharp muscular semaphore that looks like krump dance rendered in CGI. Sometimes you can’t quite believe what you’re seeing. You might also be blown away by the atmosphere, a level of intensity that is brave, that sucks you in with its gravity. The stage is dim and hazy (lit – or rather hardly lit – by Aideen Malone), while composer Vincenzo Lamagna arranges thick strings, seismic rumbles, silent pauses and sudden shocks of volume that leave you vibrating at the same frequency as the performance. But to what end? Well, who knows. Outwitting the Devil is inspired by the 4,000-year-old epic of Gilgamesh, about a demigod seeking immortality after the death of his friend and failing to achieve it. Gilgamesh, we assume, is the white-haired François Testory (a one-time dancer with Lindsay Kemp) and represented in his older years. Perhaps at one point he’s also Jessop. Is that body on the floor Gilgamesh’s friend Enkidu or the guardian of the cedar forest? Maybe no actor is meant to be anyone in particular. Bharata natyam dancer Mythili Prakash certainly looks like a powerful god. What there seems to be is death, grief, screams, some animals, a man who looks like he’s melting and a continually shifting sense of action and identity. Designer Tom Scutt’s understated set consists of black bricks and slabs, in lines or in piles on the stage. It is probably supposed to recall the stone tablets on which the Sumerian poem was written, but the stage is too dark to glean much more and it gets us no closer to a sense of place, journey, character or relationships between the people in front of us. Dance doesn’t have to deliver all these things, but we know some of it was there in the roots of the work. Here it is frustratingly impossible to grab hold of. This show is part of the Carnival of Shadows season, celebrating 20 years of Khan’s company. In that time he has gone from an audaciously talented young dancer, creating a new language combining kathak and contemporary dance, to a globally in-demand choreographer, making experimental dance-theatre that premieres at the big European festivals. Reworking myths is his prime pursuit and, with dramaturg Ruth Little, the method seems to be to peel away layers of theme or narrative with the aim of leaving something raw underneath. But in this instance the show loses shape in a way that leaves the audience baffled. There’s occasional text projected above the stage, a translation of the French voiceover, although these are no more than fragments of Gilgamesh’s story. But the dancing – just hold on to that. To see bodies defy all ordinary limits, to be absorbed in their constant transformation, to witness the grace and control, to feed on their ever-changing energy and be drawn into their orbit. That is something that needs no explanation. At Sadler’s Wells, London, until 27 November. Carnival of Shadows season continues until 4 December.A Michelin-starred restaurant in a 14th-century thatched inn has been “reduced to ashes” after fire broke out in its roof. Firefighters spent the night tackling the devastating blaze at the Star Inn at Harome, near Helmsley in North Yorkshire. The chef and owner Andrew Pern tweeted footage of the fire at 4.17am. “It’s been a long night so far,” he said. “I’m afraid we won’t be open for a while as we are reduced to ashes with the Star on fire and still burning.” Pern said he received a call after 10pm to say the straw roof was on fire. “With it being a 14th-century thatched pub, it didn’t really stand a chance once the fire had got hold,” he told BBC Radio York. “It is still burning now, eight hours later.” He praised employees for their early attempts to put out the blaze. “It was smouldering at first and the staff did a brilliant job, they grabbed all the fire extinguishers, got a hosepipe from the cellar, they did an amazing job themselves. “But with the thatch and the straw and beams that are 700-800 years old, it didn’t stand a chance really.” Pern said he had no idea how the fire started but the thatched roof was the perfect fuel. “It’s one of those things. You always think, I hope I never have a fire, it is one of those risks you have with a thatched property.” North Yorkshire fire and rescue service said crews attended the fire at 10.13pm on Tuesday and all of the occupants were out of the building on arrival. At its height there were nine fire engines and one aerial ladder in attendance. A spokesperson said: “The incident was scaled back to seven fire engines and the aerial ladder platform at around 5.45am. “The incident is still ongoing and crews are still working to extinguish the fire in the roof using hose reel jets and 45mm jets. There is no cause at this time, but fire investigation officers will be attending the incident this morning.” The Star Inn, on the edge of the North York Moors, has won many awards including UK gastropub of the year. It has held a Michelin star for much of Pern’s 25-year tenure. Pern, a finalist with Tom Kerridge in the BBC’s Great British Menu in 2011, estimated it may take a year to get the main dining area up and running again. A newer section of the pub “should be OK, so we’ll be able to function in a fashion, somehow.” The Michelin Guide praises the Star Inn as “one of our most delightful places” in a building that oozes character. “While the restaurant side has a plush, luxurious feel, it’s still very much the village local and you’ll find the regulars supping on a pint of bespoke ‘Two Chefs’ beer in the characterful bar.”Eddie Jones has revealed he sent Maro Itoje to acting classes to try to improve his leadership skills but, at the moment, does not view the towering lock as a future England captain. In a new book on leadership, published on Thursday, the England head coach outlined how he believes the now 51-times capped Itoje, a former England Under-20s World Cup-winning captain, is “inward-looking” and does not help other players develop away from the field of play. “I might be wrong, but I am not sure Maro is a future England captain,” Jones said. “He is going to be one of the great players, but Maro is very inward-looking. He drives himself rather than anyone else. He doesn’t usually influence people off the field. “Maro might be able to develop this skill and relate to people even more effectively, but he has work to do here. We’ve sent Maro to acting classes, which is having a beneficial effect. He speaks more influentially now, and I am hopeful he can develop more communication and leadership skills. Acting brings Maro out of himself. “The acting classes are a practical step to helping Maro and others share that internal fire and magic which makes them special. We’re always looking to see if we can develop these traits and find the right mix of leaders.” In the book, Jones also details how a sense of entitlement among the squad and the fallout from Saracens’ salary cap scandal which undermined his leadership group derailed their 2021 Six Nations in which they finished fifth. “Eventually the leadership group would crack as the influence of the Saracens contingent waned,” Jones wrote in the book. The solution was to reinvent the squad and leadership group, a process begun during England’s summer series while the Lions were playing, and which continued with big-name players such as Mako and Billy Vunipola and George Ford being left out of the autumn internationals. In leadership terms, Courtney Lawes replaced the injured Farrell as captain for two of the three internationals in November, with vice-captains Tom Curry and Ellis Genge. Leadership, by Eddie Jones, published by Pan Macmillan, £20Boris Johnson’s CBI speech may prove to be one of those moments that damningly define a prime minister in the public mind and which they can never shake off. Many will hope that something reputation-puncturing happened to Johnson this week. And perhaps it did. It is true that Johnson has never been less popular as prime minister. His YouGov approval stands at -35, with 64% of voters saying he is doing badly and 29% well. But the most powerful evidence that things are going off the rails for Johnson is not to be found in the polls but at Westminster and in Whitehall. There have been three dominant domestic political events in the past 10 days: the U-turn on MPs’ outside earnings, the slashing of the HS2 rail project and the launch of the new social care cap. All three are large issues. All three have been bungled. The government’s standing in the polls, the headlines and within the Tory party have all taken serious knocks. Those knocks now have consequences. By far the most significant words this week were not Johnson’s halting “Forgive me … forgive me” in South Shields. They were the incendiary comments reported by the BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, from a Downing Street source: “There is a lot of concern in the building … It’s just not working.” Kuenssberg is too important and reliable a reporter for these remarks to have been either casual asides or unrepresentative whinging. Their message is a devastating one, that Johnson and his team are not up to the job. They imply that changes are required at the centre if the Conservatives are to emerge, from a winter dominated by the cost of living, Covid and the Channel migration crisis, in a position to win the next general election. What form should or might the necessary change take? In Johnson’s great man view of history, he stretches out across the petty conventions of politics and government to connect with and inspire the public and achieve grand goals. The problem, very simply, is that this is not happening because the whole conceit does not work in the first place. As history, Johnsonism does not withstand scrutiny. “Young Alexander conquered India,” says the Brecht poem; “He alone?” But as politics and government it is not delivering either. Good government requires strategy, rules, hard work and, perhaps above all, a team. It can be enforced by terror and force, or through trust and ethos. The former is thankfully not available to Johnson; the latter is something he does not do. Britain’s embrace of Johnsonism in 2016 and 2019 is now confronted by Johnsonism’s in-built unworkability in practice. Faced with an irreconcilable, the Tory party will eventually have to make a choice. Either it will bet the farm on Johnsonism, or it will try to rein it in. Perhaps, if it manages to do the latter, it can then pretend that it is still doing the former and thus, if it is lucky, win another election. Johnson’s character means he will initially respond with denial and distractions. The unveiling of a punitive criminal justice plan on Wednesday to impose automatic life sentences on killers of emergency service personnel was an obvious example. The migration crisis in the Channel will probably generate more. Arguments with Europe will also be escalated. But the government’s need to make progress on delivery cannot be postponed for ever. The former Liberal prime minister Herbert Asquith once said that “the office of the prime minister is what its holder chooses and is able to make of it”. Johnson’s problem is that his preferred way of governing is on the extreme end of the spectrum of possibilities. He has got rid of a generation of senior civil servants. He first brought in and then fired the arch-disrupter Dominic Cummings. Few of his appointments last long. Johnson’s way has been tested to the brink of destruction. It is no accident that this crisis has arisen after barely two years, a period in which few governments could achieve anything. If he or any successor seriously wanted to govern for a decade or more, he should take a lesson from the most important democratically elected leader in Europe who has done just that. Angela Merkel is about to step down after 16 years as Germany’s chancellor. But she owes that long and remarkable reign not just to her own calm mastery but to the system she built around her in the chancellery. Merkel governed through a team of six highly trusted advisers and officials who offered solidity, strategic thinking, professionalism and complete discretion. Led by the chief of staff, Beate Baumann, they have no public profile. But their loyalty and competence are legendary. In the entire 16 years of Merkel’s leadership, there have been only 10 holders of the six jobs. Baumann has been at Merkel’s side throughout, as has political liaison chief Eva Christiansen. None of the other four senior jobs in the chancellery has had more than two holders throughout Merkel’s time. There is no disputing which of the two systems has produced good government and which has produced bad. And while Germany is about to make a seamless transition to Olaf Scholz’s chancellorship, Britain faces a governmental emergency. No 10’s lack of a team, a structure and a shared ethos adds up to a humiliating verdict on this country’s politics. Solving the problem posed by the chaotic Johnson court is the priority of the day. The question is whether, in the light of the way that Johnson has governed since 2019, it is even remotely possible to solve. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistAt least 27 people have drowned in the Channel while trying to cross from France to the UK on Wednesday. What happened? An emergency search was sparked at about 2pm on Wednesday when a fishing boat sounded the alarm after spotting several people at sea off the coast of France. A joint search-and-rescue operation by British and French authorities was launched, and eventually called off late on Wednesday. Police have said they believe the boat set out from the Dunkirk area east of Calais. The cause of the accident has not been formally established but the boat used was inflatable and when found by rescuers was mostly deflated. Some reports in French media have suggested the inflatable may have been struck by a larger vessel. Who were the victims? Pregnant women and three children were among the 27 people, mostly Kurds from Iraq or Iran, who drowned trying to cross the Channel in an inflatable boat, according to French authorities. Two male survivors, an Iraqi and a Somali, were being treated for exhaustion and hypothermia in a Calais hospital. The public prosecutor’s office in Lille has confirmed that 17 men, seven women and three adolescents – two boys and a girl – died in the disaster. Postmortem examinations will take place in the next few days to establish the exact identity of the deceased. Why is it causing a political row? The issues of Channel crossings has been a source of increasing tension between the UK and French governments for years. But the rise in numbers reaching the UK in 2021 has hit a new high. The UK has recently provided £54m financial support to the French to reduce Channel crossing attempts. This was supposed to fund additional police patrols of the French beaches – and over a wider area. The UK government says France is not meeting its obligations, the French say they are and policing the beaches is not enough. To add to the international tensions, the crisis is creating headaches for the UK government at home. Many within the Tory party – reportedly including the prime minister, Boris Johnson – are dissatisfied by the response of the home secretary, Priti Patel. So who is to blame? Depends who you speak to. Pictures of French police cars sitting by as people board flimsy dinghies in front of them have not helped the French case that the country is doing enough to tackle the issue. Both the UK and French governments seem to agree that the role of people smugglers is key to the crisis. But speak to experts in displacement and asylum and they will say the UK government is nowhere near to taking the right approach to address the causes behind the influx. They argue that the establishment of safe and legal routes to asylum in the UK would reduce the numbers willing to take the risk of crossing the Channel. This could range from improved family reunion rules to the use of humanitarian visas permitting travel to the UK to apply for asylum. Where did this crisis begin and why is it so bad right now? The phenomenon of people attempting to cross the Channel to apply for asylum is not new. But the numbers have surged in the last two years as the pandemic disrupted migration flows and restricted other means of travel to the UK – such as air, road and rail.The easiest thing in the world would be to call Hellbound the new Squid Game. After all, they’re both South Korean dramas, they both deal in violent death and they’re both smash hits on Netflix. This week it was reported that Hellbound had topped ratings in 80 different countries within 24 hours of premiering, and had overtaken Squid Game as the platform’s most-watched show. Of course, the comparisons are valid. Squid Game was such a marker – not only in putting Korean dramas firmly in the mainstream, but in underlining the popularity of shows not in English – that it was always going to swallow up the next thing to come along. Remember how every female-fronted comedy was called “the new Fleabag” for years after that show debuted? This is a similar thing, only with screaming Korean people dying in unimaginably horrible ways. However, I desperately hope Hellbound can shake off such easy comparisons. Not only does it deserve to stand on its own two feet, but it also happens to be good. Like, insanely good. Better than Squid Game. Better than most things, even. If you haven’t watched Hellbound, drop everything now and do it. Its premise is just wonderful. Out of the blue, people are visited by an eerie face that materialises in front of them, and told the time and date of their imminent death. And then, just like clockwork, three hulking great CGI brutes burst in from another dimension and pulverise that person in a beatdown that results in full-body incineration. Lots of other work would just leave it there – indeed, the demonic smackdowns have a slight sub-Marvel feel – but where Hellbound thrives is in its willingness to show us what happens around their edges. The sudden knowledge that some force is deliberately choosing certain people to be murdered by supernatural beings instantly reshapes all of society as we know it. Individuals who claim to have an insight into the cause are elevated to messianic status. Vast, ugly conspiracy theories are seized upon by millions. The world’s population finds itself enveloped in a morass of fear and confusion. Before long the demons themselves are reduced to sideshow fare. In that respect, Hellbound is actually more reminiscent of two quieter, more cerebral shows. Although the grabbier “here’s when you will die” hook is lifted straight from The Ring, tonally it has much more in common with The Leftovers and The Returned; shows that shone a light on the fragility of the human experience, that reminded us that it doesn’t take much for everything to fall apart completely. You don’t throw around comparisons to The Leftovers lightly, but Hellbound deserves it. It’s for this reason that I don’t think Hellbound will permanently steal Squid Game’s crown. Squid Game was a show that, in hindsight, was made with one eye on the internet. The outfits, the masks and the chants were surely designed to fuel memes (as they did), and it was rooted in the sort of easy nostalgia that keeps your parents on Facebook. Squid Game was big and broad and episodic, to the extent that my six-year-old has developed a fairly good understanding of it, based purely on peripheral internet content. But Hellbound is a much darker, knottier affair. There are nods to internet culture – most noticeably in the Arrowhead, a QAnon-esque group that frequently appears to scream hysterical frenzy-whipping claptrap directly on to a livestream – but they are presented more in damnation than overture. Characters here are not just faceless numbers in tracksuits, either, with each one given their own fleshed-out backstory. With every whiplash-inducing twist – and there are a lot – you are forced to feel the full weight of each consequence. It is a lot less fun than Squid Game, and much harder to digest. This is why it is so worthwhile. Hellbound is a truly exceptional drama wrapped in only the lightest of genre thrills. It might currently find itself swept up in Squid Game’s wake, but I guarantee that, of the two, it’s the show that will still be talked about a decade from now.More than 2,000 years after it was last wielded by a warrior somewhere on the Iberian peninsula, a rare, magnificent – and plundered – sword has been recovered by Spanish police, who tracked it down before it was sold online. The pre-Roman falcata, a double-edged, curved sword used by the Iberians between the fifth and first centuries BC, was seized along with 202 other archaeological pieces after it appeared on what Policía Nacional officers termed “a well known social media site”. The sword, which has been dated to between the third and first century BC, is particularly sought after because of the original condition of its blade. As falcatas were personal weapons, they tended to be buried with their owners, their blades deliberately bent and beaten to put them beyond the use of others. This one, however, has an intact blade. “The investigation began after officers discovered that a social media user had posted on a well known site about an Iberian falcata, with a bird’s head hilt, that had been plundered,” the Policía Nacional said in a statement. “Following various efforts to confirm the existence of the archaeological piece, determine its location and recover it, investigators managed to track down the person offering it for sale, who turned out to be a Spanish citizen living in the [Andalucían] province of Jaén.” Police said the undamaged blade of the falcata “significantly increased its value as it is very rare to find examples in this condition”. Officers also recovered scores of other pieces, including arrow heads, jewellery and ceramic fragments. The sword and the other artefacts have been confiscated and the man arrested on suspicion of misappropriation and a historical heritage offence. According to Spain’s National Archaeological Museum, falcatas, which could cut as well as stab, were complex, efficient and functional weapons that were often imbued with a symbolic value relating to the wealth and social standing of their owners. “A complete design process was used to define and tailor a falcata to the needs of its user,” reads an entry on the museum’s website relating to another falcata discovered in the neighbouring province of Córdoba. “Nothing was left to chance when it came to ensuring it did its job as well as possible … The result is a consistent and tough design. Its curved, asymmetric shape distributes the weight to concentrate force and the union with the hilt is reinforced to stop it being fragile, while the double-edge blade makes it versatile.”Anne, 72, Argyll Occupation Psychotherapist and writer Voting record Voted Labour when she was young, but switched to Green some years ago. Now votes Scottish National party and Green Amuse bouche Peter Sellers once nearly ran her over Katie, 71, Argyll Occupation Retired dentist Voting record Has voted SNP and Green in the last three elections; previously voted Liberal Democrat. Way back in the dark ages, voted Conservative. Has never voted Labour Amuse bouche Cycles the Cowal peninsula every day; it is “a proper cycle with proper hills” For starters Katie I’d taken a saltire face mask – I thought I might meet someone who didn’t believe in Scottish independence. Anne I’m Irish; I only moved to Scotland because my husband is Scottish. Katie We both started with the cullen skink – a wonderful Scottish dish made of smoked haddock, cream and potatoes. Then I had the scallops. Anne We had the same starter, which was some kind of soup. Then I had the fishcakes and an elaborate dessert. The big beef Katie We started talking about immigration, and how vile the UK has become; I am shocked by the lack of compassion. Boris Johnson has seized on this narrative that appeals to a very small proportion of some nasty-minded people in England; it doesn’t have any resonance in Scotland. Anne So I said something a bit contentious. My father loved walking along and saying hello to his neighbours – he lived near a girls’ school, which was very attractive to Muslim families; more and more came. He was this old gentleman, walking out and saying, “Good morning! Good morning!” and he used to say: “They never reply. And often I have to step into the gutter. I don’t like it here any more.” I really don’t like religion. It is always difficult when you have fundamentalist Christianity or fundamentalist Islam, and then they encounter a liberal society. I thought Katie might not agree with me, but we were genuinely interested in what the other had to say. Both of us thought immigration had been blown out of proportion by certain media in order to avoid dealing with the true crisis of poverty. Katie Scotland has many problems, but they are not xenophobia or racism – they’re more sectarian. Anne was born and raised a Catholic, and I was born and raised Church of Scotland, so on that we should have been diametrically opposed. But not really, because I don’t care about religion and nor does she. Sharing plate Katie I am desperate for Scotland to become independent, so we can get away from the shambles that is the UK. Don’t take this the wrong way, but people relate to the English differently. If you go anywhere in the world, you find a much warmer welcome as a Scottish person than a British one. It brings a smile to somebody’s face – kilts, haggis, funny stories. It cheers people. Being English doesn’t cheer anyone. Anne I am not fiercely pro-independence, because I do know that there are complexities with the economics. Katie’s very Scottish and fiercely independent. I think it would have come to blows if I had been against it. Where I’m coming from is Brexit, which was catastrophic – it just smashed something for me. That’s why I’ll vote for independence. For afters Anne I shared that I had gone to an ayahuasca ceremony. My son had died and I couldn’t get over it. I’d gone to this shaman and it really helped me. I could tell that it wouldn’t have been something Katie would have done, but she heard what I said. She was present. Katie The circumstances of her using the shaman were very special – she was grieving over the death of a beloved son. I have a son, and cannot even begin to imagine how I would feel in those circumstances. I believe I would grab at anything. Takeaways Anne The way she listened, the way we spoke – it was like meeting a comrade. I hope she felt the same. Katie Anne and I were like soul sisters. I hope she meant it as much as I did, but I really want to keep in touch. I’m normally a quiet, reserved person, but I just talked and talked and talked. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • Anne and Katie ate at the Creggans Inn, Strachur, Argyll Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreWhether they’re camped outside in freezing temperatures or stranded at sea, Matteo Salvini exhibits little sympathy for the asylum seekers blocked at European borders. The Italian far-right leader, who as interior minister attempted to stop NGO rescue boats landing in Italian ports, in one case leading to criminal charges, will travel to Warsaw next month in a show of solidarity with his Polish allies who have deployed hardcore tactics to ward off thousands of refugees trying to enter from Belarus. “I think that Europe is realising that illegal immigration is dangerous,” Salvini told the Guardian in an interview conducted before 27 people drowned attempting to cross the Channel in an inflatable boat. “So maybe this shock will be useful.” The Poland border crisis is the perfect opportunity for Salvini to reignite his faded rightwing populist star as he plots his strategy for Italy’s next general election, which is slated for 2023 but could come sooner. An earlier attempt to capitalise on soaring opinion poll ratings by collapsing his League party’s coalition with the anti-establishment Five Star Movement (M5S) and forcing fresh elections spectacularly backfired, instead sending the party into opposition, but in a peculiar twist of events it returned to government in February as part of an emergency administration led by the former European Central Bank chief Mario Draghi. Salvini once accused Draghi of being “complicit in the massacre of our economy” for his role in saving the euro. Nowadays he says Draghi is “very good”, especially when it comes to protecting Italy’s interests abroad. But Salvini, described by some as a political chameleon, is also very much in campaign mode, resorting to his tried and tested formula of immigration, nativism and Euroscepticism before the election. Salvini does not have a ministerial role but items on the desk of his spacious office in the Italian senate – cluttered much like a family home with pictures of him with his children and girlfriend, images of Jesus and the Virgin Mary, an AC Milan shirt and a yellow toy bulldozer on a bookshelf – give an insight into his current positioning. One document contains a list of items Salvini wants inserted into Italy’s budget for 2022, including a fund to help disabled people. Another lays out plans by a revived alliance of European far-right political forces, including the League and Marine Le Pen’s National Rally, to create “an alternative Europe”. “I can be in a pro-Europe government while dreaming of a different Europe,” Salvini said in an interview. He said he joined Draghi’s broad coalition because it was the right thing to do as Italy recovers from the pandemic. “In government the League can take care of things such as tourism, the flat tax, people with disabilities … Did you see those people leaving as you came in? They’re business owners. They came to me because I’m in government and can help.” But in a future campaign Italy’s dwindling birthrate will be a top theme for the League. “My objective is to give economic serenity to Italians to encourage them to have children,” Salvini said. “I refuse to think of substituting 10 million Italians with 10 million migrants.” In August 2019 Salvini appeared to be on the verge of becoming prime minister when, from a beach near Rome, he announced it was impossible to patch up the League’s differences with M5S and that snap elections were the only way forward. As interior minister Salvini had been on a roll, brandishing rosary beads and posing for selfies as he packed squares up and down Italy with supporters who loudly applauded him for shutting off the country’s seaports to migrants. The League was Italy’s biggest party, riding high in the polls, and he called on Italians to give him “full powers” – the same words used by the fascist dictator Benito Mussolini after he came to power in 1922. But Salvini was outplayed by M5S, which went on to form a government with the centre-left Democratic party, pushing the League into opposition, with an immediate hit to its poll ratings. Ask former supporters of the party – which today polls in third place at about 18%, behind its far-right ally Brothers of Italy and the Democratic party – why Salvini lost favour and they inevitably point to his miscalculation. Many have switched allegiance to Brothers of Italy, whose leader, Giorgia Meloni, they say is more consistent. Brothers of Italy has continued its steady rise since choosing to stay out of Draghi’s government. Salvini is taking his party’s knock in the polls in his stride even as Meloni, with whom he allies along with Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia in elections, eclipses him in popularity. Bruised by the coalition’s defeats to the left in mayoral elections in major cities in October, he was left red-faced after a secret recording revealed him implying that Meloni was “a pain in the ass”. He insists he is not in competition with Meloni and would happily cast aside his own aspirations and let her be prime minister. “I will let the voters decide … but I’m not for pink quotas, green quotas or female quotas, what interests me is that [the candidate] is good, man or woman.” He says he has no regrets about crashing out of power in 2019. “Life is a risk … we were part of a government which for the first year did good things, and then everything totally stopped,” he said. “M5S were against everything … then they started to say ‘Salvini is wrong on immigration’. I was part of a government in which I couldn’t manage to do what I promised to do.” In his stint as interior minister he introduced draconian anti-immigration measures that included closing refugee centres, scrapping humanitarian protection permits and blocking migrant arrivals. He is unfazed at being on trial in Palermo on kidnapping charges for preventing the arrival of 147 migrants onboard the NGO ship Open Arms in August 2019. “I have no regrets. I did it [blocked the ships] 50 times and I would do it again. My main satisfaction from that period is that Europe remembered that Italy existed,” he said. Asked if he could ever conceive of creating a more humanitarian immigration policy, he said: “I’d like to have an ad hoc ministry for immigration and international cooperation, one that includes a ‘humanitarian corridor’ to help bring in children from places like Libya and Afghanistan.” He said “a trained, foreign workforce” could be useful for Italy’s economy. “What I don’t want is them arriving on boats, that’s a mess.” Salvini gets tetchy when the topic of fascism arises. The League started out as a northern separatist party, with its founder, Umberto Bossi, lamenting “damned fascists”, before Salvini took the helm in 2013 and began its pivot towards the hard right. Despite evoking fascist-era figures in some of his speeches and social media posts, he said the League “has never had anything to do with fascists or nostalgia”. As for the partnership with Brothers of Italy, a party that emerged from neofascists, he said: “Even Brothers of Italy have changed. I hope that in 2021, fascism can be archived for everyone.” If general elections were held anytime soon, the League, Brothers of Italy and Forza Italia could easily surpass the 40% of the vote likely to be required to govern. Salvini said they performed better in the towns and provinces beyond the cities, “which are more globalised, with things such as Amazon, and where there is less social connection”. Between them, they already hold 14 out of 20 Italian regions. “My objective now is the [national] vote. We are all in the hands of God but I am in good health. We will win.”Eco-friendly pet food is on the rise as dog and cat owners become more aware of the impact of their beloved pet’s diet. New figures released exclusively to the Guardian show that the number of pet food products containing Marine Stewardship Council (MSC)-certified sustainable seafood has grown by 57% in the UK during the last five years, from 49 to 77. In the last year alone consumers bought more than 7m tins, pouches and packs of MSC-certified pet food. Globally, pets consume about 20% of the world’s meat and fish, a number set to rise with the trend for consumers to feed them human-grade meat. An area double the size of the UK is used to produce dry pet food for cats and dogs each year, while approximately 3m tonnes of fish are used in pet food in the UK every year. Pet food is estimated to be responsible for a quarter of the environmental impacts of meat production, such as the release of greenhouse gases, phosphates and pesticides. But there are now a growing number of environmentally friendly alternatives available. Dog food containing insects went on sale for the first time in 2019 and can be bought in high street pet food shops, and vegan brands are increasing in popularity. The market continues to grow as people realise the food their pets eat could increase their carbon emissions and contain meat from animals kept in poor welfare conditions. A recent study found that vegan pet food is just as good for dogs and cats as meat. However, the British Veterinary Association still does not recommend feeding your pet a plant-based diet. The Animal Welfare Act 2006 also penalises pet owners if they fail to feed a “suitable diet” meeting their dog’s nutritional needs – a £20,000 fine or a 51-week jail sentence could ensue. Andrew Knight, a professor of animal welfare and ethics at the University of Winchester, said at the time that his research showed that cats and dogs had as good or better health outcomes on plant-based diets as they did when fed on meat pet foods, provided these were carefully formulated with additional synthetic nutrients. In general, fish has a lower carbon footprint than meat, according to research published in the journal Nature Climate Change, which found that for each kilogram of fish caught between one and five kilograms of carbon is produced while red meat production produces between 50 to 750kg of carbon for each kilogram of meat. However, it is vital that pet owners choose food containing fish that is not overfished, including Cornish sardines. There have also been concerns raised about salmon after investigations that have revealed the environmental impact of salmon farming. And recently the lack of oversight in the UK’s fish farms was revealed by Animal Equality. Salmon is the most popular species for MSC-certified sustainable pet food containing fish, followed by cod, tuna, sardines and saithe. Newly launched pet food ranges include a prawn pet food product by McAdams, Cornish sardines by Aldi and a golden red fish product by Woofs. George Clark, the MSC’s programme director for the UK and Ireland, said: “UK pet owners increasingly understand that caring for their furry friends also means looking after the wider environment. Fish species and marine wildlife around the globe are being put at risk as overfishing threaten our oceans. We also know that seafood often has a significantly lower carbon footprint than meat, so buying sustainable seafood products is one of the most positive choices that pet owners can make to help reverse this worrying trend. “The Marine Stewardship Council recently introduced a Pet Food Brand of the Year award for the very first time at its annual awards this year, a response to the growing importance of sustainability for consumers of sustainable pet food products.”Are you ever frustrated with having to wear clothes when you’re working? Do you feel you’re better at your job if you’re able to be naked? KayBee123 I usually take off my clothes when I get home but I have no special ambition to be naked on screen. And I’m getting fewer and fewer offers. I don’t know what that means. Was it intentional to channel your inner Col Kurtz in Dune? Calymac I didn’t have any intention to start with but when I saw the silky pyjamas and Denis (director, Villeneuve) asked me to bend my head down and put my hand on it I understood. I think it was his idea. It’s just the bald head, the dress, the gesture – that’s it. But it’s fun. Have you ever considered publishing a cookery book? Bakinglass No. I’m a good amateur and I love cooking. But there are so many fantastic books out there by professionals. I don’t like celebrity cookbooks and coffee-table stuff. So I try to stay away. It’s like when people ask me if I want to write my memoirs. There’s no joy in it. The public side of being an actor has no pleasure for me. I mean it’s fun talking to a journalist, but then it’s in the paper. So that’s not fun. I only do it because I want some project to be seen, like in this case with Hope: a very good film made by a wonderful Norwegian film-maker, Maria Sødahl. Her husband, Hans Petter Moland, is one of my best friends; I’ve done six films with him. So when Maria got cancer in a very, very bad way and was told she would die, I followed that terrible situation because they were friends. Then she asked me if I wanted to do a film based on it. And I said: oh no, no, no, no, not another fucking cancer film. But it’s not a cancer film. It’s actually a love story. And I could have said: oh no, no, no, not another fucking love story, but it’s a good love story. And it’s got cancer in it. Do you get tired of being cast as a smart person? PtolemySoter Yeah. One of my favourite roles was in The Simple-Minded Murderer that I won the actor’s prize for in Berlin sometime in the last century [1982]. He was a man who was very lovable, not very smart, treated really badly and was also the hero of the story. It was a lovely role to play. I would really love to play more stupid people. There’s so many of them; you just have to open the paper. Was your career affected by having eight children? Lrbnvntr I’ve learned so much with my children that it has probably been very positive. And also since I finished at The Royal Dramatic Theatre in Stockholm in 1989, I haven’t done any theatre and I’ve only worked for four months a year, so I’ve changed diapers for 40 years. I cooked a lot for the children and I’ve seen them grow up and I usually brought them all when we travel. So I’ve had a real normal life and the only way it’s affected me is that I’ve been able to steal from my children because in them you see humanity in its raw form, unhidden. You can look at a three-year-old and then you can play the president of the United States no problem, because you understand him. What are your top dos and don’ts for fatherhood? AmongstTheWaves Don’t lie. Even if they ask you very difficult questions at a very young age, be truthful. Otherwise sooner or later they will realise: oh my God, my parents have been lying to me. Even about Santa Claus. He does not exist. At least there’s no proof of existence. And don’t interfere. You have to give them so much love and security when they are young that from the age of about 16, all the decisions are theirs. What does being Swedish mean to you? Brassmonky It does affect you to have grown up in a country that was like a bubble in the world in terms of having better social security and healthcare than anywhere else. It’s a very secularised society and fantastic in that sense. When I was a kid we still had obligatory Christian lessons in school, but that stopped when I was 10. My parents were atheists and my father was vehemently against any social rules. That wasn’t always good. But it gave me an idea of freedom. You did not accept any authority other than authority from competence. I don’t respect anybody because he’s rich or powerful or owns half the world. That doesn’t mean anything. But if I see a cobbler who is really, really good at fixing my shoes then I respect him. The pandemic hit Sweden very hard in the beginning because it came when all of the schools had their winter break and all the Swedes went to the Alps and skied and brought back Covid. The high death rate in the beginning also came from the fact they had privatised a lot of the care homes, but they were also municipally governed, which means that every little shithole in Sweden was supposed to oversee them. The conditions weren’t good enough. And they had lot of staff that didn’t understand Swedish because they were cheaper. So there were a lot of the big mistakes, but we have been able to live a reasonably normal life in Sweden and we haven’t had more deaths per capita in England. Last year I spent 10 months in London shooting in lockdown. Staying in a Soho hotel and being able to sleep with a open window was an extremely pleasant experience. But I was constantly thinking of other people in east London who were living eight grownups and five children in two rooms with no safety net. Which art form is gives you creative inspiration other than films? sevenpenguins Literature. I read a lot. I just read Colm Tóibín’s The Magician, about Thomas Mann. That was fantastic. Now I’m reading a quite entertaining book that is a little lighter: Harlem Shuffle by Colson Whitehead. It’s fun. Not as dark as his previous books. What’s your craziest Lars von Trier anecdote that you’ve never previously shared? Lightsinthedusk There’s this impression he’s a demonic Nazi who hates women. It’s so utterly wrong. He’s the most pleasant person to be with and he has the most open, free set. He’s very low-key and everybody feels safe. There’s no hierarchy. Anybody can say anything to him, and the tone is playful and ironic. You insult each other all the time and it’s so sweet. I don’t think he’s crazy. He’s usually happy when he’s shooting but riddled by demons otherwise. For a while he couldn’t go to the bathroom and wash his hands if the lights were on, because he was afraid that he would see blood in the sink. Stuff like that. He’s not a happy man. But he’s also a funny man, very gentle and compassionate and nice. And most of the women who have worked with him agree. Except Björk: all directors are control freaks and Björk has always controlled everything she’s done. So that didn’t work. The Beatles or the Rolling Stones? Or Abba? mikkoketola At the time it was the Beatles for me, totally. I ordered Sgt Pepper from England before it was out in Sweden. The Rolling Stones I love now. Back then, you had to take sides; now I can love them equally. When Abba broke through in the 70s, I was in my 20s and doing my best to be an artist with a very dark mind. And it was far too light for me. Now I can listen to them and enjoy it. I loved Mamma Mia!, such a fun, sunny movie! If you were Bill in real life, would you prefer to know if you were or weren’t the father, or would you be happy to remain a theoretical third-share? PookieFugglestein The end solution was really good: they shared. I wouldn’t prefer to know because there was a 66% chance I wouldn’t be the father and that would have been sad. Could you please detail a few acting performances from others that deeply impressed you. TedHume When I can’t see their tools. When it’s as if I was watching an amateur. That’s why Björk was fantastic in Dancer in the Dark: there were no skills whatsoever involved in her acting. What Kirsten Dunst did in Melancholia was fantastic: how just her face described the different stages of a depression. It’s silly of me to pick two Von Trier films, but it reflects what I look for. What is your take on the criticism of superhero movies by directors such as Martin Scorsese and Ridley Scott? HoggyBear I’ve got nothing against superhero movies. I’ve been in a couple and they definitely have a place. The problem is that the system that allows eight people to own half of the wealth in the world enhances the power of the market forces, so small and independent cinemas rarely exist any more outside a few big cities. There’s no distribution channels for all the mid-budget films that have the best actors, the best writing, because they can’t throw up $3m for a marketing campaign. When cinemas let them in, they do so for one week and if it doesn’t pay off in a week, they’re gone. Remember that The Godfather first opened in 100 cinemas in the United States – big films now open in 4,000. They had small ads in the New York Times, but it grew and grew because it was such a good film. The people’s opinion has no chance any more. And that is sad. I think that we should have Marvel films and more rollercoaster films. We should have other films, too. And that’s the sad thing: when raw market forces come in, studios start being run by companies that don’t care if they’re dealing in films or toothpaste so long as they get their 10% [return]. When AT&amp;T took over Time Warner, it immediately told HBO to become lighter and more commercial. They were always making money. But not enough for an investor. Have you ever smoked cannabis? LegaliseCannabisNow Yeah. Do you prefer building sandcastles or snowman? TheShiftyShadow Sandcastles, definitely. I don’t go out much in the winter. Which current franchise word you like to join? Gavmyster Bond would be fun. You don’t know where that’s going now. I have so many friends from Pirates of the Caribbean and Marvel films and Mamma Mia! But I don’t have a big desire to be in a franchise. Regarding the Swedish delicacy surströmming – to eat or not to eat? GammalTant Not. It’s basically a rotten Baltic herring. When food was scarce in the north you’d have to preserve whatever you caught one way or another. And one way was salting it, but they didn’t have enough salt, so it’s sort of half-rotted and fermented. They had the same thing in Iceland with a shark. They buried the shark and then it’s sort of is preserved by souring. I like normal anchovies, and Asian fish sauce is fantastic. But surströmming: no. Nymphomaniac has one of the most haunting and unexpected (yet expected in hindsight) climax scenes ever. Did the knowledge of what happens in the end in anyway inform your performance and interpretation of the character? Bharathan778 Before the film was written, Lars called and offered me the part. He said: “Stellan, my next film will be a porno and you will get to show your penis, but not until the end and it has to be floppy.” Lars hates when it gets too nice in a film. So he has to throw in something to fuck it up. With Melancholia, which is a wonderful film, I think, he’d say: it’s too nice, the music is too good, it’s too beautiful. He gets annoyed by that even in his own project. But a floppy penis I can provide anytime. • Hope is released in the UK on 10 DecemberAsylum claims made in the UK have risen to their highest level for nearly 20 years, according to new figures from the Home Office, as the head of the Refugee Council calls for less “nationalist posturing” over people fleeing war zones. The backlog of cases waiting to be dealt with is also at a record high, with 67,547 people in the queue and more than 125,000 either waiting for a decision or due to be removed from the UK. The figures come as the head of the Refugee Council calls on the government to find a better and more humane way to deal with refugees and asylum claims. Analysis by the council published last week shows that almost all arrivals in the 18 months to June this year were from 10 countries, including Iran, Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Sudan, Eritrea and Afghanistan, “where persecution is not uncommon”. It said that more than six out of 10 people from these countries seeking asylum in the UK are granted refugee status or protection. The council’s chief executive, Enver Solomon, said: “The horrific deaths in the Channel require the government to stop and think again. Less empty rhetoric, more intelligent realism, less nationalist posturing, more global leadership – and most importantly, less punitive control.” A government spokesperson said the statistics showed “the complex scale of the global migration crisis” but also that the Home Office’s new “points-based system is delivering on the people’s priorities, by welcoming those who have the skills the country need while encouraging businesses to invest in British people”. It added that “a significant proportion” of the asylum claims “should have been made in a first safe country, rather than people risking their lives making dangerous crossings”, a reference to an EU-wide policy. It has been criticised by countries such as Italy and Greece, which have been the first port of call for millions of people fleeing African countries, Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan. A total of 37,562 applications were made in the year to September, more than in any 12-month period since the year to June 2004, when just under 40,000 applications were made. It is also higher than the numbers seen at the peak of the European migration crisis in 2015 and 2016 (36,546). Data also shows that, in the year to 31 March 2021, more than 50,000 people were waiting more than six months for a decision. Separate figures published on Thursday show the Home Office is also facing a massive backlog dealing with EU citizens already in the country who are now forced to obtain immigration status to live, work, study or retire in the UK. More than 5.8 million EU and European Economic Area citizens and their families, including 1 million children, have been granted immigration status to remain in the UK post-Brexit, official data has shown. However, there is a queue of 400,000 people awaiting a decision, and a second backlog of people who have already been granted temporary “pre-settled status” who are obliged to make a fresh application to stay before they have been in the UK for five years or more. The latest figures on asylum applications show 67,547 people were awaiting a decision at the end of September – up 41% year-on-year and the highest since current records began in June 2010.Sheffield United have sacked Slavisa Jokanovic after six months as manager and promoted Paul Heckingbottom, their under-23s head coach, to the role. Heckingbottom, the former Barnsley and Leeds manager, has signed a contract until June 2026. Jokanovic’s appointment on a three-year deal was regarded as a coup but the team have struggled and are 16th in the Championship. The Blades hierarchy are understood to have explored other candidates, including their former manager Neil Warnock and the former Norwich manager Alex Neil, but have placed their faith in Heckingbottom, who impressed senior figures during a spell in caretaker charge after the departure of Chris Wilder. Heckingbottom won three top-flight games after Wilder’s exit in March before reverting to his previous post. The former Blades players Jack Lester and Stuart McCall will form part of Heckingbottom’s staff, the latter taking the role of assistant manager after leaving the same position at Blackpool. Jokanovic won promotion to the Premier League with Fulham and Watford. Despite the team winning at Reading on Tuesday the United owners have decided to act on a poor run of one victory in five games, feeling it was in the club’s best interests. The relationship between Jokanovic and the United hierarchy frayed in recent weeks, with Wilder’s successor voicing unhappiness regarding the playing budget. His remit this season was promotion. Heckingbottom’s first game in permanent charge will be at home to Bristol City on Sunday. The United chief executive, Stephen Bettis, said Heckingbottom’s “style and ethos matches that of the club”. He added: “Disappointingly, after a slow start, we have not seen an improvement in results, performances and we’d prefer to be in a better league position. We have enough league games remaining, we know we have the ability and resources within our playing squad to start picking up points and climbing the league table.”Thai activists who have called for reform of the monarchy are among at least 17 people in Thailand who say they have been warned by Apple that they have been targeted by “state-sponsored” attackers. Warnings were sent to the prominent activists Panusaya Sithijirawattanakul and Arnon Nampa, according to Panusaya’s sister May and the administrator of Arnon’s Facebook page. Panusaya and Arnon are in pre-trial detention after leading demonstrations calling for the power of the monarchy to be curbed. Dechathorn Bamrungmuang, a rapper known as Hockhacker with the group Rap Against Dictatorship, said on Facebook he had also received an alert from Apple, and posted a screengrab of the message. The group’s music has taken aim at the monarchy and the military-backed government, and Dechathorn faces charges of sedition. The message posted by Dechathorn said: “Apple believes you are being targeted by state-sponsored attackers … These attackers are likely targeting you individually because of who you are or what you do. If your device is compromised by a state-sponsored attacker, they may be able to remotely access your sensitive data, communications, or even the camera and microphone. While it’s possible this is a false alarm, please take this warning seriously.” Less high-profile activists who have worked behind the scenes to support pro-democracy protests have reported receiving similar warnings, as have academics. They include Prajak Kongkirati, a political scientist at Thammasat University; Puangthong Pawakapan, a political scientist at Chulalongkorn University; Piyabutr Saengkanokkul, an opposition figure and secretary general of the Progressive Movement; and Yingcheep Atchanont, of the legal rights non-profit iLaw. It is not clear how many people were contacted by Apple. At least 17 people said on social media or told the Guardian directly that they had received similar messages. Apple did not respond to a request for comment. It is not known how the alleged attack was carried out. Separately, Apple announced this week that it had filed a lawsuit against NSO Group, stating that its Pegasus software had been used to “attack a small number of Apple users worldwide with malicious malware and spyware”. The Pegasus project, an investigation into NSO by the Guardian and other media outlets coordinated by the French media group Forbidden Stories, has documented dozens of cases where NSO’s spyware was used to attack iPhone users. Thailand’s digital ministry could not be reached for comment. Elia Fofi, a Thai activist, said he received an email from Apple at 4am on Wednesday, followed by an SMS message at about 11pm. He said he did not consider himself to be a high-profile protester, but other pro-democracy activists who work behind the scenes had also been contacted by Apple. The activists were not intimidated by the messages, Elia said. “We have nothing to fear. What we say, what we think, what we fight for is the most common thing ever. We are not doing a terrorist attack.” But he said an attack on their privacy was an attack on the public’s privacy more broadly. “People will feel fear to talk about things that they want to talk about in private,” he said. Last year a wave of youthful protests broke a long-held taboo in calling for reforms of the monarchy, an institution previously considered off limits. Protesters called for the royal budget to be reduced and demanded that the king not interfere with politics. They also called for the resignation of the Thai prime minister, Prayuth Chan-ocha, a former general who first came to power in a coup. At least 1,636 people have been charged in relation to their political activities or political expression since protests escalated in July 2020, according to Thai Lawyers for Human Rights. More than 150 people face lese-majesty charges, which can lead to up to 15 years in prison. Nattacha Boonchaiinsawat, an MP with the opposition Move Forward party, called on Prayuth to clarify whether the government was involved in the attacks. “I also would like to ask the digital minister how the government is protecting Thai citizens and how it will take action against those behind the attacks. This is not a personal issue but it’s national security where the government should take responsibility and protect the people.”People hoping to travel to the European Union next year will have to get a booster jab once their original Covid vaccines are more than nine months old, under new proposals from Brussels. On Thursday, the European Commission proposed a nine-month limit for vaccine validity that would apply for travel within and to the EU. If the plans are approved by EU ministers, from 10 January 2022 non-EU travellers will be required to show proof of an EU-approved booster jab once their original vaccine status is more than nine months old. Similarly, travellers between the member states would have to meet the same requirement to avoid Covid tests, quarantine and other restrictions. The Commission hopes to avoid a confusing mixture of rules across the 27 member states, as governments scramble to tighten restrictions on everyday life following a surge in coronavirus infections. The plans were unveiled on Thursday as the European Medicines Agency approved the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine for children aged five to 11, opening the way for governments to extend vaccination campaigns. The EU regulator recommended two injections three weeks apart in the upper arm for primary-school children, at one-third of the adult dose. The latest EU proposals prioritise vaccinated people, as Brussels moves to classify travellers according to individual health and vaccine status, rather than their country of departure. From 1 March 2022, EU member states would only permit entry to vaccinated, recovered or essential travellers, such as lorry drivers. The current system, under which countries are added and removed from a safe list, will be dropped, a change officials think offers more certainty. The recommendation to make booster jabs necessary after nine months for non-EU non-essential travellers is part scientific advice, part practical policy. Immunity wanes after six months, but EU officials added an extra three to allow governments to get booster-shot programmes up and running. The EU executive also wants to allow entry for travellers with non-EU approved vaccines that are recognised by the World Health Organization, such as China’s Sinopharm and Sinovac and the AstraZeneca vaccine made by the Serum Institute of India. The EU has only approved four vaccines: Pfizer-BioNTech, AstraZeneca (produced in Europe), Janssen (Johnson &amp; Johnson) and Moderna. Most EU member states only permit entry to people with EU-approved vaccines. Under the new proposals, travellers to the EU with a WHO-approved vaccine that is not EU approved, could enter the EU, but would have to produce a negative Covid-test. Tests and vaccination are not required for children under six, whereas those aged six to 17 are required to have a negative Covid test to enter the EU. Within the EU children under 12 are exempt from the travel rules. Travel within the EU has been eased by the EU’s digital Covid certificate, which enables travellers to prove they have been fully vaccinated, recently tested negative or are fully recovered from the virus. The EU “passport” is now linked to equivalent systems in 43 countries, including Switzerland, the UK, Turkey and New Zealand. This means those countries’ Covid certificates are accepted in the EU and vice versa. At least 20 EU member states use the digital certificate to control entry to bars, restaurants, cinemas and other venues. EU officials fear that if member states opt for different rules on travel, people will lose confidence in the EU digital Covid pass. Didier Reynders, the EU commissioner for justice, said EU residents in possession of the EU Covid certificate should not face additional restrictions when travelling inside the union. The EU has vaccinated nearly two-thirds of the population and around three-quarters of adults, not enough to avoid a surge in cases driven by the more contagious Delta variant and relaxation of restrictions. On Thursday, the outgoing German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said “every day counts” in introducing social distancing measures, warning her country faced “exponential growth” in cases. A host of measures have been introduced by German regions to curb the spread of the virus, but Merkel is urging them to go further. Earlier this week, the EU’s disease control agency, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, changed its guidance to recommend booster shots for all adults, with priority given to the over-40s. The EU commissioner for health, Stella Kyriakides, said: “We have vaccinated over 65% of the total EU population, but this is not enough. There are still too many people who are not protected. For everyone to travel and live as safely as possible, we need to reach significantly higher vaccination rates, urgently.”People who are considering buying dogs and cats for Christmas are being asked to check if they have access to a vet before they buy due to shortages caused by Brexit and Covid. The British Veterinary Association (BVA) is urging caution after a rise in demand for vets due to the increase in pet ownership in lockdown and the new legal requirement for Brexit health checks on food exports to the EU. The BVA’s comments come just days after the Food Standards Agency (FSA) warned meat and poultry producers that the shortage of vets might impact the supply of meat over Christmas. The BVA’s senior vice-president, James Russell, said the shortage of vets could also affect domestic animals. “If you are thinking, we should be having a puppy or a kitten or whatever, then part of the due diligence, really, of thinking ‘how am I going to look after that animal right through its life?’ would be to think, where will I access veterinary care for this animal? “We would encourage people to check in with their local vets to find out: are they taking on clients at the moment? What happens out of hours?” he said. “Those sorts of questions, to make sure they’re actually in a position to fulfil their obligation of being able to find veterinary care for those animals when they need it.” The warnings come amid unprecedented demands on vets in the wake of Brexit. All exporters of meat and fish to the EU are required to get vets or veterinary officers to certify food for entry into Europe. Earlier this year exports of some fish from Scotland were halted because Brexit rules required every box of seafood to be inspected and signed off as healthy by vets before being placed on a truck for Dover. Russell said the new certification process was consuming vast amounts of vets’ time. “From 1 January to the end of September, our professional spent 210 years’ worth of time completing export health certificates,” he said. More than 3.2m UK households have brought a pet home since the start of the pandemic, according to the latest report from the Pet Food Manufacturers’ Association (PFMA), a trade body representing the pet food industry. Russell said part of the problem was that so many of the vets working in the UK were from the EU, particularly those working in abattoirs. “We’re seeing much fewer of those coming into the country. Both a combination of Brexit and Covid,” he added. On Wednesday a senior government official told the public accounts committee that the UK had built up sufficient numbers of vet and veterinary officials to conduct the checks on food and animals by offering free training to those interested in doing the work. However, the committee’s chair, the Labour MP Meg Hillier, questioned whether the work with exporters was diverting vets from “dealing with cats and dogs or sheep” and “all their private practice”.It’s here. The time of year when every single marketing email you’ve signed up for over the course of the last few years – to get that tempting introductory discount perhaps – comes back to haunt you. A terrifying flurry of discounts, all for a limited time only, often with an additional dose of emotional blackmail about how buying this product will make you a better person, friend, parent, sibling. Each year, the Black Friday emails come thicker, faster and earlier, with a vigour rivalled only by the Hogwarts owls, and the spectre of last year’s semi-cancelled Christmas has rendered most of us more vulnerable to manipulative marketing than ever. There are probably few more qualified to talk about the cumulative effect of a difficult relationship with money and an unfortunate susceptibility to clever marketing than me, given that my own path into writing was through sharing the process of paying off a five-figure debt. If I could portion out the £27,000 into different reasons, some of it would be about simply trying to survive, some would be frivolity, but the vast majority would be in some way linked to my need to please others, and to keep up appearances at any cost, financially or otherwise. Giving was my achilles heel; if I found the perfect present, I would always justify the expense somehow. My way of showing that I cared was through material generosity, and I always had to be the one to give more. Too proud to ask for help or admit that I was drowning in financial difficulty, I racked up more debt trying to prove that I was fine, until March 2019, when everything finally came undone. My breaking point came on an otherwise unremarkable morning, when my bank called me to ask why I was in an unarranged overdraft, and when I’d be able to clear it. “There’s just … no money left,” I heard myself say to the woman on the phone when she asked why I wouldn’t be able to fix things more quickly. And when I came off that phone call, awash with despair but also, if I’m honest, a little bit of relief at having finally said it, I did the obvious thing. I started an Instagram account. The last couple of years of documenting my progress out of debt and examining the reasons why I ended up there in the first place have taught me a lot, but my biggest triumph has been growing some resilience to the exact type of marketing we find ourselves pelted with at this time of year. The techniques enlisted by retailers around Black Friday are now in play all year round – the perfectly timed Facebook ads, the addition of a “buy now, pay later” banner to your abandoned online shopping cart, the way that one dress follows you around the internet until you finally give in and buy it – but at Christmas, and especially against a pandemic backdrop, those techniques are both generously applied and increasingly effective. I have noticed among friends and acquaintances a type of trauma response to the changing of the seasons this year. Many are low and anxious, afraid to make plans with the wreckage of last Christmas still fresh in their minds, while others are marching into the festive period with a grim determination to make this year “better [for which read: more expensive] than ever”. Both sentiments make fertile ground for overspending and over-consuming, and the messaging used in almost every ad campaign only serves to reinforce this. In my email inbox, Paperchase commands me to “make up for lost Christmastime” by “spoiling them silly”, while Tesco’s TV advert that shows people overcoming Covid and the supply-chain crisis to make sure that “this Christmas, nothing is stopping us” makes me feel “to hell with the consequences” when adding to my basket. The biggest piece of advice I can give you as we head into this next few weeks? Unfollow, unsubscribe and turn off “off-Facebook activity” (Google it, you won’t regret it). For presents, make a list and stick to it. Look to gift guides – or just ask the person what they want – rather than aimlessly browsing the internet, collecting cookies and losing your mind. If you manage to get a discount, don’t feel you need to make up the extra money with another gift. Remember that it’s only a bargain if you were going to buy it anyway, and this won’t be the only chance you get to buy that particular thing. And even if it is, I promise you’ll quickly forget about it. It’s just stuff, after all. Clare Seal is the author of My Frugal YearThink of an electric car and the first name that comes to mind will probably be Tesla. The California company makes the world’s bestselling electric car and was recently valued at $1tn. But behind this US success story is a tale of China’s manufacturing might. Tesla’s factory in Shanghai now produces more cars than its plant in California. Some of the batteries that drive them are Chinese-made and the minerals that power the batteries are largely refined and mined by Chinese companies. As the world transitions to electric vehicles (EVs), companies are racing to secure and strengthen their positions in the battery supply chain, from mineral extraction and processing to battery and EV manufacturing. The sector has seen a move towards vertical integration – where one company controls a number of steps along the supply chain – to guarantee supply and, in some cases, to improve transparency. And in what has been dubbed, the “battery arms race”, China is in pole position. China is the world’s biggest market for EVs with total sales of 1.3m vehicles last year, more than 40% of sales worldwide. Chinese battery-maker CATL controls about 30% of the world’s EV battery market. And cobalt specialist suppliers Darton Commodities estimate that Chinese refineries supplied 85% of the world’s battery-ready cobalt last year; a mineral that helps to improve the stability of lithium-ion batteries. Most of that cobalt comes from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), where almost 70% of the mining sector is dominated by Chinese companies. Drive through DRC’s southern copper and cobalt mining belt, and signs in Chinese are everywhere: at the entrance to casinos and hotels and on trucks and business premises. In August, China Molybdenum Company (CMOC), a giant Chinese mining firm, announced an investment of $2.5bn (£1.8bn) to double copper and cobalt production at its Tenke Fungurume Mine, already one of the largest in DRC. That followed its purchase of a 95% stake in nearby Kisanfu copper and cobalt mine for $550m. Fellow Chinese corporate giant, Huayou Cobalt owns or has a stake in at least three copper-cobalt mines in DRC and is a key player at every step of the cobalt supply chain, from mines to refineries to battery precursor and cathode production. But China’s dominance of DRC’s copper-cobalt mines comes at a price, according to claims by Congolese workers employed at them. “The Chinese treat Congolese very badly. They like to insult us. They like to raise their voices. Even for a small fault, you’re punished. The Chinese are there as the boss to control Congolese,” says a worker employed at Sicomines, a mine majority-owned by a Chinese consortium, which includes Huayou Cobalt. Workers at Sicomines claim they are paid less than Chinese workers who do the same jobs, and are subjected to degrading treatment by Chinese supervisors. “It’s the same as during the colonial times but now we’re under the Chinese,” says another worker. Yet Amnesty International, which has conducted investigations into human rights abuses in the informal mining sector in the DRC, says the nationality of the companies dominating the EV market is not their primary concern. “The issue is that many of the Chinese mining companies are refusing to be transparent about their operations, but the human rights issues related to cobalt mining in the DRC did not arrive with the Chinese: the DRC has a long history of foreign players coming to the country and exploiting their resources with little accountability,” says Mark Dummett, programme director at Amnesty International. “Amnesty is extremely concerned about the impact that mining for electric car batteries is going to have on communities around the world; it has the potential to be devastating if the brands at the top don’t use their leverage to demand that these new global supply chains are set up in a way that respect human and environmental rights.” Chinese mining companies point to the contributions they make to DRC’s revenues and local communities, while working in a challenging environment. One Chinese manager says, “It’s very frustrating to work with the Congolese government. It’s the most corrupt country.” Analyst Christian-Geraud Neema Byamungu, says labour laws are not always respected and corruption is widespread in the country as a whole, which potentially could create an environment in which companies are not inclined to follow the rules. Some car and battery manufacturers are beginning to reduce the amount of cobalt in their batteries, partly as a way to avoid the legal and reputational risks associated with cobalt from DRC. Nickel-rich batteries are seen as one way forward, but the same Chinese companies that dominate cobalt mining in DRC – Huayou Cobalt and CMOC – are also increasing investment in nickel extraction and processing in Indonesia, which has the world’s largest nickel reserves at 72m tonnes. This means China is now the largest global market producer of nickel, beating off competition from Europe and the US. “China will be the major player because they connected with the market in the country – but also export the nickel material at a lower price compared to Europe, as Chinese companies are known for cheap labour,” says Pius Ginting, executive director of Action for Ecology and People’s Emancipation (AEER), an Indonesian environmental NGO. Recently there have been efforts to push back against China’s dominance, starting in DRC. On a visit to Kolwezi in May, a city in the heart of DRC’s copper-cobalt belt, the country’s president, Félix Tshisekedi, said: “People come to Congo empty handed and when they leave they are billionaires, but we remain poor.” DRC recently announced a review of some of its biggest mining contracts, including the $6.2bn deal which gave the Chinese consortium majority control over Sicomines in 2007. In Europe too, companies are beginning to gain on China’s lead. By the end of the decade, the continent is expected to have 28 factories producing lithium-ion cells, with production capacity due to increase by 1440% from 2020 levels, according to Darton Commodities. That growth is being driven by companies such as Britishvolt in Northumberland and Sweden’s Northvolt, as well as Asian firms expanding production into Europe. However, European investment in mining and the production of battery precursor and cathode materials is not keeping pace, says Andries Gerbens at Darton. “China will eventually become less dominant. Nonetheless, it will remain a big player,” he says. The US, however, lags behind, despite a $174bn investment “to win the EV market”, announced as part of President Joe Biden’s $2tn infrastructure package in April, although this has since been slimmed down. Simon Moores, CEO of Benchmark Mineral Intelligence told a US Senate committee in June that China is building the equivalent of one battery megafactory a week compared with one every four months in the US. He warned: “A new global lithium-ion economy is being created, yet any ambitions for the United States to be a leader … continue to only creep forward and be outstripped by China and Europe.” A spokesperson for CMOC in DRC says, “We are devoted to providing a safe, healthy, and decent work environment to all employees and attach great importance to protecting the rights of employees.” The spokesperson says the company is committed to observing international labour conventions and local labour laws, adding that all DRC national employees are members of trade unions. Sicomines itself did not respond to multiple requests for comment. However, in a statement Huayou Cobalt says, “Sicomines, as a responsible company, strictly abides by DRC laws and regulations and respects human rights and fulfils best labour practice.” • This article was amended on 30 November 2021 to correct the name of Pius Ginting.Lara Trump, the Fox News contributor and wife of Eric Trump, has bizarrely claimed that the rising cost of the Thanksgiving turkey is part of a liberal plot to “chip away” at American traditions. During a discussion on Fox News about inflation and its impact on Thanksgiving-related purchases, the former president’s daughter-in law claimed leftwing Americans “want to fundamentally transform America” and were using the humble Thanksgiving turkey as a vehicle for their nefarious plot. “Well, how do you that? You have to change America from the inside-out. You have to take away our traditions. So it might seem a little funny and a little ridiculous. ‘Oh, don’t have a turkey, then people won’t come over.’” In the exchange with the Fox host Pete Hegseth, Trump was responding to comments made by the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, that inflation had pushed costs of the traditional Thanksgiving bird to about a dollar more for a 20lb bird. “It all goes to fundamentally transforming this country, and the way you do that is you make sure that we have no commonality whatsoever, no traditions as Americans whatsoever,” she said. “You start chipping away at that, and they don’t care that Thanksgiving costs a lot more.” A battle over turkey inflation has been brewing for weeks, with conservatives accusing liberals of attempting to quash holidays, including Halloween, as part of an effort “to divide Americans up”. “They don’t want us to have any common ground. They don’t want us to have any shared traditions like Thanksgiving. A lot of places last month actually did away with Halloween because they wanted to be inclusive of the people that didn’t celebrate Halloween,” Trump added. Last week, the American Farm Bureau Federation (AFBF) warned that costs of the traditional turkey feast has risen 14% over the past year. The cost increase, up from an average of $46.90 for a family group of 10 last year to $53.31 in 2021, works out at $6 a person. Within the overall 6.6% increase in the cost of the family sit-down, including stuffing, sweet potatoes, rolls with butter, peas, cranberries, a veggie tray, pumpkin pie with whipped cream, and coffee and milk, the cost of the bird has increased more than any other factor – 24%. At the same time, Butterball, the North Carolina poultry giant that produces more than 1bn pounds of turkey each year, told the Guardian that it had been preparing for this Thanksgiving a year in advance and prices “remain roughly the same as previous years, and turkey is one of the most economical parts of the Thanksgiving meal”. But the tradition of a turkey dinner is under pressure from some other quarters, with some questioning why it is necessary for millions of turkeys to be slaughtered. In a punchy essay for the Cut, food writer Mia Mercado argued that side dishes are the true stars of the holiday sit-down. “I’m coming for your precious holiday bird. Turkey is not welcome at my Thanksgiving,” Mercado wrote.The FBI has warned its employees about Havana Syndrome, a mysterious ailment that appears to have affected US diplomats and spies in several countries in recent years and manifests as a brain injury. More than 200 US officials, from the state department, CIA and national security council (NSC), have suffered from some form of symptoms – including dizziness, nausea and headaches. The phenomenon was first identified in Cuba but has happened elsewhere. In a statement to NBC News, the FBI has now admitted that it has warned its staff about the issue, which it refers to as Anomalous Health Incidents. Calling the reporting of AHI a “top priority” the agency told the US network that it had “messaged its workforce on how to respond if they experience an AHI, how to report an incident, and where they can receive medical evaluations for symptoms or persistent effects”. The FBI made the statement in response to an NBC inquiry regarding a former FBI agent who had reported symptoms of Havana Syndrome but claimed to have had trouble getting medical assistance from the FBI. NBC said it marked the first acknowledgment by the FBI that its agents were also reporting suffering from the syndrome, though the news organization has previously reported that FBI agents have been hit by the syndrome, including in Vienna, Austria. Speculation about the reality and reasons behind Havana Syndrome are rife. The state department, CIA and Pentagon have all launched investigations, but have yet to come to conclusions. A National Academy of Sciences report last year found that the injuries were most likely caused by “directed pulsed radio frequency energy”, raising the prospect of a form of weapon being used for attacks on US government officials. Such weapons do exist, according to leading experts.‘I don’t really want the interview to be about me,” says Mick Harford, almost by way of introduction. It underlines why he is such a popular personality in the game and beyond. “It is all about Prostate United and Prostate Cancer UK. Obviously, you’ll have to say a little bit about me but I just want to concentrate on all the help I’ve been getting and the way people have been around me, going out of their way to support me in my illness.” It is almost 12 months since the Luton assistant manager and chief recruitment officer was diagnosed with prostate cancer and four since he started radiotherapy. This month staff at the Championship club, its academy and community trust signed up to the Prostate United fitness challenge to show support for Harford and raise money for Prostate Cancer UK, which funds research to enhance treatments for the most common cancer in men. It kills one man every 45 minutes in the UK. Harford wants to raise awareness and his openness has already had a meaningful impact. “I’ve had lots and lots of letters,” he says. “‘Thanks Mick, I’ve gone and got checked out.’ I’ve had emails from people who have said they have got the all-clear or they’re at different stages of prostate cancer. I didn’t want sympathy; I didn’t want to do interviews … I just hoped to raise awareness because it will get anyone. As football players, we think we’re invincible, we think we rule the world at times. But this illness doesn’t leave anyone alone.” A speck of normality came back when Harford returned to the north-east to visit family last weekend. He took in four games in five days, starting with Leeds v Chelsea Under-23s and ending with Luton’s draw at Nottingham Forest on Tuesday. “The supporters have been absolutely amazing. I’ve got tears in my eyes thinking about what they’re doing for me; every away game, every home game, they’re singing my name. It was a very overwhelming experience.” Harford says he was taken aback by the billboard outside Kenilworth Road bearing the words “Big Mick, we’re with you every step”, organised by the club’s community ambassador, Raj Koyes, whose charity awards dinner raised £1,500. In another show of support, Luton’s home shirt sponsors, JB Developments, will be replaced by Prostate Cancer UK for Saturday’s game against Cardiff. Last month Harford completed 40 days of radiotherapy at University College Hospital (UCLH) in London. The 62-year-old remains on hormone medication and goes for hyperbaric oxygen therapy three or four times a week. His next consultation is on 29 December. “I have good days and bad days. My numbers are good. My blood tests have been positive, so I’m quite happy, but it is a long road and I know it is going to be a big fight ahead.” While at UCLH he inevitably ended up talking football. “I met a guy while I was having treatment whose father was in the Munich air disaster, a player for Manchester United,” Harford says. “I met his son, who was having treatment for cancer. He wrote a book called Johnny The Forgotten Babe. I said to him: ‘What was your father’s name?’ He went: ‘Johnny Berry.’ I said: ‘I can’t remember him.’ He said: ‘Exactly, no one remembers him.’ And the next day he brought me the book in, so I read it and it was really inspirational.” Sixty-one people from the club, academy and trust are in Luton’s Prostate United squad, including the manager, Nathan Jones. Each participant chooses a daily distance to run or cycle: 10km, 5km or 3km on foot, or 25km, 15km or 10km on the bike. There have been a couple of bumps along the way; Chris Clark, the club secretary, spent two nights in hospital after falling off his bike and into a ditch and this week Carl Turner, an electrician on the maintenance team, was knocked off his bike by a car. Every effort keeps the club’s WhatsApp group ticking over. “I get a ping every five minutes because someone else has done another 15 miles, 10 miles or 5km,” Harford says. Harford tries to visit the training ground once a fortnight – “I miss being around the boys” – but he has had to get used to watching games from home in Harpenden. “I am trying to get out as much as I can, keep active and try to stay positive. You sit at home and your mind wanders and you become full of negativity.” One of the first messages of support came from Sir Alex Ferguson. “I have met him on odd occasions but to get a text off the great man was awesome. I was actually a closet Manchester United fan a few years ago because my best friend, Tony Coton, worked there as a goalkeeping coach. Whenever United were in town, in London or locally, I’d try and get there. I loved watching United play in their heyday, when [Roy] Keane was in the team. “I’ve had messages from some of my heroes,” he continues, referencing Dennis Tueart, who he grew up idolising in Sunderland. Then there is Alvin Martin, with whom he duelled in his playing days. “He said: ‘Who’d have thought, Mick, me and you – me and you – would have been speaking to each other like this in a nice manner, [given] the way we used to kick lumps out of each other?’ It was a brilliant conversation. He rings me every week, just to give me that support. That’s the football family. You leave all of that behind when people are suffering a little bit. I’ve had support from all walks of life.” What would be his message to anyone reluctant to get tested? “We don’t want to know we’ve got cancer, and that’s the biggest hurdle you have to get over,” Harford says. “The PSA test is unbelievably quick – you’re in and out of the surgery in 30 seconds, finished. It’s a simple test – just a little prick in your arm and a blood test and it’s done. I would say please don’t be scared or frightened because the longer you leave it, the worse it will become.” • To donate to Prostate United, visit https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/ltfcprostateunitedThe defence secretary, Ben Wallace, has announced a radical reorganisation of the British army, with an additional £8.6bn to be spent on equipment and a new ranger regiment created to help counter extremist organisations and hostile state threats. The Future Soldier programme would reconfigure the army to address next-generation threats around the globe, positioning it as a globally engaged, modernised war-fighting force, Wallace told MPs. “To keep pace with the changing character of warfare our army must be forward-looking, adaptable and embracing of new ways of working as much as new weapons and technologies,” he said. Wallace said the extra £8.6bn in equipment more than 10 years, bringing the total investment to £41.3bn, would create “a modern, innovative and digitised army”. The army would operate on a “continuous basis” and be “persistently engaged around the globe”. It would be “as agile in the new domains of cyberspace as it is on the ground”, with state-of-the-art equipment including upgraded tanks, he said. The programme would transform the army into a more agile, integrated, lethal and expeditionary force, with integration at its heart, bringing together regular, reservists and civil servants, Wallace said. From December a new ranger regiment will form part of the newly established army special operations brigade, and it will be routinely deployed around the world to counter extremist organisations and hostile state threats. By mid-2022 a new “deep recce strike brigade” combat team will be established. New equipment such as Boxer armoured vehicles, Challenger 3 tanks, AH-64E Apache helicopters, long-range precision missiles and uncrewed aerial systems will be introduced, while much of the fighting force will fall under new self-sufficient brigade combat teams. An experimentation and trials group will try out new technologies. There will be some restructuring and reorganisation of units over the next four years. The regular army will be 73,000 strong by 2025, which combined with an army reserve of 30,000 means the army headcount will stand at more than 100,000. “For too long the historic infantry structures have inhibited our army’s transformation. We cannot afford to be slave to sentiment when the threat has moved on,” Wallace said. Every unit would be affected in some way by the changes, he said. By 2025 the army HQ’s regular personnel will be reduced by 40% and reserve integration will be made more productive. Reservists will play a pivotal role in homeland protection and resilience operations. A new reserve brigade based in York will ensure crises on the home front, such as the Covid pandemic, are met at points of need. There are changes to limits on promotion, plans for a soldier academy to mirror the prestige of Sandhurst, and a new career management system “fit for the digital age”. A mental health team within the field army will support wellbeing. Wallace said the changes would result in “a credible and relevant, relentlessly adapting force that will confront the threats against the nation and meet the challenges of the future”.The Wigan Athletic striker Charlie Wyke is in a stable condition in hospital after collapsing during training earlier this week. The club announced on Thursday that 28-year-old Wyke received treatment from Latics medical staff after the incident on Monday before being taken to hospital. He is continuing to be monitored and will be unavailable for selection for the immediate future. Wigan’s chief executive Mal Brannigan told the club’s website: “First and foremost, the absolute priority for everyone associated with Wigan Athletic is Charlie’s health and wellbeing and providing support to him and his family. “As a club, we would like to place on record our sincere appreciation to all of the staff within the NHS who, within what we know are challenging times, were excellent in their response and subsequent care for Charlie, working together with our medical team. Clearly this news will cause alarm, though we would politely request that the privacy of Charlie and his family is respected. At the appropriate time, we will look to provide further updates to our supporters.” Wyke joined Wigan this summer from Sunderland and has scored five goals in 17 appearances for the League One side. Club owner Talal Al Hammad wrote on Twitter: “I’m praying that you get better and regain your strength soon Charlie. You are in all of our wishes as you recover. We are all keeping you in our thoughts and prayers, hoping you find strength with each new day. Get well soon.”Cyberhackers are using compromised cloud accounts to mine cryptocurrency, Google has warned. Details of the mining hack are contained in a report by Google’s cybersecurity action team, which spots hacking threats against its cloud service – a collection of remote computing services which can include storage of customers’ data and files off-site – and gives advice on how to tackle them. Other threats identified by the team in its first “threat horizon” report include: Russian state hackers attempting to gain users’ passwords by warning they have been targeted by government-backed attackers; North Korean hackers posing as Samsung job recruiters; and the use of heavy encryption in ransomware attacks. “Mining” is the name for the process by which blockchains such as those that underpin cryptocurrencies are regulated and verified, and requires a significant amount of computing power. Google reported that of 50 recent hacks of its cloud computing service, more than 80% were used to perform cryptocurrency mining. The report said that “86% of the compromised Google Cloud instances were used to perform cryptocurrency mining, a cloud resource-intensive for-profit activity”, adding that in the majority of cases the cryptocurrency mining software was downloaded within 22 seconds of the account being compromised. Google said that in three-quarters of the cloud hacks the attackershad taken advantage of poor customer security or vulnerable third-party software. Google’s recommendations to its cloud customers to improve their security include two-factor authentication – an extra layer of security on top of a generic user name and password – and signing up to the company’s work safer security programme. Elsewhere in the report, Google said the Russian government-backed hacking group APT28, also known as Fancy Bear, targeted 12,000 Gmail accounts in a mass attempt at phishing, where users are tricked into handing over their login details. The attackers attempted to lure account holders into handing over their details via an email that said: “We believe that government-backed attackers may be trying to trick you to get your account password.” Google said it had blocked all the phishing emails in the attack – which focused on the UK, the US and India – and no users’ details had been compromised. Another hacking ruse flagged by Google in the report involved a North Korea-backed hacker group posing as recruiters at Samsung and sending fake job opportunities to employees at South Korean information security companies. Victims were then steered towards a malicious link to malware stored in Google Drive, which has now been blocked. Google said dealing with ransomware attacks, where the files and data on a user’s computer are encrypted by the attacker until a payment is made for their release, was difficult because heavy encryption “makes recovery of files nearly impossible without paying for the decryption tool”. The report flags the emergence of Black Matter, which it describes as a “formidable ransomware family”. However, at the beginning of the month Black Matter said it was shutting down due to “pressure from the authorities”. Black Matter victims include the Japanese technology group Olympus. The Google report said: “Google has received reports that the Black Matter ransomware group has announced it will shut down operations given outside pressure. Until this is confirmed, Black Matter still poses a risk.” • This article was amended on 26 November 2021 to clarify details about Google’s cloud service.Childhood best friends Ana María Wahrenberg and Betty Grebenschikoff said goodbye to each other in a German schoolyard in May 1939. Now the school pals, who were separated aged just nine when their Jewish families were forced to flee the Nazis, have hugged each other in person once again after spending more than eight decades fearing the other had died in the Holocaust. But in a St Petersburg, Florida, hotel room on 5 November, the 91-year-olds were finally physically reunited thanks to the USC Shoah Foundation – a non-profit organization founded by Steven Spielberg that records and preserves audiovisual recollections of Holocaust survivors. Grebenschikoff was one of 20,000 European Jews to settle in Shanghai, while Wahrenberg and her family had fled to Santiago, Chile. Both had contacted databases to search for the other, but it was only when an indexer at the foundation noticed similarities in their accounts were they finally reconnected. “It felt like coming home,” Grebenschikoff told the Washington Post after their reunion, adding that her friend “was always on my mind. We just had this feeling, like we really belonged together.” “It was very emotional,” said Wahrenberg. “It was like we were never separated. It was very special that two people, after 82 years, still love one another.” The pair, both widows, recounted that they then spent four days together shopping, talking, eating and drinking champagne. “We’re not the girls we used to be when we were nine, that’s for sure, but we kept giggling like we were little kids,” Grebenschikoff told the Post. “It was such a joy for both of us.” After Wahrenberg spoke at a virtual Kristallnacht event, a Shoah Foundation indexer, Ita Gordon, recalled the testimony Grebenschikoff had given to the foundation 24 years previously and made the connection between the two women’s stories. “These two remarkable women being reconnected after losing each other is such a testament of hope,” senior director Kori Street said earlier this year. After meeting in Florida this month, Grebenschikoff said their reunion had proved that “good things can happen out of a bad experience. It was the silver lining of all silver linings. It was the fulfillment of a dream.”For the last six months, we have been part of the 2021 JournalismAI Collab Challenges, a project connecting global newsrooms to understand how artificial intelligence can improve journalism. Our particular challenge was to answer this question: “How might we use modular journalism and AI to assemble new storytelling formats and reach underserved audiences?” Participating newsrooms were organised into teams to define the challenges they would work on, imagine potential solutions, and turn them into prototypes. Our team included newsrooms from across Europe, Africa and the Middle East. Although we all attract different audiences, produce different types of content and have different business models, we share some of the same fundamental challenges. Modules were defined as fragments of a story that live independently, can be repurposed, or even be replaced by another fragment. Based on this definition, quotes strongly qualify as a module. There are a number of good reasons for using AI to identify quotes, from creating new content from them to tracking shifting opinions on the same subject over time, and fact checking. Another interesting use case is revealing hidden insights about our journalism. Who are our sources? How diverse are they? How often do we quote the same people or organisations? Do we give the same exposure to different gender and ethnic groups? What is a quote? The Guardian joined forces with Agence France-Presse (AFP) to work on a machine learning solution to accurately extract quotes from news articles and match them with the right source. Existing solutions did not work that well on our content. The models struggled to recognise quotes that did not match a classic pattern such as: They admitted: “The model was trained on a limited number of quotation styles.” Some models were returning too many false positives and identifying generic statements as quotes. For example: The government announced on Thursday that the means-tested support families receive with their care would not be counted towards the £85,000 total, meaning those with relatively modest assets could still see themselves paying that amount in full. Co-referencing, the process of establishing the source of a quote by finding the correct reference in the text, was also an issue, especially when the source’s name was mentioned several sentences or even paragraphs before the quote itself. Our previous attempts to solve this problem using regular expressions (sequences of characters that specify a search pattern) stumbled over words that content creators decided to put in quotation marks to indicate non-standard English terms (such as “woke”). We wanted to see if we could teach a machine to understand the difference between these two speech constructs. There was also an extra benefit in trying the machine learning approach as we could better mitigate typos resulting in mismatching or missing quotation marks or sources quoted inside another quote. First, we needed a clear definition of a quote. We decided to use the Wikipedia definition as our starting point: “A quotation is the repetition of a sentence, phrase, or passage from speech or text that someone has said or written. In oral speech, it is the representation of an utterance (ie of something that a speaker actually said) that is introduced by a quotative marker, such as a verb of saying. For example: John said: ‘I saw Mary today.’ Quotations in oral speech are also signalled by special prosody in addition to quotative markers. In written text, quotations are signalled by quotation marks.” Following this definition we made a design decision to clearly separate paraphrases and quotes and focus our efforts on identifying text in quotation marks only. Deep learning to the rescue To train a model to identify quotes in text we used two tools created by Explosion. Spacy is one of the leading open-source libraries for advanced natural language processing using deep neural networks. Prodigy is an annotation tool that provides an easy-to-use web interface for quick and efficient labelling of training data. Together with our AFP colleagues we manually annotated more than 800 news articles with three entities: content (the quote, in quotation marks), source (the speaker, which might be a person, an organisation, etc), and cue (usually a verb phrase, indicating the act of speech or expression). Stick to the style guide, please! Before rolling up our sleeves we needed to create a very clear and concise guide for annotating our data. To minimise noise and uncertainty in the training dataset we had to make sure that multiple annotators would understand the task in the same way. The Guardian’s style guide offers an overview of how writers should quote sources. It was a good starting point and we found it very useful. However, we discovered that many quotes in our content deviated significantly from the suggested rules in this guide. From the first model based on regular expressions we inherited a long list of different quotation styles and constructs. Initially, we counted 12 different ways journalists include quotes in their writing but we added many more during the annotation process. “If only all quotes were like this,” we moaned. The last item in this long list of different constructs was this one: The annotator got annoyed and said: “When we thought we had listed all the quote styles we found this …” she said. 🙇 You can find the complete list in our public GitHub here. Michaëla Cancela-Kieffer, AFP deputy news editor for editorial projects, says: “I like the idea that AI forces us to deconstruct our habits and understand how we do things, and what steps we take before telling the model what the rules are. By doing that we can sometimes identify necessary changes and improve our original ‘real life’ processes. That is why this type of experiment could also lead to changes in our style guide.” Human learning and machine learning The main challenge in building the training dataset was navigating the ambiguity of different journalistic styles. For several days, we discussed dozens of cases where it was difficult to make the right choice. How should we treat song lyrics or poems? What about messages on placards? What if someone quotes their thoughts, something that has not been said aloud? The first batch of our annotations turned out to be quite noisy and inconsistent but we were getting better and better with each iteration. Collectively we experienced the same teaching process we were putting our model through. The more examples we looked at, the better we became at recognising different cases. Yet the question remained – if it is difficult for a human to make these decisions, can we teach a machine to cope with this task? The results looked promising, especially for the content entity. The model managed to identify all three entities (content, source, cue) correctly in 89% of cases. Considering each entity separately, content scored the highest (93%) followed by cue (86%) and source (84%). Interestingly, we achieved these results by discarding the very first annotations we made, indicating that we became much better and aligned between each other as we continued annotating more examples. The difference between the three entities is not surprising. The content entity is encompassed in quotation marks, thus punctuation is a strong signal for matching this entity type. However, not every phrase in quotation marks is a quote – quotation marks are also used for other stylistic choices, adding noise to the entity extraction task. From our preliminary analysis, it looks like our model has learned to distinguish between genuine quotes and words in quotes indicating either non-standard terms or stylistic choices. To evaluate our model, we used the strictest way of measuring the performance of named entity recognition, namely each predicted entity needs to match exactly (from start to end) with respect to the annotated data. Even in cases where the model is getting it wrong, we often find that it managed to partially match the entity. This is especially true for source entities. What’s next? Moving forward we need to build a robust coreference resolution system. We would like to explore deep learning options to help us with this mission. Another challenge will be to identify meaningful quotes – content that is worth storing for future references. We are confident that a combination of machine learning, existing metadata about articles, and additional information extracted from sources and content might give us a strong signal for classifying quotes. Another application would be a user interface for discovering quotes. This would enable journalists to surface previous quotes quickly in order to check them against current statements or to enrich their articles. “This could lead to a user-facing tool with multiple applications. The data generated by that search could in return inform the newsroom about users’ interests,” says Cancela-Kieffer. Chris Moran, the head of editorial innovation at the Guardian, says: “We’re committed to thinking about AI and automation through a journalistic lens, and will be experimenting as much as we can to find the really positive ways we can apply it and avoid the pitfalls.” Attempting to identify and extract quotes from news articles using ML may seem arcane to some. But the potential benefits to readers, journalists and editors could be considerable – from making sure we are giving a platform to those who are often under-represented, to building products and formats that tell the whole story, rather than defaulting to a simple “he said, she said” formula. Watch this space, we hope to update you on our progress soon. This project is part of the 2021 JournalismAI Collab Challenges, a global initiative that brings together media organisations to explore innovative solutions to improve journalism via the use of AI technologies. It was developed as part of the EMEA cohort of the Collab Challenges that focused on modular journalism with the support of BBC News Labs and Clwstwr. JournalismAI is a project of Polis – the journalism thinktank at the London School of Economics and Political Science – and it’s sponsored by the Google News Initiative. If you want to know more about the Collab Challenges and other JournalismAI activities, sign up for the newsletter or get in touch with the team via hello@journalismai.infoPaisley Park was unbeaten in seven races between October 2018 and January 2020, including a famous win in the Stayers’ Hurdle at Cheltenham in March 2019. But Emma Lavelle’s nine-year-old, who remains one of the most popular horses in training, has only one win to his name in six starts before the Long Distance Hurdle at Newbury on Friday. He also renews acquaintance with Paul Webber’s mare Indefatigable, who was five lengths in front of him at Wetherby last month, and Lisnagar Oscar, the 50-1 winner of the Stayers’ in 2020 when the defending champion was a long way below his best. Paisley Park (3.00) is 6lb better off with Indefatigable on Friday, however, and showed more than enough in the closing stages at Wetherby to suggest he can reverse the form with that run behind him. Newbury 1.15: Aidan Coleman takes the ride on hot favourite Jonbon after Nico de Boinville sustained an injury in a fall while schooling on Thursday morning, and will hope to land the spoils with a minimum of fuss. Nicky Henderson’s five-year-old was a deeply impressive bumper winner at this track in March and nothing less than a victory will do on his hurdling debut if he is to retain his position as second-favourite for the Supreme Novice Hurdle at the Festival next year. Newbury 1.50: Several of these were very useful over hurdles and will ensure a tough test for Boothill, the likely favourite, on his chasing debut. Fifty Ball made a solid start over fences behind the prolific Minella Trump at Sandown earlier this month, and the 4-1 chance remains open to plenty of improvement as he returns to the track and trip where he finished a three-length second in last season’s Betfair Hurdle. Newbury 2.25: Phoenix Way has clearly not been an easy horse to train but he has shown glimpses of serious potential several times on his sporadic trips to the track. He has had a second wind op since running with credit in a Grade One at Aintree in April and is worth an interest at around 9-2 to register a third career win after a break. Newbury 3.35: A highly competitive stayers’ handicap hurdle to conclude the card, with Alrightjack possibly the pick of the prices at around 12-1. His winning form at Fontwell last time is backed-up by the clock and the way he stayed on there suggests this step up in trip should suit.It was a grand slam for Italy – winners of Eurovision and Euro 2020 – this week, as Giuseppe Dell’Anno triumphed in The Great British Bake Off. The 45-year-old engineer – with his precise, impeccable English; his Bristolian life; wife and three sons; and his unbelievably tidy workstation – never thought of himself as a showman. “Whenever I do a Myers-Briggs [personality] test,” he tells me the morning after the final airs, “I come out as a massive introvert. Nothing gives me more energy than locking myself in a room and working on my own. When I got into Bake Off, I thought: ‘This is going to be a nightmare.’” But cameras, audiences and – most importantly – the judges loved him. Twice awarded star baker – once for some milk bread that looked like vegetables, again for a German cake that looked like an alien invasion on the brink of victory – to the uninitiated, his creations may have seemed as elaborate as those of any Bake Off winner. “But one of the comments that Paul often gave me,” he recalls, of those moments before a Hollywood Handshake, “was that my bakes were ‘rather simple but very effective’. That is the way I work. I would rather spend time doing something small, and doing it very well, than venture into something complicated.” Giuseppe Dell’Anno is a lovely man, but why are they always so lovely, the cast of Bake Off, series after series? Is the genius in the casting: a nationwide manhunt for the 12 nicest people in the land? Or is there something about being creative and engrossed that brings out the best in everybody? It’s all about losing yourself, he says. “On Bake Off, the focus is on the bakes. You’re just the medium through which the bake comes to life. So that’s probably why there’s no bickering. That makes it very sweet, if you’ll pardon the pun.” This sweetness is what makes the show, and it appears to be very genuine indeed. Dell’Anno is full of affection for Chigs Parmar, the frontrunner. “While we were doing practice bakes, Crystelle [Pereira] was always first to arrive in the tent, I was second or third. Chigs would show up at 11am, play in the kitchen for two hours tops, and nail it the next day.” Despite speaking on the phone, I could almost hear him close his eyes as he rapturously described Pereira’s talents. “I couldn’t believe how good she was at combining flavours. When she made that focaccia: how do you put together grapes, fennel and goat’s cheese with vinegar and make that work? It was to die for.” And then there was Jürgen Krauss, knocked out in the semi-finals, to the blank astonishment of an audience who thought, reasonably enough, that anyone who could make a windmill out of biscuit that thin had surely made a pact with the devil. “The sheer baking knowledge he’s managed to shove into his head is phenomenal,” says Dell’Anno. It was a Covid-restricted set, with contestants living in a bubble and many going long stretches without seeing their families, so it is no wonder that they became close. But what is a wonder is how they got these long absences past their loved ones to begin with, particularly Dell’Anno, who has three sons, aged five, seven and nine. He hadn’t even told his wife, Laura, that he had entered Bake Off until he got the call to say he was on the show. “She said: ‘This is one of the many bonkers things you’ve done,’ but there was never any friction, only incredulity. I’ve always had a phenomenal respect for my wife – especially after seeing childbirth – but when I realised how selflessly she was supporting me, I had the realisation that I’m the luckiest man on Earth.” While his performance on the show was impressive, it wasn’t all plain sailing. On the night of the final, everything went wrong. He lost 15 minutes when his oven door wasn’t properly closed, plus the other two looked exceedingly strong and had started assembling their showstoppers while he was still baking toadstools. And yet, he made it through. After nine rounds, he was accustomed to moments of being thwarted – his signature gesture was putting his head in his hands – and says that life as an engineer had prepared him (“I’m used to very difficult customers and stressful situations”). What he had anticipated finding hardest in the tent wasn’t the challenges but the hubbub – scores of people around, constant human stimuli, topped off with Noel Fielding in your grill asking you to kiss a spatula. And OK, maybe Noel was a bit distracting, but not in the way he had set out to be. “Noel and Matt are very considerate: their job is to be an ‘entertaining nuisance’ but they never intentionally bother you,” he says. “But in the early weeks, there was a part of my brain that kept telling me: that’s Noel Fielding right there, talking to you. It took me a while to adjust to having celebrities around me.” However, the rest of the frenzy was a revelation to Dell’Anno. “It was all so pleasurable and natural,” he says. “It made me realise that I can show my true self on national television without any fear or trepidation. People usually leave the tent with more confidence in baking – I’ve left the tent with more confidence in being my true self in every single aspect of life. It’s a very big thing to say about a baking show, but that’s the truth.” His plans for the future are perhaps atypical for a Bake Off winner, at least in so far as he doesn’t want to change jobs (he has just accepted a job in Milan, in fact, where he is originally from, and is commuting between the UK and Italy). In the end, this has been “a validation exercise on a spectacular scale”, but he is “a very conscientious person … I’ve got a mortgage to pay and three kids to feed, and also it took me a long time and a lot of effort to build up an engineering career,” he says. “I’m not ready to give that up.” Yet there is one Bake Off-adjacent project he does want to do, which is to publish a book of family recipes. (“Give them to posterity, if you like, mostly for the legacy that I took from my dad.”) He dedicated his win to his father, and says that it took him years to realise that the cakes he had made every Sunday were “effectively his vocabulary, his way of being close to people. When you have that sort of epiphany, you realise how lovely it has been.” Brexit hovers at the edge of the conversation: its practical implications for Dell’Anno, and why it feels so peculiarly right – and so totally Bake Off – to see an Italian win, a salve to our thwarted Europhilia. While Dell’Anno loves his home town in Italy, he says he misses the UK when he is there, and vice versa. “I have to learn to live with this, because once you’ve left your home country, it’s bittersweet. You’ll never be at home anywhere, but your horizons expand. It’s so rich.”Health leaders are urging thousands of unvaccinated pregnant women to get vaccinated after the first official data from England found Covid jabs are safe and effective. The analysis of more than 350,000 deliveries by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) shows women who have had a Covid vaccine are no more likely than unvaccinated women to suffer stillbirth, premature birth or have babies with low birthweight. It reinforces international evidence that the jabs have a good safety record in pregnant women. Health leaders hope the fresh data will spur pregnant women who are still unvaccinated to take up the offer of a jab. Of all pregnant women in hospital with symptomatic Covid, 98% are unvaccinated. Only 22% of women who gave birth in August were vaccinated, official figures show. One in five of the most critically ill Covid patients in hospital since July have been pregnant women who have not been vaccinated. “If you haven’t already been vaccinated, this new information should add to the reassuring safety data,” said Dr Mary Ramsay, the head of immunisation at UKHSA. “Every pregnant woman who has not yet been vaccinated should feel confident to go and get the jab, and that this will help to prevent the serious consequences of catching Covid-19 in pregnancy.” The data shows good birth outcomes in vaccinated women who had their babies up to August this year – with no consistent differences between vaccinated women and all women in the figures for stillbirths, low baby birthweights and premature births. Dr June Raine, the chief executive of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, said: “We want to reassure all pregnant women that the Covid-19 vaccines are safe and effective for them to use at all stages of pregnancy. “Our rigorous safety monitoring of these vaccines in pregnancy shows that the vaccines are safe and that there is no increased risk of pregnancy complications, miscarriage or stillbirth.” In the eight months between January and August 2021, 355,299 women gave birth, of whom 24,759 had received at least one dose of the Covid vaccine prior to delivery, according to the UKHSA analysis. Preliminary figures released by the UKHSA show the stillbirth rate for vaccinated women who gave birth was 3.35 per 1,000, a similar rate to unvaccinated women (3.60 per 1,000), between January and August. In the same period, the proportion of vaccinated women giving birth to babies with low birthweight (5.28%) was almost exactly the same as the proportion for unvaccinated women (5.36%). The proportion of premature births was 6.51% for vaccinated and 5.99% for unvaccinated women. UKHSA said the small differences between groups may be explained by differences in the women eligible for and taking up the vaccine. Prof Lucy Chappell, the Department of Health and Social Care’s chief scientific adviser, said: “This pandemic has created a lot of fear and uncertainty for those who are thinking about pregnancy or expecting a baby, with Covid-19 being very dangerous for pregnant women in particular. “It is therefore really important that they get their Covid-19 vaccine – which has now protected hundreds of thousands of pregnant women around the world. Today’s data is hugely reassuring and further shows the vaccines continue to be the best way pregnant women can keep themselves and their babies safe from this virus.” About 84,000 pregnant women have had the jab in the UK. Pregnant women aged 40 and over, who are health or social care workers or are in an at-risk group are now also eligible for booster vaccines, six months after their second dose. Dr Nikki Kanani, a GP and deputy lead for the NHS Covid-19 vaccination programme, said: “This new and encouraging research shows there are no significant concerns about the safety of Covid-19 vaccines in pregnancy, so we will continue to advise midwives and clinicians to give expectant mums the information and support they need to make the right decision for them and their babies.” Figures also show uptake in the most deprived areas and for those from certain minority ethnic communities is lower than for other areas or ethnicities. It follows a similar pattern to the uptake figures for these groups in the general population. This includes 5.5% of black pregnant women and 7.8% of pregnant women from the most deprived areas being vaccinated. “We are concerned that women of black ethnicity and those living in the most deprived areas in England were least likely to have been vaccinated before they gave birth,” said Dr Edward Morris, the president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. “Efforts must be strengthened to support and encourage these groups – who are already at the highest risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes – to accept the offer of vaccination.”HIV drug resistance is on the rise, according to a new report, which found that the number of people with the virus being treated with antiretrovirals had risen to 27.5 million – an annual increase of 2 million. Four out of five countries with high rates had seen success in suppressing the virus with antiretroviral treatments, according to the World Health Organization’s HIV drug-resistance report. But the study found an increase in countries reaching a 10% threshold of resistance to a class of drugs which, the WHO said, underlined the need for a move to an alternative treatment, which it has recommended since 2019. Resistance exceeding the 10% threshold was reported in 21 of 30 countries surveyed. Switching from non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors was important for children, the report said, with nearly half of infants newly diagnosed carrying drug-resistant HIV, according to surveys in 10 sub-Saharan African countries. The WHO said robust monitoring of drug resistance was key for governments with high numbers of HIV patients to ensure that suppression of the virus did not wane. It said 64% of those countries had plans to monitor and tackle drug resistance. Meg Doherty, director of WHO’s global HIV, hepatitis and STI programmes, said the report held countries accountable for monitoring drug resistance and ensuring effective treatment for patients. “In the future, we will expand our surveillance to new ARVs [antiretrovirals], and those that are delivered as long-acting agents for prevention and treatment, so that we can maintain our ARVs for the lifetime of people living with HIV,” said Doherty. According to the report, countries achieving high levels of viral suppression increased from 33% in 2017 to 80% by the end of 2020, which the WHO said prevented transmission and deaths from HIV and slowed the emergence of drug resistance. WHO’s director general, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, urged countries to use antimicrobials therapy responsibly to ensure effectiveness. “Antimicrobials – including antibiotics, antivirals, antifungals and antiparasitics – are the backbone of modern medicine. But the overuse and misuse of antimicrobials are undermining the effectiveness of these essential medicines,” said Tedros. “We can all play a part in preserving antimicrobials and preventing drug resistance.”A Russian court has begun hearing arguments on the liquidation of International Memorial, a human rights group founded to research and inform the public about state-sponsored crimes and repression under the Soviet Union. Prosecutors have said the organisation should be shut down for violating Russia’s contentious “foreign agents” law, which the government has increasingly used to punish and close organisations it deems unfriendly. A judge ordered a recess until the middle of December, leaving the rights group’s fate uncertain but raising the possibility that it could be given a reprieve. The group has said it believes the judge’s decision will be political. Members of Russian civil society and from western governments have voiced strong support for Memorial, one of Russia’s oldest human rights groups. Diplomats from more than 20 countries, including the US and UK, attended the hearing. On Thursday, the presidents of Poland, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia expressed concern regarding “historical revisionism in Russia and specifically the possible closure of Memorial”. The organisation was “ready to tell the whole truth about an inconvenient history and human rights violations committed by totalitarian regimes,” the statement said. A crowd of more than 100 human rights activists, students and academics, politicians and others milled on the streets outside Russia’s supreme court in downtown Moscow, waiting for word on the organisation’s fate. Police made at least three arrests for picketing as protesters took out posters in support of the organisation, which was co-founded by the Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov in the late 1980s. “It is impossible to murder the memory of a people,” read one of the posters. “We are surviving in poverty, powerlessness and almost without hope.” The picketer, an elderly woman, was quickly arrested and bundled away by police. Some believed a decision to dissolve the organisation was inevitable, citing a political shift in Russia away from examining the crimes of previous governments in favour of celebrating Soviet achievements. “It’s just incredibly heartless, cowardly,” said Vadim Ivaschenko, an engineer who was outside the court. “This is our history. I have great respect for what Memorial does. [Closing] it would be like shutting a door on an entire era of our past.” Inside the courtroom on Thursday, prosecutors argued that the organisation had “systematically violated” its requirements under the “foreign agents” law by failing to affix a text warning on all of its publications. One long exchange between prosecutors and the acting director, Yelena Zhemkova, focused on whether her business cards identified the organisation as a foreign agent and when she had them printed. The judge also turned down a number of appeals from the defence, including calling witnesses who could testify about working with the organisation. Zhemkova argued it would be wrong to shut an organisation that helps people and “helps preserve shared memory” on a “technicality.”Joe Biden is preparing for a virtual summit with Vladimir Putin with the aim of fending off the threat of another Russian invasion of Ukraine. The summit has been previewed by the Kremlin. The White House has not confirmed it, but Biden’s press secretary, Jen Psaki, said that “high-level diplomacy is a priority of the president” and pointed to the teleconference meeting with Xi Jinping earlier in November. The stakes could hardly be higher. China has been menacing Taiwan, while Russia has been conducting a military buildup around Ukraine. In both cases the US could be drawn into a conflict, with potentially catastrophic results. The head of Ukraine’s defence intelligence agency, Brig Gen Kyrylo Budanov, told the Military Times on Saturday that Russia had more than 92,000 troops around Ukraine’s borders and was preparing for an attack in January or February. Others say the threat is not so imminent and that Russia has a lot to lose by invading Ukraine, but few if any experts would rule out an invasion entirely. In confronting Putin over Ukraine, every policy option available to Biden is fraught with risk. In a statement on Wednesday commemorating the Holodomor famine in Ukraine of the early 1930s, Biden restated “our unwavering support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine”. Such statements of support are meant as a deterrent, but each time they are repeated they heighten the dilemma that Biden will face if Putin calls his bluff. “What I am worried about, frankly, is that if we, the United States, continue to make ironclad commitments to Ukraine and get ourselves in a position where we are obliged to defend it, or not to defend it and look completely weak, we will be putting ourselves in a very difficult position,” said Rajan Menon, a professor of political science at the City University of New York. Hanna Shelest, the director of security programmes at the Foreign Policy Council’s Ukrainian Prism thinktank, said US support for Ukrainian sovereignty did not imply it would ultimately be drawn into combat. “There has been panic and hype about new American boots on the ground. Come on, who is inviting you to fight?” Shelest said. “When we talk about a guarantee of security there are plenty of other options. For example, sharing intelligence, the satellite pictures of the buildup, and making it public is already a support. You don’t need an American soldier to stand at the contact line. You can have diplomatic statements at the proper level that are very clear.” CNN has reported there is an urgent policy debate in the Biden administration over whether to step up deliveries of weaponry, such as Javelin anti-tank missiles and Stinger anti-aircraft missiles. Some in the administration say such weapons would raise the costs of any Russian military incursion and thereby influence Putin’s calculations. Others argue it would represent a dangerous escalation, and increase fear of a US or Nato attack, which is at the base of Russia’s aggressive military stance. “You’re damned if you do and damned if you don’t,” said Fiona Hill, a former senior director for European and Russian affairs in the national security council. Hill helped prepare for Donald Trump’s summits with Putin and advised the Biden team before his first meeting as president with the Russian leader in June. She said new talks were urgent and essential, but did contain traps Biden would have to avoid. “The problem right now is the way that Russia is framing the Ukraine issue as a very stark choice: the United States capitulate on Ukrainian sovereignty – over the heads of not just Ukraine but also of Europe – or risk all-out war,” Hill said. She added that the Kremlin had long wanted to return to the cold war paradigm of the two superpowers sitting down and deciding on spheres of influence. One of the solutions being floated is for Russian fears to be assuaged by ruling out future Nato membership for Ukraine as well as putting limits on its military capabilities, but Hill said that would make a nonsense of Ukraine’s sovereignty, setting a damaging precedent. “We can have a virtual summit. We can have the sitdown with the United States and Russia, but Ukraine can’t be on the bargaining table. We can talk about strategic stability, but we’re not in a position to bargain away Ukraine,” Hill said. “And it can’t just be the United States. The Europeans have to take this seriously.” Menon, a co-author of the 2015 book Conflict in Ukraine: The Unwinding of the Post-Cold War Order, suggested that the imminent threat was being exaggerated. He said 87,000 Russian troops were in the region abutting Ukraine well before the current crisis, and the region was broadly defined. Some of the troops were more than 430 miles (700km) from the border, he said. “Even if one assumes that Russia could throw 100,000 troops into battle, it would not have the numerical advantage [generally calculated at 3:1] to overwhelm a Ukrainian army which, for all its faults, is now better trained and equipped and has better morale than it did in 2014,” he said. “Plus, the farther west Russia pushes, the more it will stretch its supply lines, risk hit-and-run attacks that seek to disrupt them and encounter areas with larger proportions of [unfriendly] ethnic Ukrainians. These problems, and the fact that Putin would be burning all bridges with the west by invading Ukraine, are either ignored or given short shrift in the prevailing narratives here.” That does not mean that Putin would not ultimately launch an invasion if Russian red lines were crossed, Menon said. “We should not think that, [if] push comes to shove, when they say we will not allow Ukraine to join Nato … that they’re just bluffing. I don’t think they’re bluffing at all.”India has more women than men for the first time in its recorded history and is no longer experiencing a population boom, according to a government survey that indicates significant societal shifts in the country. The fifth National Family and Health Survey (NFHS) carried out by the government between 2019 and 2021 has found India now has 1,020 women for every 1,000 men. The survey of about 650,000 households also found that India’s reproductive rate had dropped to an average of 2, which is the first time it has been below replacement fertility levels. In urban areas, it was even lower at 1.6. This means that not enough children are being born to replace the older generation, suggesting that India’s population of close to 1.4 billion may be near its peak, and is a significant shift for a country where in the 1950s women had an average of six children. India’s swing towards a predominately female population is also a remarkable moment for a country which for centuries has been one of “missing women”, referring to the millions of girls killed before or just after being born due to a societal stigma to giving birth to a daughter. It indicates strides are being made in tackling sex-selective abortions, female foeticide and neglect of girls and women, which have deeply impacted on the female population. In 1990, when the Indian Nobel prize-winning economist Amartya Sen first wrote of India’s 37 million missing women due to these factors, the ratio of women to men was 927 women to 1,000 men. Poonam Muttreja, the executive director of the Population Foundation of India, said: “It is heartening to see the improvements in the overall sex ratio. It reflects the strides that the country has made towards gender equality and women’s empowerment.” Muttreja emphasised that a full picture of India’s shifting sex ratio would not become clear until the census, which was due to happen in 2021 but currently postponed, was carried out. India’s last census occurred in 2011. Despite apparent progress, according to the survey, the gender ratio at birth still remains at 929 women for every 1,000 men, indicating that the issue of sex selection and female foeticide has not been eliminated. “With greater access to literacy and education, the aspirations of women are fast changing,” said Muttreja. “Girls are asserting themselves and taking charge of their lives, and will play a critical role in the growth and development of the country in the future.” The findings on India’s falling fertility rate may also have political implications. Several Indian states, such as Assam and Uttar Pradesh, have floated population control bills, including limiting access to state benefits, rations and government jobs to those who have more than two children. They have been proposed on the basis that India’s population needs to be brought under control. Yet these bills are also considered to have a communal tinge, and play to fears of the Hindu right wing that the Muslim population in India is surging and creating a “dangerous demographic imbalance”. India is still not expected to experience a fall in its population, currently the second largest in the world, for another 30 or 40 years, in part because more than 30% are between the ages of 10 and 30 and are likely to have children over the next two decades.30. The Style Council – It Just Came to Pieces in My Hands (1983) On the B-side of A Solid Bond in Your Heart lurks Weller’s mea culpa take on the sudden demise of the Jam, the arrogance of youth and the perils of becoming the Voice of a Generation. “I was a shit-stained statue / Schoolchildren would stand in awe … I thought I was lord of this crappy jungle.” 29. Paul Weller – Into Tomorrow (1992) After the demise of the Style Council, it took Weller’s dad-cum-manager to talk him into performing again. On his debut solo single, a kind of musical note-to-self, there’s something really thrilling about the way you can hear Weller willing himself along, “into the stars and always up … praying that it has not passed”. 28. The Style Council – Life at a Top People’s Health Farm (1988) The relative commercial failure of Confessions of a Pop Group certainly wasn’t down to the quality of the music it contained – it may be the Style Council’s best album. And Life at a Top People’s Heath Farm should have been a bigger hit: soul horns, electronic funk, a ferociously bitter lyric. 27. Paul Weller – Uh Huh Oh Yeh! (Always There to Fool You!) (1992) In which Weller revisits his home town of Woking in search of inspiration and becomes surprisingly emotional at the sight of the old place – “dear reminders of who I am, the very roots on which I stand”. A fascinating mediation on place and ageing and the ties that bind, plus its sax-driven groove absolutely bangs. 26. Paul Weller – From the Floorboards Up (2005) Prior to the radical reinvention of 2008’s 22 Dreams, Weller’s 00s albums were subject to diminishing artistic returns – not bad, but nothing spectacular. And yet, he could still occasionally pull out something that made you sit up and take notice. From the Floorboards Up, from 2005’s As Is Now, is a short, sharp, exhilarating – and Jam-like – jolt. 25. The Jam – Funeral Pyre (1981) Pigeonholed as traditionalists, the Jam don’t get enough credit for being experimental. Funeral Pyre has almost no tune, just sprawling guitar noise, a relentless fusillade of drums and a furious, still-relevant lyric. “As I was standing by the edge / I could see the faces of those who led / Pissing theirselves laughing.” A single, incredibly. 24. Paul Weller – The Cranes Are Back (2017) For an artist who spent the first part of his career fetishising youth – from “I wanna tell you about the young ideas” to Saturday’s Kids – Weller has worn age exceptionally well. Case in point: the voice of hard-won experience that sings gruff, careworn southern soul ballad The Cranes Are Back, shaking his head at the death of Alan Kurdi as he goes. 23. Paul Weller – Starlite (2011) The standout from Sonik Kicks, Starlite is a delight in its album version – a breezy, lovely melody floating over scratchy funk guitar, clattering drum machines and a dose of dubby echo. If you want something smoother, the Drop Out Orchestra remix is laid-back, disco-string-laden, sax-solo-heavy nirvana. 22. Paul Weller – You Do Something to Me (1995) Yes, it’s the dictionary definition of dadrock, complete with footy, kids and Beatles T-shirt in the video. Yes, it’s a Weller song that could be played on Mellow Magic – a once-unthinkable notion. But You Do Something to Me is also a supreme bit of songwriting, a genuinely affecting lyric set to a melody so well-turned, it feels like it always existed. 21. The Jam – Carnation (1982) The biggest singles band of their era – four of them went to No 1 – the Jam were also extremely adept at hiding incredible songs away on their albums. Case in point, Carnation’s gently psychedelic Beatles-soul hybrid, topped off with an extraordinary self-baiting lyric. 20. Paul Weller – Peacock Suit (1996) A high-water mark of Britpop-era classicist Weller, Peacock Suit is essentially one of those swaggering check-me-out 60s mod anthems – I’m the Face; Whatcha Gonna Do About It? – rewritten for troubled middle age. The schmutter is still as sharp as ever, the man inside is “sour as shit … I have no solutions”. 19. The Jam – Tales From the Riverbank (1981) Pastoral psychedelia of a sort, albeit shot through Weller’s grimy early 80s lens – “life and death are carried in this stream”, he sings – and there’s a dark undercurrent to the music. Tales From the Riverbank is the perfect example of the Jam’s willingness to release superb, A-side quality songs as B-sides. 18. The Style Council – Headstart for Happiness (1983) It says something about Weller’s determination to prove the Style Council were Not the Jam that the rap-influenced funk of Money-Go-Round was the single and Headstart For Happiness – 2min 47sec of pure, 60s-soul-infused joy – was relegated to the 12” B-side. The best version is on Café Bleu – Weller was still performing it live in the 00s, testament to its charm. 17. The Style Council – You’re the Best Thing (1984) The great Weller love song – at least until You Do Something to Me came along to compete – You’re the Best Thing is timelessly beautiful songwriting. In a different era, Al Green could have covered it; instead, it was subjected to a spectacularly drippy reading by dimly remembered 90s boyband 911. 16. The Jam – Down in the Tube Station at Midnight (1978) One thing that made the Jam so compelling was the sound of Weller growing up in public. The jump from A Bomb in Wardour Street’s shock-horror ramalama to Down in the Tube Station at Midnight – a tightly written short story with a horrifying twist, the music leaping from tensely evocative to cathartic release – is vast. 15. Paul Weller – Push It Along (2008) Whatever provoked Weller’s artistic volte-face on 22 Dreams, it led to a flood of brilliant songwriting. You could fill half this chart with selections from that album alone – Sea Spray! Where’er Ye Go! – but let’s go with the Push It Along: ramshackle, occasionally atonal, mad key changes and a massive hook. 14. The Jam – English Rose (1978) English Rose wasn’t listed on the cover of All Mod Cons, suggesting Weller felt self-conscious releasing something so nakedly romantic – “no bonds can ever tempt me from she”, he sings, over fingerpicked acoustic guitar – in the climate engendered by punk. He shouldn’t have been: English Rose is musically gorgeous, lyrically heartfelt, a vast leap forward. 13. The Style Council – Long Hot Summer (1983) The summer of 1983 was indeed scorching, and the singles chart was weirdly filled with songs that seemed to soundtrack the weather. Hazily brilliant and audibly influenced by cutting-edge R&amp;B, Long Hot Summer fitted perfectly. Extra marks for the homoerotic video, apparently designed to outrage the more lumpen aspects of Weller’s fanbase. 12. Paul Weller – Wake Up the Nation (2010) The sound of a man completely re-energised, aged 51, a clangorous punky racket bearing Weller’s most stirring call-to-arms in decades. His vocal verges on Rotten-esque sneer, everything sounds like it’s on the verge of collapse, there’s room for some codger-ish moaning about “the Facebook”, and it’s all over and done in barely two minutes. Fabulous. 11. Paul Weller – Sunflower (1993) More than any song, Sunflower set Weller’s course in the 90s, its sound a twitchy cocktail of Low Spark of High Heeled Boys-era Traffic and soul. It was a blueprint he eventually wore out, but it sounds aggressive and fresh here: a fantastic riff, a subtle but effective lift into the chorus. 10. Paul Weller – Rockets (2020) Weller’s latterday exploratory purple patch continues apace. Rockets, from 2020’s On Sunset, is a song that he patently wouldn’t have written 20 years ago – you can hear the influence of David Bowie, for one thing. It’s incredibly powerful, the arrangement swelling as the lyrical focus shifts. “All the wealth is hidden … well, have it all, it’s worthless.” 9. The Jam – The Eton Rifles (1979) The Eton Rifles is an old-fashioned protest song, inspired by a single incident, when unemployed marchers clashed with jeering pupils from the titular school. But the sheer force of its anger – and the brilliance of its melody – meant it long slipped its original moorings. No matter. The story that provoked it may be forgotten, but the song’s fury still burns bright. 8. The Style Council – Walls Come Tumbling Down! (1985) Boasting one of Weller’s most attention-grabbing opening lines – “You don’t have to take this crap” – Walls Come Tumbling Down! had him railing against political apathy to a northern soul backbeat. The chorus is so terrific, it snuck a lyric as uncompromising as “the class war is real and not mythologised” into the Top 10. 7. The Jam – A Town Called Malice (1982) A snappy, super-smart Motown pastiche that’s Ray Davies’ favourite Weller song, which makes sense: a eulogy for the passing of a Britain destroyed by the rise of Thatcher, the gaucheness of his early lyrics is gone, replaced by incisive lines, evocative images and wit (“I could go on for hours and I probably will”). 6. The Style Council – My Ever Changing Moods (1984) Take your pick from the ballad on Café Bleu, or the 70s soul-inspired reading released as a single. Both are superb in their own ways, the ambivalence of the lyric and the strong melody (inspired, one US critic insists, by easy-listening band Classics IV’s 1968 hit Stormy) meaning it works perfectly as either wistful lament or celebratory anthem. 5. The Jam – The Bitterest Pill (I Ever Had To Swallow) (1982) “I will never be embarrassed about love again,” sang Weller on 1980’s Monday, and he meant it. The opposite of English Rose’s muted, don’t-mind-me appearance, The Bitterest Pill’s saga of romantic woe opens with a pealing, wedding bell-like riff, and brings in dramatic strings, falsetto vocals and an epic chorus. What a fantastic single. 4. Paul Weller – Wild Wood (1993) You could trace the roots of Weller’s folky bent back to the Jam’s English Rose and Liza Radley, but Wild Wood remains its finest flowering. The gorgeously understated music suggests getting it together in the country, but – as on Weller favourite Nick Drake’s Bryter Layter – the lyrical setting is distinctly urban. Killer Portishead remix too. 3. The Style Council – Shout to the Top! (1984) The greatest Style Council single of the lot, an exquisite, orchestrated anthem of resistance and picking yourself up after failure; its video made its message’s links to the ongoing miners strike explicit. Shout to the Top! enjoyed an unexpected afterlife as a Balearic anthem on the early acid house scene. 2. The Jam – Going Underground (1980) Weller at his most brilliantly contrary: horrified by Thatcherism, he writes a song claiming he doesn’t get what “the public want” and has no interest in the mainstream, then sets it to his most potent and irresistible melody yet, full of explosive twists and turns. It enters the charts at No 1. 1. The Jam – That’s Entertainment (1980) It’s a very close-run thing – indeed there are Weller songs that didn’t make this list that people might easily claim as their favourite, with Strange Town, The Changingman and Speak Like a Child among them – but That’s Entertainment nudges in front. Apparently written in 10 minutes, while drunk, it’s a cynical depiction of the limitations of working-class life that also captures a universal sense of longing and restriction – is that all there is? – in a series of blunt, but memorable, images. “Pissing down with rain on a boring Wednesday”, “A hot summer’s day and sticky black Tarmac”, “Watching the telly and thinking about your holidays”. To put it in equally blunt terms: what a fucking great song. An Orchestrated Songbook: Paul Weller with Jules Buckley and the BBC Symphony Orchestra is released 10 December on Polydor RecordsRichard Madeley has confirmed he has left I’m A Celebrity ... Get Me Out Of Here! because he “broke the Covid ‘bubble’” after he was taken to hospital in the early hours of Thursday. The TV presenter, 65, was seen by an on-site medical team before being admitted to hospital as a precaution, following an episode in which he slid head first into a sewer of rotten fruit and vegetables. In a statement on Thursday afternoon, Madeley said he was “absolutely fine”. “I started to feel briefly unwell in the small hours of the morning and was taken to hospital as a precaution,” he said. “By leaving the camp, I had consequently broken the Covid ‘bubble’ and as such I’ve had to leave the castle and all the wonderful celebs that remain in the camp. “Obviously I’m gutted to be leaving so soon but the safety of all the campmates is the number one priority. I’m incredibly excited to watch their journey continue … even more so at the prospect of being somewhere a little warmer than Gwrych Castle.” In Wednesday night’s challenge, called Castle Kitchen Nightmares, Madeley hunted for 10 hidden stars in a room “full of castle critters” as rotten food including fish guts and offal was dumped on him from above. After searching in dark chambers for 10 minutes, the klaxon sounded with Madeley only managing to get four out of 10 stars, securing a meal of squirrel for the camp. Fans of the show complained on Twitter that the trial was too difficult. “The trial Richard Madeley just did was impossible,” one said. “No way was anybody ever going to get all those stars. They don’t want them to eat too well this year.” Another said: “Ridiculous and impossible trial for Richard Madeley. You knew it wasn’t happening with the time given, even after skipping sections. GET REAL.” An ITV spokesperson said: “Richard was unwell in the early hours and was immediately seen by our on-site medical team. He’s since been taken to hospital as a precaution, the health and safety of our campmates is our priority.” Madeley, best known for hosting This Morning alongside his wife, Judy Finnigan, was one of 12 contestants taking part in this year’s series at Gwrych Castle in north Wales. He thanked “everyone who supported me on my brief but completely unforgettable adventure”, adding: “I’ve made some great friends and honestly had the time of my life.” ITV said no stand-ins would be entering the castle. Madeley, who has recorded a message to campmates, will speak with Ant and Dec on Friday night’s show. A spokesperson for the Welsh ambulance service said earlier on Thursday: “We were called at 5.43am this morning, Thursday 25 November 2021, to reports of a medical emergency at Gwrych Castle in Abergele, Conwy. “We sent a paramedic in a rapid-response car and an emergency ambulance to the scene, and one patient was taken to hospital.” The ITV series is returning to Wales for a second year because of coronavirus travel restrictions that have prevented filming at its usual Australian jungle location. Madeley told Metro before he went into the castle: “I really hope I do get voted for the trials. The thing about this programme is you mustn’t go into it if you take yourself remotely seriously.” The presenter had been asked to do I’m A Celebrity on numerous occasions – but said he “realised the time had come to experience it”.Amid a rising number of small boats crossing the Channel, culminating in tragedy on Wednesday, campaigners and experts have proposed a number of possible solutions to curb the dangerous journeys: Take refugees’ claims seriously The government stands accused of misunderstanding the reasons behind the current crisis. The home secretary, Priti Patel, has claimed that 70% of people crossing in small boats are economic migrants, a claim disputed by the Refugee Council in new research. Undocumented economic migrants do not generally deliver themselves into the hands of Home Office officials as soon as they reach UK soil. A recent high court case about support payments to asylum seekers in hotels revealed that Patel and the then immigration minister Chris Philp rejected recommendations from officials to make payments of £12.11 a week to asylum seekers in hotels for essential living needs because they did “not want to further increase any possible pull factors”. Asylum seekers insist they are not travelling to the UK in order to receive these modest payments. Critics say it is hard to identify solutions if the nature of the problem is misunderstood. Work with other peaceful nations to try to resolve or mitigate global conflicts The gold-standard solution to halting refugees crossing the Channel in small boats is to end global conflicts which cause people to flee for their lives. The UK’s Department for International Development (DfID) did a great deal of work aimed at this before it was axed as a standalone department and merged with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in 2020. DfID worked to strengthen the infrastructures of fragile countries in the hope of increasing stability there. The EU also has significant collective clout when it comes to global diplomacy, but Britain is no longer a member. Enable safe, legal routes and refugee resettlement Refugee resettlement is a safe way to airlift people out of conflict zones or neighbouring countries and allow them to begin a new life without having to deal with the many roadblocks in the current asylum system. However, refugee resettlement is only offered to a very small number of people fleeing conflict. Despite the promise of more safe routes, the number of people resettled under the government’s UK resettlement scheme was 1,171 in the 12 months to September 2021, down by about 45% year on year. Operation Pitting airlifted 15,000 people out of Afghanistan this year and the UK government resettled around 5,000 Syrians a year following the Syrian conflict. Refugee charities are calling for these schemes to be expanded. Process UK humanitarian visas on French soil UK officials already staff a border in France. Charities say that asylum seekers in northern France hoping to reach the UK to claim asylum should be able to register their claim with UK officials and then be placed on ferries to be brought to the UK while their claim is processed. If such a scheme was adopted it would achieve what the government has repeatedly promised to do: smash the business model of the people smugglers. Overhaul the asylum system Delays in processing asylum claims are at record levels, with the number of people waiting six months or more for an initial decision on their claim rising by 5% to 56,520. Previously the Home Office had a target to process the majority of straightforward claims within six months. It dropped that target in 2019 saying officials wanted to focus on prioritising the most vulnerable asylum seekers. The majority of asylum claims are found to be legitimate according to the Home Office figures released on Thursday. Almost two-thirds (64%) of asylum claims ended in a grant of protection. Of those rejected that then went on to appeal, 48% were successfully overturned. The scale of the delays leads to the perception of the system being overwhelmed; experts say it doesn’t have to be.Manchester United are in advanced talks with Ralf Rangnick over becoming their interim manager until the end of the season. Rangnick, the highly respected former director of football at RB Salzburg and RB Leipzig, is head of sports and development at Lokomotiv Moscow but negotiations over a move to Old Trafford have progressed swiftly since Monday. The 63-year-old made clear to United that he would accept their offer of a six-month contract as interim manager only if it came with a guaranteed consultancy role until May 2024 or 2025. United are understood to have agreed to that condition, which would give Rangnick a significant say in major football decisions. Negotiations with Lokomotiv are continuing. Rangnick signed a three-year deal in July and wants an amicable departure. United are confident Lokomotiv will agree to release the former Stuttgart, Schalke and Hoffenheim head coach. United officials held talks with Rangnick on Monday and have had discussions with other candidates including the former Barcelona manager Ernesto Valverde. The club said when sacking Ole Gunnar Solskjær last Sunday that they would look for a temporary manager before making a longer-term appointment in the summer. Rangnick has not worked as a manager since holding the fort at Leipzig in the 2018-19 season while the club waited for Julian Nagelsmann. He had previously been director of football at RB Salzburg and RB Leipzig, where he overhauled their youth systems and recruitment strategies as the clubs developed into regular European competitors. He has also been credited as a major influence on the philosophies of fellow German coaches including Jürgen Klopp, Thomas Tuchel and Nagelsmann. Last season Rangnick held talks with Chelsea over an interim role and told the Times the following month: “I said: ‘I would like to come and work with you, but I can’t do it for four months. I’m not an interim coach. To the media and players you would be the ‘four-month manager’, a lame duck, from day one. It would have to be something special.” Mauricio Pochettino remains interested in taking the United job in the summer and would not be put off by Rangnick’s presence in a consultancy role. Paris Saint-Germain were not willing to consider losing their manager mid-season but a deal could be possible at the end of the campaign. Pochettino has misgivings about aspects of the PSG project, notably the coherence of a recruitment strategy that he believes centres more on signing glamour names than on constructing a squad to fit his vision. He knew the sky-high expectations he would face but that has not made them any easier to bear. United face Chelsea at Stamford Bridge on Sunday when Michael Carrick will again be in charge because, in the event of Lokomotiv sanctioning Rangnick’s exit, work permit issues would delay his arrival.Hundreds of thousands of parents are missing out on help paying for childcare and billions allocated to the government’s flagship “tax-free childcare” scheme is going unspent, data has revealed. New figures show a £2.37bn underspend on tax-free childcare over the past four years, with just a fraction of the parents eligible for help with childcare costs taking up the offer, according to Treasury figures. The government has spent less than it forecasted on tax-free childcare every year since it was introduced in 2017, data shows. In 2020-21 the underspend was £660m, the same figure as the year before, according to a response to a parliamentary question by Labour’s Tulip Siddiq, shadow minister for children and early years. “The Conservatives are completely failing to deliver childcare support for working families and have pushed the early years sector to the brink of collapse,” said Siddiq. “This is the fourth year in a row that the government has failed to deliver on promises of childcare support, yet ministers don’t seem to be doing anything about it.” Data also reveals that the original amount the government forecast it would spend on the scheme has been reduced year-on-year – the original forecast from the Office for Budget Responsibility in March 2017 for 2017-21 was £3bn, by autumn 2017 it fell to £1.62bn – but the actual amount spent in the 2017-21 period was £630m. In September, 316,000 families used tax-free childcare of the 1.3 million estimated to be eligible – which means only one in five eligible families are taking up the scheme. Tax-Free Childcare sees parents pay childcare providers from a government account. For every £8 parents pay in, the government adds £2, up to a maximum of £2,000 a year until a child is 11 – and up to £4,000 for disabled children until they turn 17. Joeli Brearley, founder and chief executive of Pregnant Then Screwed, said the system was “difficult to navigate” and a large proportion of parents were unaware of its existence. “It is clear that ministers haven’t got a grasp of this issue yet, and that’s understandable – they are busy people and this is really complicated – the only way to ensure that further funding isn’t wasted and that this sector gets the support it needs is an independent review,” she said. Childcare was debated in parliament in September after more than 100,000 parents signed a petition calling for an independent review of childcare funding and affordability. According to data from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the UK has the third most expensive childcare system in the world, behind only Slovakia and Switzerland; a full-time place costs £12,376 a year on average. In June the Early Years Alliance (EYA) accused ministers of “shamelessly, knowingly” underfunding the early years sector in England, after an investigation revealed that 2020-21 funding rates for the “free” childcare offer for three and four-year-olds were less than two-thirds of what the government believed was needed. In the spending review the treasury announced around £170m a year in extra funding to increase the hourly rate for childcare providers until 2024-25. But Neil Leitch, chief executive of the EYA, said it was not enough to make up for historic shortfalls and called for the underspend to be reinvested in the sector, which lost more than 3,000 providers in 2021. “Despite the increase in early years funding historic sector underfunding alongside the ongoing impact of the pandemic means that many providers still face an uphill battle to remain in business,” said Leitch. A government spokesperson said: “We consistently encourage eligible families to sign up for the scheme via stakeholders, social media and the press and will continue to explore ways to further increase take-up.”Aml Ameen has one of those big, light-the-room smiles – and he deploys it freely, even to those physically impervious to his charm. When I join the video call, he is asking Alexa, very nicely, to turn down the music. Ameen is at home in Los Angeles (to where he moved from London a decade or so ago). He has been acting professionally since he was six and now he has co-written, directed and starred in a romcom, Boxing Day. It is an irresistibly Christmassy London movie in the tradition of Love Actually (a film that he adores). It is also the UK’s first Christmas-set romantic comedy led by a Black cast. Ameen grew up watching old movies with his mother – anything with Katharine Hepburn, Jimmy Stewart or Cary Grant. His sensibilities lean towards stories about love, family and friendship. But you wouldn’t necessarily know that from his films. “I do a lot of leading roles. But I’ve never played anything close to home. Even if you go back to Trife in Kidulthood. That’s not my life or how I grew up.” Kidulthood, the gritty 2006 film in which he played a teenager dicing with trouble in west London, was his breakthrough. Since moving to the US, he has appeared in David E Kelley’s legal series Harry’s Law, the young adult sci-fi movie The Maze Runner and the Wachowski sisters’ Netflix series Sense8. He played D, a Jamaican gangster, in Idris Elba’s British drama Yardie. With Boxing Day, Ameen wanted to reveal more of himself as an actor, he says: “To amplify another side of myself and the characters in my real life. It’s a love letter to them and to British culture.” The film is semi-autobiographical, a fictionalised version of his family’s Boxing Day parties: big get-togethers in London with aunties, cousins, friends and friends of friends. He plays Melvin, a writer who, with his gorgeous American girlfriend, Lisa (Aja Naomi King), flies in from LA for Christmas. The plan is to introduce her to his Caribbean British family on Boxing Day. What he has omitted to tell her is that his ex is a famous pop star (played by Little Mix’s Leigh-Anne Pinnock). Ameen says he put a bit of himself in the character, but as a comic device he wrote Melvin as a bolter. “He runs a lot, but I’m confrontational. I’m happy to confront an issue.” He wanted to show a side of British life that we don’t see in the cinema. “If the world stopped tomorrow, what were Black British people like? If we only had movies to go on, it’s very narrow. I’m adding my stroke of the brush. “Everything is British culture that is in the country, right? Whether it’s Bend It Like Beckham, or Top Boy, or Richard Curtis and the wonderful films he’s done.” Ameen loves the fact that Boxing Day is the first all-Black Christmas romcom in the UK. “But, more than that, it’s a universal film.” It is universal. Still, I tell him some of my favourite scenes are specific to Black British culture. Marianne Jean-Baptiste gives a stunning performance as Melvin’s mum, Shirley, whose new boyfriend is white. She makes a speech where she explains to him why she can’t bring herself to introduce him to her kids. She talks about her challenges as a parent, raising her Black children to “take pride in what they saw in the mirror”. It is incredibly moving, I tell Ameen, who looks bashful. “Thank you so much, honestly. One of the most amazing things about finally being able to write and direct is to express things that I’ve thought or written over the years.” Growing up around women of colour, these were anxieties he witnessed when they started interracial relationships. “One of the things I’ve heard that happens is that sense: ‘Do I feel like I’m betraying my culture? Do I feel like I’m betraying my family?’” he says. Ameen grew up in London – one of eight siblings, the oldest from his parents’ marriage. He gets his forceful belief in himself – and a hardcore work ethic – from them, he says. His British Jamaican mother looked after the kids when they were little and later trained as a psychologist; she now practises as a relationship therapist. Ameen is stumped for a moment when he tries to describe his father. It’s funny talking about my dad,” he says, his arms gesturing the impossibility of putting it into words. “He’s a jack of all trades. He was a massive leader in the borough of Hackney.” His dad, who was born in St Vincent, is an immigration lawyer and businessman. He established a college for Caribbeans in London and organised youth exchanges around the world. As a kid, Ameen tagged along: “I was exposed to a lot of the world. That informs a lot of who I am.” After a pause, he has it: “You know, if I was to characterise my dad, he’s like that golden immigrant, who lifts up a country a little bit. When you’re an immigrant to a country, like I’m an immigrant to America, you get that sense: ‘I must do this. There’s no going back.’ You know what I mean? Ameen made his first TV appearance at six, on Floella Benjamin’s kids’ show Hullabaloo, then went to the same stage school as Naomi Campbell and Amma Asante and performed in the West End musicals Oliver! and Jolson. He was on stage with Michael Jackson at the Brit awards when Jarvis Cocker invaded the stage and waggled his bum. This was 1996; Ameen, who was 11, had been picked to play one of the sad-faced suffering children to Jackson’s messiah. After the incident, kids who had been hurt in the commotion were whisked off to Hamleys in Brent Cross by Jackson’s team. “I tried to fib,” Ameen recalls, but he didn’t have it in him to pretend that he had been injured. As a teenager, he was “crazy ambitious”: head boy and “star” of his stage school. “I was a corrupt head boy,” he grins. “If you gave me Softmints when you were late, we were good.” At home, things weren’t so great. His parents divorced when he was 15 and his comfortable life was pulled out from underneath him. “We moved around a lot for a little bit. That was quite challenging for me. I hated poverty.” He left their four-bedroom house and moved into a small flat with his mum. It defined him as a teenager: “I was 15 and I was like: you know what? I’m going to make my own way, my own money, my own thing.” At 20, he had a cracking year: Kidulthood came out of nowhere, kickstarting a new generation of British teen movies. At the same time, Ameen landed a role in The Bill. His best friend told him he would be mad ever to leave the series. But he had other ideas. “I agreed with my agent that I’d do 18 months and bounce, because I was very clear I had to go to America.” The lack of diverse roles in Britain has been a motivator for other Black British actors – including David Harewood and David Oyelowo – to move to the US. But Hollywood has always been Ameen’s “beacon”. That said, the talent drain is a reality. “You’ve just got to look at the math. We don’t have Idris Elba without Idris going to America and doing The Wire – and then coming home and going to Luther,” he says. Directing Boxing Day has made him more picky as an actor. He is nearly finished playing Martin Luther King in a biopic about the gay civil rights activist Bayard Rustin, who organised the 1963 March on Washington. He has done the “I have a dream” speech, which is protected by copyright and therefore isn’t usually portrayed in movies. “Before I went on, Chris Rock [his co-star] was like: ‘This is the first time anybody has been allowed to say Martin’s words on screen. No pressure!’” But if anyone can deal with the baggage of playing an icon, my money is on Ameen. He describes his acting style as “accidentally method”: “I literally lean energetically towards whichever character I’m playing.” Last year, he appeared in Michaela Coel’s I May Destroy You, playing Arabella’s friend Simon, a city banker. Coel knew his younger brother from the spoken word scene and they clicked: “Me and Michaela, we caught a good vibe.” He identified in her series what he wanted to do with Boxing Day, broadening the view of Black British life. “I think Michaela really blew it out of the water from a global standpoint. That’s the first time people had seen Black British people just function in everyday life. I loved that about I May Destroy You.” He puts on a gee-whiz American accent to explain what he is talking about: “Oh, they’ve got, like, Black people in England?” Is he asked that question in LA? Not any more. “We thank Idris Elba.” He laughs. “Idris Elba and Seal. The only two Black men in England.” Ameen has lived in LA for more than 10 years. The funny thing is, he talks non-stop about London, I say. “Oh man. I rep my city every day. My cousin says this about me. He’s like: ‘Do you what you are? You’re patriotic abroad.’ He loves London for its multiculturalism. “There’s nowhere, no city that I’ve come across, that [people] live so closely together and are so influenced by each other.” Would he move back? A pause. “I’m trying to think of a cool answer. But the answer is no. I’ve got a lot of work happening there. I’m there a lot. But no. I love the sun; my beautiful Black skin loves the sun.” • Boxing Day is released in the UK on 3 DecemberIt was the kind of boat, a French politician said, that you blow up like a paddling pool. Not much more than a toy, of the kind many families will have bought this summer for their children to play in on the beach. But this winter, flimsy inflatables may be all that stand between other people’s children and a watery grave. Smugglers charge a small fortune for places in boats so dangerously overloaded that some begin to sink while still in sight of land, while others drift in darkness through one of the busiest shipping lanes in the world. Refugee charities had long warned of a tragedy waiting to happen, and so it has proved. At least 27 human beings, including a pregnant woman and three children, lost their lives in the freezing November sea this week, in the worst such incident since human traffickers began using this route three years ago. Yet within hours, other boats were setting forth, a reminder of just how fiercely desire burns. After all, those on board have nothing much left to lose. They may have already sold everything they had, or left loved ones behind; many will have endured life-threatening journeys to reach the French coast, only to end up shivering in makeshift roadside camps, repeatedly moved on by police who confiscate their tents and sleeping bags to leave them at the mercy of the elements. Some young men are carrying the hopes of families left behind, who have sacrificed everything to get one child to the west. They’re not going to stop when the end is so tantalisingly in sight; not after all they have been through, let alone all they may have fled. (Research suggests two-thirds of those crossing the Channel are ultimately judged to have been genuine refugees, escaping conflict and persecution.) As charities must be tired of saying, nobody would do this if they had a better option. Now our job is to provide them with one. This tragedy forces everyone in British politics once again to confront an issue that most find visibly uncomfortable. The government plainly doesn’t know what to do about the flow of people across the Channel, and the opposition often struggles with what to say about it; Labour members lean towards a much more open and generous offer to refugees, but their party’s most likely path to Downing Street lies through an electorate that instinctively doesn’t. It is, however, time for a few home truths. If nothing else, this must spell an end to Home Office talk of forcibly “pushing back” boats as they enter British waters, which had prompted widespread concerns about the risk of capsizing them. The only way in which this week’s tragedy could have been more awful is if British border officials had physically been responsible for tipping people into the sea themselves. It should also shock Britain and France into working more closely together, although the omens are not good; within hours Boris Johnson was accusing the French of supposedly failing to do enough to stop small boats crossing, while French politicians retorted that it was the supposed ease of finding jobs in Britain’s black market that incentivised people to keep trying. President Macron is however pushing for an emergency meeting of European ministers, recognising that half of Europe is wrestling with similar dilemmas. The next step is recognising that enforcement alone isn’t enough. Britain used to mock Donald Trump’s plan to build a wall, not just for its inhumanity but because it sounded so dumb and crude. Anyone can make it physically harder to cross a border but you can’t build a wall against hopes and dreams, or contain the universal desire for a better life behind a fence. But if Priti Patel could work out how to build a wall on the water she would doubtless do it tomorrow, and demands for more beach patrols and more enforcement are effectively the nearest equivalent. A strategy built solely on keeping people out does nothing to tackle either the push factors driving people to leave – conflict, political repression, and perhaps increasingly in future climate crisis-fuelled natural disasters – or the pull factors drawing them here, with many migrants insisting they don’t want to stay in France and claim asylum there because they have relatives in Britain or speak English. And that leaves a difficult conversation to be had with the electorate. British politicians are long past the point of having the courage to challenge assumptions on this most electorally toxic of issues. But if they were honest they would admit that the “crisis” we have supposedly experienced pales by comparison with what Greece or Italy, whose shores form Europe’s most southerly border, have seen in recent years. Although asylum claims are at their highest annual level since 2004, that’s likely to reflect a fall during the pandemic when travel was restricted and a surge after it. Far from being an irresistible magnet, in the year to this March, Britain received the fourth highest number of asylum claims compared with EU countries and only the 17th highest when measured by head of population. Yet much of Britain still behaves – and votes – as if it was overwhelmed with people who are in fact mostly going somewhere else. Five years ago, leave campaigners exploited these exaggerated fears to help secure a Brexit that, if anything, has made illegal movement harder to control, ending a longstanding right to return asylum seekers arriving from another EU country and poisoning relations between Britain and France just as goodwill was needed. The gall of Brexiters now in government is breathtaking, but saying so doesn’t help stop people drowning at sea. For that we need safe, legal routes out for asylum seekers, agreed in concert with other countries to ensure that accidents of geography don’t leave some struggling to absorb an unfair share. That solidarity is even more critical now that Russia, always alert for opportunities to destabilise and divide Europe, is suspected of weaponising tensions by funnelling people through Belarus into Poland and perhaps its neighbours beyond. Tackling such complex, intractable issues requires a political maturity currently lacking, and a willingness to recognise tragedy as the spur to change. Migrants are all too often painted as a threat to Britain, but events such as this should remind us that the real danger is to those crossing the Channel. In death we can see them for who they are; victims both of the regimes they are escaping and of traffickers exploiting their desperation, but sometimes also of kneejerk hostility in the countries that they long to reach. In the immediate haunting aftermath of tragedy, that hostility may sometimes be replaced, if only briefly, by pangs of conscience and by compassion. Blink now, and we will miss the moment. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistThe National Trust has banned trail hunting on its land, almost a year after temporarily suspending such activity amid concern from critics that the practice serves as a smokescreen for illegal foxhunting. In a landslide vote at its annual meeting in October, the trust – one of the UK’s largest landowners – voted overwhelmingly to ask the trustees to ban this form of hunting, which was devised after the Hunting Act banned the hunting of foxes with dogs. In trail hunting, a “trail layer” goes out ahead of the hunt, dragging a rag coated in an animal scent. Huntsmen cast the hounds to this scent, and follow it to the end of the trail. Critics argue that it is routinely used as a cover for old-fashioned illegal hunting. It comes after one of the biggest landowners in Wales, Natural Resources Wales (NRW), similarly banned the practice. The land the government-sponsored body owns accounts for about 7% of Wales’ countryside and forests. The National Trust’s decision was welcomed by League Against Cruel Sports, an animal rights charity. However, the organisation said it was concerned it did not go far enough and would not become permanent, and that without a full and explicit ban, foxhunting could still take place. Chris Luffingham, the charity’s director of campaigns, said: “Their members’ voices could not have been louder, sending a clear message to the board of trustees that enough is enough and trail hunting should be banned on trust land. “The board has recognised the strength of feeling in its membership and the public in general, who are more aware than ever that so-called trail hunting is used as an excuse – a smokescreen – for illegal hunting. However, the recent Hankinson verdict has shown that the hunting community cannot be trusted from the top down, and not having a definitive ban could lead to foxes being chased and killed by hunts.” Mark Hankinson, the former director of the Masters of Foxhounds Association, was found guilty of encouraging or assisting others to break the Hunting Act 2004, under the Serious Crimes Act 2007. He had been talking to more than 100 other huntsmen on a series of training webinars about how to use trail hunting as a smokescreen. The NRW said in a statement: “The outcome of the court case against a senior leader of the MFHA has resulted in a loss of confidence in the organisation’s ability to ensure its activities are carried out within the law and terms of its agreement.” The league is lobbying other major landowners such as Forestry England, United Utilities, the Church of England, Crown Estates, the Duchy of Cornwall, local authorities, the national parks authorities, and the Ministry of Defence to follow the National Trust and Natural Resources Wales in banning trail hunting.Russia’s State Duma has voted to deprive a Communist MP of his immunity from prosecution after police found the dismembered remains of an elk in the boot of his car. Valery Rashkin, who recently led protests against the Kremlin over alleged election fraud, could face criminal charges for illegal hunting and may also be stripped of his seat in parliament. Police say officers discovered the animal remains during a traffic stop in the Saratov region in October. Rashkin also faces punishment for refusing to take a breathalyser test, Russian prosecutors said. Rashkin has said the case against him is politically motivated and is meant to punish him for his criticism of the September elections. He initially said he dismembered the animal in order to put it in the boot of his car and report it to the police. In remarks to the broadcaster RTVI in October, he called the incident a “provocation”. This week Rashkin said he was ready to pay a fine or to “offset the material and environmental damage” by buying a female moose of the same age and releasing it into the wild. Russian MPs are granted immunity from prosecution but can be stripped of that privilege by a majority vote in the Duma. On Thursday lawmakers voted 341-55 to support the general prosecutor’s motion against Rashkin. Government officials have denied that Rashkin is being targeted because of his political views, although vocal opponents of the Kremlin have been demonstratively purged from the legislature before. “There can be no talk of any political agenda here,” Russia’s top prosecutor, Igor Krasnov, told the Duma. He said the evidence against Rashkin included a scene examination report, biological, DNA and ballistic testing, and witness testimony. The charges mentioned in the prosecutor’s motion carry a maximum five-year prison term.At least one pregnant woman and three children were among the 27 people, mostly Kurds from Iraq or Iran, who drowned trying to cross the Channel in an inflatable boat, French authorities have said. Two male survivors, an Iraqi and a Somali, were being treated for exhaustion and hypothermia in a Calais hospital. A criminal investigation has been opened by the public prosecutor in Lille, with four men suspected of “direct involvement” in the attempted crossing arrested on Wednesday and a fifth detained early on Thursday morning. The bodies were brought into the port of Calais by boat and helicopter through the evening, where volunteers with local migrant aid associations lit candles and held aloft placards reading “How many more?” after what the International Organization for Migration described as the biggest single loss of life in the Channel since it began keeping records in 2014. The public prosecutor’s office in Lille has confirmed that 17 men, seven women and three adolescents – two boys and a girl – died in the disaster. “Examinations are being carried out this morning,” a spokesperson said. It said the lives of the survivors were not in danger. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, told RTL radio that the fifth suspect had been driving a car with German number plates and had “bought inflatable boats in Germany”. He said 1,500 suspected people smugglers had been arrested in France since the beginning of the year. “The main responsibility for this situation lies with the smugglers,” Darmanin said, describing them as “mafia-like organisations in Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany and Britain”, adding: “France and Britain have to work together. We can no longer be the only countries to be fighting these smugglers.” Darmanin also renewed his criticism of Britain’s refugee policies. “France expels about 20,000 illicit migrants a year,” he said. “Britain manages 6,000 – about four times less than France, despite the fact that the UK gets about half as many illicit migrants. The UK does not handle illicit migration well.” French media said the inflatable boat, carrying at least 29 people, was believed to have set off from Loon-Plage near Dunkirk and that they had most likely been camping out in the dunes near Grande-Synthe, the location of several migrant camps. The largest, home to about 1,500 people, was dismantled last week. Winds were light and the sea was calm at the time, prompting unconfirmed reports in several media including La Voix du Nord newspaper that the boat was either hit by a container ship in one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes or had folded under the weight of its occupants, possibly after hitting the wake of a larger vessel. The first alarm was sounded at about 2pm by a French fishing boat that spotted bodies in the water off the coast of Calais, with French sea rescue services arriving on the scene soon after. “The boat was found mostly deflated but was still floating,” Bernard Barron, the head of the Calais lifeboat service, told reporters. The people were recovered from the water, where the temperature was estimated to be 17C, he said. The head of the Dunkirk lifeboat service, Alain Ledaguenel, said the disaster was predictable. “It had to happen, and it happened,” he said. “We know that the means available for sea rescue are inadequate.” French police said on Thursday morning they had come to the assistance of 20 people on Wednesday night. “Their boat was overloaded and rapidly began taking in water, forcing its occupants to return to the beach,” a tweet said. “Police officers immediately went to their assistance.” The French prime minister, Jean Castex, was holding a crisis meeting on Thursday with six cabinet colleagues including Darmanin, the justice minister, Éric Dupond-Moretti, the maritime affairs minister, Annick Girardin, the transport minister, Jean-Baptiste Djebbari ,and the foreign affairs minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian. The Elysée palace said in a statement on Thursday that Emmanuel Macron had “informed Boris Johnson in a telephone call” that he “expected full cooperation from Britain and [to] stop instrumentalising a dramatic situation for political ends”. The French president “insisted on the need to act with dignity, and respecting the spirit of effective cooperation concerning human lives”. The two countries’ interior ministers would be discussing the matter during the day, the statement said. Another body was found on the northern French coast on Thursday, according to La Voix du Nord, though it was not thought to be linked to Wednesday’s tragedy as it had spent more than 24 hours in the water.THE REVIEW IS IN Following the publication of the government’s fan-led review into football governance, The Fiver’s immediate and entirely predictable reaction was to wait for some industrious Big Boy News reporter to spare us the bother of reading its 162 pages by distilling the contents into a short list of easily digestible bite-sized bullet points. In total, the review published no fewer than 47 recommendations to safeguard the future of the game in England; among them calls for a stamp duty-style tax on every transfer fee to help support the football pyramid, a new independent regulator to oversee financial regulation and monitor owners, the introduction of a legally binding “golden share” for fans to help protect the heritage of their clubs, better treatment for women’s football and … 42 other things. The reaction of the punditocracy to the contents of the review has been largely positive, while the good folk at the Football Supporters’ Association say “it offers an unprecedented opportunity to overhaul the power structures of the domestic game – giving fans a voice at the heart of football”. Perhaps more importantly, the fact the review was overseen by Tracey Crouch serves as another ringing endorsement. While the MP for Chatham and Aylesford may be a Tory, she is far from the worst of them. Indeed, the fact there is no place for her among the gallery of rogues, liars, spivs, charlatans and self-serving hypocritical lickspittles that currently serve on Boris Johnson’s front bench serves only to bolster her credentials as a woman of integrity. If further proof that Crouch’s review is worth far more than the reams of paper it’s printed on was needed, it was provided on Thursday morning when Aston Villa’s Christian Purslow was the first of what one imagines will be a stampede of like-minded Premier League suits out of the blocks to sniffily criticise its contents and declare it risked “killing the golden goose” that has, in his wrong opinion, been so generous to financially straitened clubs over the years. Showing no sign of even passing familiarity with the document he was rubbishing, he harrumphed at length about there being no one catch-all quick-fix for the €uropean $uper £eague, the failure of Bury and the impact of Covid – the original issues which had prompted the review. “They, I would argue,” he began arguing, “are very, very different issues in the game and it feels unlikely that there’s one recommendation that would fit all three of those very different problems.” Which is why there are 47 of them, Christian. Do try to keep up. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Daniel Harris and Paul Doyle from 5.45pm GMT for hot Big Vase clockwatch updates. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I don’t really want the interview to be about me” – Luton Town assistant manager Mick Harford talks to Ben Fisher about being overwhelmed by support since his prostate cancer diagnosis. FIVER LETTERS “Watching that imbalanced mess of a team burdened by the ego of one of the best players ever getting torn apart by Manchester City, I realised why Mauricio Pochettino might want to go to Manchester Unit … oh” – Admir Pajic. “I’m sat on a rail replacement bus that doesn’t get me home until 2.30am. But I’m (the only one) still smiling, the latest leg on my journey to set a new Guinness world record for watching a game at all 92 grounds in the fastest time having taken me to Ewood Park. The club arranged a press pass for me, I’ve seen my biggest win of the season so far (4-0), I did an interview for BBC Radio Lancashire at half-time, I’ve had my best pie of the season (9/10 for the Clayton Park potato, onion and cheese), and I’ve just broken the £750 barrier for mental health charity Mind. Feeling very happy. Anyone who isn’t, you will do. I promise” – Desmond Hinks. “Re: yesterday’s Fiver. I have to point out that, much as your article and the situation at Oldham pulls at the old heartstrings, you finally printed an inaccuracy (semantically speaking). Luton and Notts County were both founder signatories of the Premier League. Without both signatures, football would never have begun in August 1992. Sure, they never kicked a ball of the newly-invented foot variety. But that’s because they were both selfless devotees of the wider interests of the game, allowing themselves to be relegated from the top flight of English non-football in May 1992. Luton made it to non-league in 2009, a whole 13 years earlier than Oldham could make it. And Notts County achieved it in 2019” – James. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Desmond Hinks. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Wigan forward Charlie Wyke is stable in hospital after collapsing during training earlier this week. Former Italy and Juventus striker Fabrizio Miccoli has had a sentence of three-and-a-half years in the clink upheld. Miccoli was found guilty in 2017 of approaching the son of a mafia boss to recover €12,000 from a nightclub owner on behalf of a former Palermo club physio. Manchester United are in advanced talks with Ralf Rangnick over becoming interim manager until next summer. After barely six months in charge at Sheffield United, Slavisa Jokanovic has been binned off in favour of Paul Heckingbottom, who has been given a Pardewesque contract until 2026. Emile Heskey is temporarily at the wheel of Leicester City Women after manager Jonathan Morgan was told to Do One. “This season has been disappointing, with [knack] contributing to a difficult start but we haven’t achieved the results we had hoped for,” sighed Morgan after eight WSL defeats out of eight. Mikel Arteta would quite like Arsène Wenger back at Arsenal in some capacity. “What I can say is from my side and I can talk, I think, on behalf of everybody, is that we would be delighted to have him much closer,” tooted Arteta. Perhaps it would be better for the game if Arsenal only played every two years? And hats off – at least in part – to Brentford, who are keeping their home kit for another year. “Fans have told us that they would be in favour of the savings,” cheered chief suit Jon Varney. “For those fans keen to purchase a new shirt each season, we can confirm we will have a new away and a new third kit for the 2022-23 season.” Ah. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Football Weekly Extra is right here. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … 30 November. Tickets are available now. STILL WANT MORE? Is “new manager bounce” really a thing? Ben McAleer has a delve. Barney Ronay swoons over the manner in which Riyad Mahrez and Bernardo Silva gave PSG a Big Cup schooling. Formiga ends a phenomenal international career for Brazil’s women later, having played in seven Olympics and seven World Cups. Suzanne Wrack pays tribute to ‘the goat, for real’. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! RECOMMENDED READINGAmid global concern for tennis player Peng Shuai, Tennis Australia posted a job advertisement demonstrating the importance of China to a sport currently at odds with it. The successful applicant for the role of “Social Content Producer, China Channels” will “help tell the story of the Australian Open to our growing audience in China” through January. The new employee will be busy, with Tennis Australia on Thursday confirming its calendar for January will include 17 tournaments in three states prior to the major in Melbourne. With the Australian Open billed as the grand slam of the Asia-Pacific, social media engagement has played a role in building the profile of the tournament in China. The event is partnered with Chinese premium liquor brand Guojiao 1573 and Ganten, which provides bottled water for tournaments held throughout the summer swing. Both are major sponsorships. The Guojiao 1573 partnership, in particular, is considered in a similar multimillion dollar-per-year realm to that of the Australian Open’s chief sponsor Kia. Hosting the 2021 Australian Open under conditions imposed to safeguard Victorians from Covid-19 proved incredibly expensive. This placed significant economic strain on Tennis Australia, which makes partnerships with companies like their Chinese sponsors critical from an economic perspective. The challenge for the various bodies in the tennis family, and for the broader sporting world, is weighing their financial partnerships with human rights concerns. What happens when a fellow tennis organisation such as the WTA Tour, which is currently dealing with a testing scenario regarding Peng in China, is in peril or under duress? While the current situation involves China, tennis and other sports have ties to other nations that also have dubious human rights reputations. It is not an isolated case. The WTA Tour, under the leadership of chairman and chief executive Steve Simon, has made clear the organisation’s stance on China during what has been an extremely challenging month for tennis. Simon has stressed the WTA Tour will walk away from the country, and its massive investment in the sport, unless it can be satisfied about the health and wellbeing of Peng. A social media post on 2 November by the former world No 1 doubles player has raised concerns for her safety that continues to reverberate around the world. She was not heard from for a fortnight after the post, which was swiftly deleted. While she has recently made several public appearances, they appeared choreographed and have not eased all concerns. “We’re definitely willing to pull our business and deal with all the complications that come with it,” Simon told CNN this month. It has been estimated that a move to break ties with China could cost the WTA Tour, which has a significant reliance on the nation, more than one billion dollars in revenue. What happens next in this particularly vexed situation is uncertain. It is one that may play out over years. Can the WTA Tour thrive should its ties to China be severed? Will the organisation be frozen out by China even if it is ultimately satisfied about the safety of Peng? Is it possible to even be satisfied in that regard? And what happens to the other tennis players from China currently on the tour, or aspiring to be? There are six Chinese women currently ranked inside the top 200. It is probable they harbour hopes of emulating the success of dual-grand slam singles champion Li Na or, dare it be said, winning a Wimbledon or Roland Garros doubles title as Peng did. Shortly before the concerning situation regarding Peng arose, Simon was on the record discussing his hopes for the WTA Tour’s return to China in 2022. The WTA Tour Finals, which were held in Mexico this year due to Covid-19, are contracted to Shenzhen until 2030. “Our support in the Asia-Pacific region, especially China, has seen a rich history of growth and talent,” Simon told the Tennis Majors website in October. In a French tennis magazine in September, WTA president Micky Lawler lamented the impact to the women’s tour caused by the loss of tournaments in China due to Covid-19. “Covid could not be anticipated. Please name me one person who would have said no to China?” Lawler said. “This was an opportunity for the whole of women’s sports, with unprecedented prize money records. We were proud when we announced it and still are.” There is optimism it will be possible to succeed in new markets, some of which were tested this year, though the dividends will almost certainly be far smaller, should the situation worsen. While the world is monitoring the situation closely, and issuing statements of support and concern for Peng, it appears business will continue with China for other organisations. The Winter Olympics in Beijing in February will proceed, though the prospect of a diplomatic boycott was raised in Australia on Thursday, as it has been in other countries. There is no suggestion the ATP Tour will not host major tournaments in October when sporting events are allowed to occur in China post the pandemic. And the grand slam of the Asia-Pacific, otherwise known as the Australian Open, will start what is shaping as another uncertain year for tennis.Four years ago in front of a capacity audience, Midnight Oil’s frontman quoted Dylan Thomas to prove to fans the group would continue to “rage, rage, rage against the dying of the light”. Now it appears Peter Garrett, Rob Hirst and company are preparing to let their live performances go gentle into that good night. On Friday Midnight Oil announced the group’s concert touring days will come to a close early next year. The Resist tour, playing across the country in major venues such as Melbourne’s Rod Laver Arena and Sydney’s Qudos Bank Arena, will be Midnight Oil’s last. “We all know time refuses to stand still for anyone but after many years together the band’s spirit is deep, the music and words are strong, and our ideas and actions as bold as we can make them,” Garrett said in a statement, released on Friday by Frontier Touring. “Having always tackled every tour like it’s the last – this time it actually will be.” Drummer Hirst paid tribute in the statement to the dozens of cherished faces he saw at each Oils concert. “But mostly, blinded by stage lights, I see the first two rows of a thousand gigs: Midnight Oil fans, pumping, jumping, singing louder than the band. But I don’t look back.” The band will release 12 new songs for the Resist final tour in March, including tracks recorded with longtime Kiwi bass player Bones Hillman, who died in the US from cancer late last year. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The tour’s promoter said Midnight Oil would use it final tour to call for governments to urgently take action to reduce carbon pollution. “This tour will embrace best practices for emission reductions and offsetting,” the statement said. “A portion of proceeds will be set aside for organisations seeking to elevate the existential threat posed by the climate crisis.” After 24 years together, Midnight Oil dissolved following Garrett’s decision to pursue a political career in 2002. When Labor led by Kevin Rudd won the 2007 election, Garrett became minister for the environment, heritage and the arts In 2009 Garrett performed with his fellow Oils for a handful of concerts to raise money for the Victorian bushfire relief. The group formally reformed in 2016, three years after Garrett resigned from the ministry and announced he would retire from politics at the next election. The following year Midnight Oil staged the Great Circle international tour, selling out 77 shows in 16 countries. Last August the band released the song Gadigal Land, its first new single in 18 years, with the proceeds going toward promotion of the Uluru Statement from the Heart. The Makarrata Project, released in October 2020, reached number 1 on the Australian charts within a week of the album’s release. Friday’s statement said each member of Midnight Oil would continue their own projects after next year’s tour. “They remain very open to recording new music together in future and supporting causes in which they believe, but this will be their last tour,” Frontier said.As winter forces many of us to ditch nights out with friends in favour of nights in on the sofa, Belcalis Alamanzar’s iconic words ring out across the digital ether: “A ho never gets cold!”. In a clip that went viral in 2014, the rapper better known as Cardi B parades up and down a hotel corridor, clad in a plunging, barely-there bralette and tight-fitting skirt. For women who wear little and care about it even less, Megan Thee Stallion has made a name for herself in the same vein. Together, Meg and Cardi would go on to birth a movement with their hit 2020 single, WAP, an ode to female sexuality and “wet ass pussy” which brought a slice of the club to the worlds’ living rooms at the peak of lockdown. In three minutes and seven seconds of poetic dirty talk, the pair walk us through the spiciest of bedroom sessions, except – contrary to patriarchal norms – they are firmly in the driver’s seat. From fellatio to make-up sex, Cardi and Megan leave their targets weak. With the video quickly becoming a talking point around the world, their sexual desire (and that of women in general) became the subject of fierce debate. While many praised their cheeky candour, others were unimpressed, with Fox News’s Candace Owens going as far as to call Cardi a “cancer cell” who was destroying culture. For the director and producer Poppy Begum, the idea to make a documentary about WAP fever was fuelled by those extreme and polarised reactions. “I wasn’t expecting the morality police to have their knickers in such a twist over the song,” says Begum. She began thinking about the double standard that exists between male and female rappers. “The moment a woman [makes a song like this], the scrutiny and speculation goes through the roof. It gets so boring after a while.” Meg and Cardi’s loud, empowering exclamations made an impact, but they’re not the first. Women – and female rappers in particular – have always talked about sex. Together, they are following in the footsteps of artists including Lil Kim, Trina, Missy Elliott and Khia (who was responsible for the iconic 00s anthem My Neck, My Back). And yet, such frank discussion still brings out a combination of wonder and disgust in many people. In Queens of Rap, Begum unpicks people’s opinions, and attempts to put herself in Cardi’s shoes by visiting her old stomping ground in the Bronx, likening the singer’s roots in a tight-knit Dominican community to her own upbringing amid the Bengali community of London’s Brick Lane. Swinging from club to club as a stripper, Almanzar was first known in the streets for her raucous laugh, bold flirtation and slightly misaligned front teeth, which she has since had corrected (see: Got a Bag and Fixed My Teeth). On the same streets, Begum felt that little had changed since Cardi was first coming up. Despite the online prominence of stars such as Doja Cat, she remarks, “In the offline world, the amount of people I came across that had old school, conservative views … [talking about Cardi and Megan] didn’t always go down well.” The circularity of the debate frustrated her, essentially boiling down to “the same classroom debates I had with my friends in school”. Begum interviews one particular woman on the street, who recoils at the thought of the WAP lyrics (“She’s a mother”, she says, referring to Cardi). Of course, Beyoncé, who joined Megan on the remix of her hit Savage, is also a mother. While the singer whispers coyly about joining the adult website OnlyFans on the track, she received little to no criticism from the media about being inappropriate. Not only is there a double standard between men and women, but between women themselves; Cardi is framed as “ratchet” – unappealing, unclassy – due to her rags to riches story, while Beyoncé is seen as more respectable, from “better stock”, even. Julianne Escobedo Shepherd, the former editor in chief of the women’s news and culture website Jezebel and one of the film’s contributors, says that the music industry hasn’t yet come to terms with women as active participants. Linking Cardi and Megan to early blues artists such as Ma Rainey and Bessie Smith, who made what she refers to as “f*cking and s*cking songs from the 1930s”, Shepherd is keen to emphasise that music about sex is nothing new. However, the industry continues to have a blind spot, and change has not historically come from within. “It took the democratising force of the internet to get us to a place where we could have more than one mainstream woman rapper at one time,” she adds. The no-nonsense attitude to sex – and potentially using one’s body for material gain – as described in WAP also overlaps with conversations on sex work. In the documentary, the presenter Zeze Millz explains that WAP is, to her mind, “soft porn”. To some, to be found attractive and to sell that image back to women as a captive audience, is to be complicit in your own fetishisation. But the journalist Jacqueline Springer makes the important point that for women who want to make it at any cost, it is better to benefit off your own fetishisation than to hand the power to someone else. Controlling their own image – to “reclaim and defame”, in the words of Shepherd – may well be an attempt to make the most of this catch-22 situation. In some ways, though, the artists remain powerless. For Shepherd, the liberation of making this kind of music may be uncapped, culturally and artistically. The capitalistic aspect of selling music, however, means that “until the industry is dismantled from its very long history of exploiting Black artists”, absolute empowerment isn’t possible. Queens of Rap paints a colourful history of female sexuality in music, though there is much more still to discuss (beauty standards, for example, and colourism in relation to sexuality could be a whole separate documentary – just look at the incessant trolling Lizzo received after collaborating with Cardi). It highlights that WAP was more than a trend, however, and that a new wave of female rappers will take up the mantle before long. And, as debates and discussions rumble on, there might be room for a follow-up yet. Queens of Rap is on Channel 4 at 10pm tonight.Laws criminalising the use of secretly recorded vision of animal cruelty and abuse are posing “too great a burden on speech”, animal rights activists have told the high court. The Farm Transparency Project, an Australian animal advocacy group, launched a case earlier this year arguing New South Wales laws restricting the use of covert footage were an unfair burden on freedom of political communication. The state’s Surveillance Devices Act criminalises the use of footage or audio that was obtained using a listening device or hidden camera, but, unlike other states, gives no public-interest exemption. The laws have been used to pursue activists on criminal charges and have prevented media outlets from using footage depicting cruelty or abuse in abattoirs and knackeries across the state. Guardian Australia was recently prevented from showing secretly recorded footage of ex-racehorses being sent for slaughter at NSW pet food factories, a clear breach of industry rules. In its written submissions to the high court, the Farm Transparency Project said the case was not about how activists were perceived by the general public. “It is about the law that is challenged,” it said. “Whether the plaintiffs are viewed as admirable activists, or vulgar vigilantes, or something in between, is irrelevant. If anything, the case is about the publishers whose freedom to publish is curtailed.” The submissions point to similar laws in Victoria, the Northern Territory, South Australia and Western Australia, which contain carve-outs allowing the use of such footage that accommodates the implied right to freedom of political communication. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “That is essentially because the blanket prohibition is too great a burden on speech, having regard to the legitimate social interests in the publication of surveillance device material, especially to ‘blow the whistle’,” the transparency project argues. “It is not to be overlooked that vigilantism cannot be condoned. But this is to highlight the importance of careful balancing – in each case – of where the public interest lies, which in turn, highlights the importance of a ‘public interest’ exemption.” The submissions point to the greyhound live baiting scandal as an example of a public interest served by the publication of such footage. That video helped spark a public inquiry and a finding that the NSW industry had lost its social licence, prompting a proposed ban that was not implemented after a backlash. The Farm Transparency Project executive director, Chris Delforce, has said previously the case has broader implications for so-called “ag-gag” laws across the country. Delforce said challenging the validity of the law would help prevent other jurisdictions from enacting similar blanket bans. “We’ve had enough – these industries need more transparency, not less,” he said. “The animals suffering in our nation’s farms, slaughterhouses and knackeries deserve to have their stories told, and the Australian public deserves the opportunity to hear them.” Not all animal rights groups support the use of hidden cameras. The RSPCA is opposed to using unlawful means to fight for animal welfare. The high court is expected to receive submissions from the NSW government this week, and Farm Transparency Project will be given a chance to reply next month.Disabled Australians are being left behind in three major states after governments failed to make minimum accessibility standards mandatory for new houses, disability advocates say. New South Wales, Western Australia and South Australia say they will opt out of clauses in the forthcoming revised National Construction Code (NCC) that would require all new buildings to have basic accessibility features such as at least one step-free entrance, a toilet on the entry level, and reinforced walls in the bathroom. These features and others, such as a walk-in shower recess and wider door frames and corridors to facilitate ease of movement, were added to the NCC earlier this year after a push from advocates highlighting the difficulties disabled people have in finding homes that meet their basic needs. The clauses mandate all new homes adhere to “silver” level accessibility standards as described by Liveable Housing Australia, which advocates say make houses more liveable for people with and without disabilities. The NCC sets safety, accessibility and sustainability standards for buildings in Australia, but each state and territory government can vary, override, delete or add to the code within its own legislation. The other states and territories around Australia have agreed to implement these new standards as part of their building legislation, but NSW, WA and SA have elected to opt out. “This is a whole of population issue, not a disability issue,” said Serena Ovens, chief executive of the Physical Disability Council of NSW. “Parents with prams, those with injuries and older people – more than 50% of the population will benefit from liveable design inclusion in new home builds.” A spokesperson for Kevin Anderson, the NSW minister for innovation and better regulation, said the state government did not support the inclusion of minimum accessibility standards in the NCC as “the changes would have negative impacts on housing affordability and the construction sector and will also come at a significant cost to the community”. The WA government has also said it will opt out, with a spokesperson for commerce minister Amber-Jade Sanderson telling Guardian Australia that this decision was due to “the significant pressures already being experienced by the building sector due to labour and supply shortages and the impacts of Covid-19”. In SA, a decision to opt out of the code had been overseen by the former deputy premier, Vickie Chapman, who stepped down as planning minister this week. A spokesperson for SA minister Josh Teague, who picked up the portfolio this week, said in a statement: “The previous Minister felt that while the provisions do provide some additional accessibility benefits, the Silver standard does not go far enough in truly assisting those who require accessible homes, and places an unjustified burden on the construction industry to mandate them across all future builds. “The Government is now considering the implications these changes will have on the South Australian building landscape, and how they could be applied in a meaningful manner.” But the additional cost burden was already taken into account in drafting the NCC. When the majority of state and territory building ministers agreed to include silver-level accessibility standards in the code in April, they acknowledged the findings of a regulatory impact assessment. This said such features would cost more, but “a regulatory solution will result in significant and lasting benefit to Australians who need access to homes with accessible features”. “People with disabilities should have choice in terms of where they live,” said Ovens. “We see cases in which people have spent decades moving from house to house without being able to find anything appropriate to their needs – where they can’t even do things like regularly wash themselves because the bathrooms aren’t accessible.” Renters hurt most Ovens said the cost to retrofit accessible features to a home is vastly more expensive than working them in at the outset. She said accessibility is a particular issue for people who rent, because they’ don’t have control over the building and can’t renovate it. “And we are increasingly seeing people who are renting their whole lives, due to ever-increasing housing affordability issues.” Ovens said that the decision plays to stereotypes about disabled people’s economic and social situations, and doesn’t take into account people moving through the community, such as when they work in or visit dwellings that are not their own home, or when they move house. “90% of [our members] don’t qualify for social housing but they still need housing that’s fit for purpose,” said Ovens. “All people with physical disability at one point or another have had to manage in a home that is patently unsuitable, even potentially dangerous, for them to be in.” Alistair Webster from the Building Better Homes campaign said the decision by state governments to opt out of the accessibility elements of the NCC was “shameful” and called on them to reverse their decision. “The inclusion of accessibility standards in the National Construction Code has the potential to be transformational for millions of Australians,” Webster said. “This decision means people with disability, seniors and people recovering from injury and illness in those states will continue to face exclusion every day. Why should people in NSW, Western Australia and South Australia have fewer rights than those in the other jurisdictions?” The Australian Building Codes Board has given states and territory governments until 17 December to confirm whether they are opting out of this part of the code before it comes into force next year.As Scott Morrison comes to the end of a ragged parliamentary week, the organisation bankrolling independents challenging Liberal incumbents in their urban heartland has amassed an election war chest of more than $4m, and bolstered its advisory body. The former leader of the Australian Democrats, Meg Lees, has joined the advisory council of Climate 200, as has the former Liberal party leader John Hewson, and the Labor veteran Barry Jones. Moderate metropolitan Liberals facing challenges from independents supported by Climate 200 have stepped up their visibility during the major policy debates of the last few months – climate change, religious discrimination, and the long-delayed federal integrity commission. Morrison has faced open rebellions during the penultimate parliamentary sitting week from MPs opposed to mandatory vaccinations, and from the moderate Liberal Bridget Archer, who crossed the floor on Thursday to support an attempt by the independent Helen Haines to bring on debate about a federal anti-corruption body. Liberal moderates including Andrew Bragg, Dave Sharma and Trent Zimmerman have been vocal during the internal debate about the government’s religious discrimination package, arguing protections for gay teachers and students should be considered at the same time, not 12 months after the religious discrimination legislation takes effect. The former ABC journalist and foreign correspondent Zoe Daniel announced on Thursday she will run as an independent in the upcoming federal election in the Melbourne seat of Goldstein, which is currently held by the Liberal MP Tim Wilson. Lees said she had joined Climate 200’s advisory council because “if ever there was a need to keep the bastards honest now is the time”. “I have no doubt the founder of the Australian Democrats, Don Chipp, who made the phrase his catchcry, would be horrified at the state of Australian politics today and so am I,” the former Democrats leader said. “I was a senator for South Australia from 1990 to 2005. I worked consistently, and made legislative change whenever possible, in support of action on climate change. “Since then I have largely stayed away from public political activity but now I feel we have reached a critical tipping point, and neither the Coalition or Labor are making decisions, advocating policies, that are in Australia’s best interests or those of the world beyond our shores.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Guardian Australia revealed last week Hewson had teamed up with Jones to endorse a social media-focused advocacy campaign targeting Scott Morrison’s record on integrity matters and climate action in the lead-up to the federal election. The voluntary not-for-profit organisation the Truth and Integrity project has some crossover with Climate 200 and with the “voices” community groups modelled on the successful 2013 campaign of independent Cathy McGowan. Hewson and Jones have also joined the advisory council of Climate 200. Climate 200 was established by the climate activist Simon Holmes à Court. The organisation is a company not a charity. It does not select political candidates, but it is a fundraising vehicle to bankroll campaigns by independents. Holmes à Court is the convener, Damien Hodgkinson – who worked with Kerryn Phelps during her campaign to win the Sydney seat of Wentworth – is a director of the company and Byron Fay is the group’s executive director. With the upswing in pre-election activity, Bragg the New South Wales Liberal senator has already written to the Australian Electoral Commission asking for a probe of the “voices” movements that are organising independent campaigns. MPs on both sides of politics think it is possible the coming federal election could be close enough to deliver a hung parliament. If that comes to pass, crossbenchers in the House of Representatives will be kingmakers, determining the next government of Australia and influencing its policy agenda. Holmes à Court said the events of this past week demonstrated the utility of the crossbench. “It is especially apt that former leader of the Australian Democrats Meg Lees has accepted Climate 200’s invitation to join our advisory council. “She is the second former party leader to sit on the board, joining John Hewson as well as former Hawke government minister Barry Jones and former independent MPs Julia Banks and Kerryn Phelps,” he said. “All have decided that if we are to restore integrity, accountability and decency to politics a crossbench of community independents is the way to do it.” But Zimmerman, one of the Liberals facing a challenge, told the ABC on Thursday the level of organisation amassing behind the challengers suggested this was not a group of independents. “I do wonder at what point these independents stop calling themselves independents when it’s actually such a coordinated network?” He also queried the value of independents targeting progressive Liberals. “It’s quite bizarre that’s the approach they would take because I hold the strong view, always have before I was in parliament, the Liberal party, the government is better served by having progressive voices like my own or like Tim Wilson in it.” Zimmerman said he had never taken his own re-election for granted “and there’s always been stiff competition in North Sydney”. “I’ve had two election battles against very high-profile independents in my first election and in my second from memory,” the moderate Liberal said.A Brisbane construction company had $8 in assets and had not commenced trading, when it was awarded a government contract – ultimately worth $1.6bn – to run Australia’s offshore processing on Nauru. The contract was awarded after the government ordered a “financial strength assessment” that was actually done on a different company. Canstruct International Pty Ltd had eight $1 shares in assets in 2017, company filings show, when the department of home affairs asked accountants KPMG to assess it for its ability to “provide garrison and welfare services” for more than 1000 refugees and asylum seekers on Nauru. Since then the contract – originally worth $385m – has been amended seven times without competitive tender. The contract now totals $1.6bn. With just over 100 asylum seekers and refugees still held on the island after eight years, it now costs more than $4.3m each year – more than $350,000 a month – for each person held. KPMG reported its pre-contract financial strength assessment was conducted on Canstruct International Pty Ltd: but the government, after twice having to correct its evidence to the Senate, has since confirmed the assessment was actually undertaken on another company, Canstruct Pty Ltd. Both companies are associated with Queensland’s Murphy family, however the minister for home affairs has confirmed its contract provided no recourse to Canstruct Pty Ltd should Canstruct International fail to meet its obligations under the contract. In 2016, the previous manager of the Nauru offshore processing facility, Broadspectrum (formerly Transfield), was taken over by Spanish company, Ferrovial, which announced it did not want to continue working on the island beyond its contract expiring in October 2017. Canstruct Pty Ltd had previously been involved in building the detention centre on Nauru and was invited to provide the department of home affairs with a quote to take over the running of the offshore operation. In August 2017, at the request of the federal department, accounting firm KPMG undertook a financial strength assessment of Canstruct International Pty Ltd. While the document produced by KPMG states it is an assessment of Canstruct International Pty Ltd – rating it a “moderate-high financial risk” to take on the contract – the department of home affairs has confirmed the financial documents KPMG assessed were those of Canstruct Pty Ltd. Canstruct International Pty Ltd had not commenced trading at that time. “The financial strength assessment of Canstruct was undertaken for Canstruct Pty Ltd for the years ending 31 December 2014, 2015 and 2016 and not across all Canstruct company holdings, or Canstruct International,” the minister for home affairs, Karen Andrews, said last month in answers to Senate questions on notice. “The department would not have recourse against entities other than Canstruct International,” Andrews said when asked what the government could do if Canstruct International defaulted on its contract. “A contingency plan was not developed. However, if the department had found Canstruct unsuitable at any point during the procurement process, it would have reviewed its options.” Shadow home affairs minister Kristina Keneally said the Morrison government and the department of home affairs had questions to answer over its handling of the Canstruct contract. “No matter how you look at it, the government handed a $1.6bn contract without a competitive tender to a shelf company – after the department of home affairs paid KPMG to conduct due diligence on the wrong company. “It looks like this company got the deal of the century from the Liberal government: its owners risked $8 of their own money and, in return, they have now received over $1bn of taxpayers’ money.” A spokesperson for home affairs told Guardian Australia: “the department does not have any concerns regarding the financial capacity of Canstruct International Pty Ltd. The department continues to be satisfied with Canstruct’s performance and its ability to deliver key services in a dynamic and complex operating environment”. The spokesperson said the department had cooperated fully with an Australian National Audit Office assessment which found the procurement and management of garrison and welfare services on Nauru was “largely appropriate”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning KPMG and the Canstruct group both declined to answer detailed questions about the contract’s provisions, why an unrelated company was assessed, or why KPMG’s report stated it was an assessment of Canstruct International Pty Ltd. Both cited contractual restrictions. “We are unable to comment on contractual matters with the Australian government,” a spokesperson for Canstruct said. “The Canstruct Group has been operating successfully in Nauru since 2012 and continues to provide a high quality of service under the contract.” Canstruct’s contract on Nauru has attracted public attention, and forensic questioning in the Senate. Canstruct was first hired to help construct the Nauru detention centre under the Gillard Labor government. Under the Turnbull Coalition government it won its initial contract to run offshore operations on the island. The Canstruct group, or entities associated with it, have made 11 donations to the Liberal National party in Queensland. No refugees and asylum seekers have been sent to Nauru since 2014. It remains Australia’s only offshore processing island, after the centre on Papua New Guinea’s Manus Island was ruled illegal by that country’s supreme court. In September, the Australian government signed an agreement with the government of Nauru for an “enduring” offshore processing regime on the island.Reading Another Day in the Colony led me back to Jackie Huggins’ Sister Girl. Not just Jackie: I went back to Aileen Moreton-Robinson. I went back to Audre Lorde. I went back to bell hooks’ Talking Back and Feminist Theory. That’s the beauty of Chelsea Watego’s debut: it puts us in dialogue with work and women we’ve known and loved for years. Or, if you’re unfamiliar with them – to paraphrase the great scholar Alanis Morissette – women you ought to know. Watego’s background is in health. Her work is informed by bringing Black people back into the conversations where they have often been ignored – Black women in particular. Another Day in the Colony combines memoir, philosophy and analysis to tell us, quite simply: “Fuck hope”. This invocation is a critique of hope as complacency, the dream deferred. What Watego seeks instead of hope is “the emancipatory possibility of not giving a fuck”. “Some people may think that calls to retire hope for nihilism are irresponsible,” she writes. “But what is irresponsible is to require us to maintain the status quo of keeping Black bodies connected to life support machines they’ve been deemed never capable of getting off.” White critics may dance around the fact that they know this book is not written for white people. But why bother? There is power in having non-white people as the assumed audience. There is power in talking to mob. For First Nations, this discursive confidence is ordinarily considered impossible; as though the marginalised don’t have the luxury of making assumptions. But if First Nations are sovereign – if, as Dr Lilla Watson tells Watego in this book, “we haven’t moved” and therefore “the violence we encounter for having held our ground is not of our making” – then shouldn’t some assumptions be possible? And shouldn’t one of those assumptions be that power and joy are possible now? Our existence – and, by extension, the existence of joy – are not marginal. Marginal to whom? Marginal to what? The penultimate chapter, titled “Fuck Hope”, meditates on this question. It is a no-fucks-given laugh. As a critic my only response was to underline. I have nothing to add; it’s all true. “Fuck hope,” Watego says: why not? Hope, she writes, is something we can hold on to temporarily, a breath taken before diving: “It does not give oxygen to your lungs, it just stops the water from entering.” This murder is not a metaphor. Divesting of hope does not mean giving up, Watego adds. It means accommodating the idea that, if joy and sovereignty do not exist right now, then they never did. But they did, and they still do. The force of this idea lies in how it gets beneath the skin. It speaks to us emotionally; we recognise its veracity in our bodies. It is an idea Watego, quoting Paul Beatty, describes as: “Unmitigated Blackness”. “The Tarneen Onus-Williams ‘burn it down’ kind of Blackness.” Beatty calls it a “nihilism that makes life worth living”. However, as Watego goes on to say: “While there is something freeing about no longer giving a fuck, I don’t think I necessarily found the freedom in it that was promised, because the strength of not giving a fuck typically feels most possible once there’s nothing left to lose.” Still, it is “the closest thing to an embodied sovereignty that I have heard articulated”. The guiding idea behind white supremacy is that whiteness is neutral. That it has humanity, a humanity in which everyone else is lacking. Those not imbued with this humanity, this “whiteness”, are seen as requiring rectification – or, as Watego puts it, paternal benevolence. The money allocated to First Nations “portfolios” is premised on colonial control, the fantasy that First Nations are, before anything else, a problem to be solved. It is a concept, Watego writes, “informed by the same racialised ideologies that enable them to forget that where they came from is not the land in which we became human”. Two journeys, each separated from the other: a people who remain and a people who forgot – and who go on forgetting – their history in order to stake out a new one. Yet this history is never truly new. It is cultural amnesia; the white supremacist longing for a homeland that can never admit to all the homes it has left behind. The only home it knows how to inhabit are those belonging to others. Watson, whom Watego mentions as one of her mentors in writing this book, might agree. Watego writes of Watson’s appeal that we “imagine a future as long as the past that is behind us”. “[T]he act of living demands of us a refusal, a refusal to accept their account of things and a refusal to let them rob us anymore of our joy, our life and our land”. “She advised me,” Watego adds later, “that we were never to see justice, in that we will never have returned to us what they have taken. She then questioned me as to why I needed to win. Why was my being in the world predicated upon wresting something from the coloniser protagonist, knowing that it wouldn’t restore us whole? She reminded me that our being on our terms is winning, of the everyday kind.” By the time I came to the end of this chapter – with only a few pages of the book left – I was shaking my head with appreciation. Reading Watego, I was reminded of how the Mohawk political scientist Taiaiake Alfred and the Anishinaabe feminist Leanne Betasamosake Simpson take a sceptical stance toward the idea of liberal evolution, or what Watego calls “the ’67 Referendum was a sign of progress” kind of Blackness. They seek not inclusion in settler-colonial society, but flourishing; a self-determination based on loving and resisting “as we have always done”. This is flourishing on our terms. No sanctions. No permissions. No slaves. No masters. • Another Day in the Colony by Chelsea Watego is out now through UQPFame. You wouldn’t wish it on your worst enemy, particularly not if your enemy was very young. Fame of the extreme kind – when you are a household name and your image is worshipped on bedroom walls and all manner of fantasies are projected on you – can be experienced as a form of trauma. A case in point is Daniel Johns, the former frontman of Silverchair. Johns was 15 when he became globally famous, and much of the hit new Spotify podcast Who is Daniel Johns is about the trauma resulting from such intense and early fame. In the podcast Johns details not being able to leave his house because of fans camped out in his street; people ringing his manager and threatening to kill themselves unless they talked to him; girls who said they were pregnant with his child, and middle aged women who had maternal fantasies about the teen singer. His manager, John Watson, told the podcast: “A number of the more obsessive crazies who would come after Daniel were people his mother’s age, who sadly had terminations around the time Daniel had been born, and they became obsessed with this idea that Daniel was the son they had never had. There were many of these people.” One woman stole his mother’s ID and would use it to get backstage. She followed the band around Europe. Johns ended up needing extra security. “Can you imagine being 17 and every time you need to do a piss, he (security) would follow me and stand right beside me? It made me feel anxious, like really anxious,” Johns said. * Anxiety is a common thread that runs through the five episodes of the podcast. But I wonder how it would be possible to be famous, and not anxious? Part of the problem for the famous person is that when in public, they can’t just be. Something is always being demanded of them (a selfie, a conversation, a connection) and they are monitored in unnatural ways. Every time a non-famous person meets a famous person, it becomes a story. If you ran into Johns at a bus stop, any interaction with him would be transformed into an encounter and your friends would ask, “What was he really like?” A diagnosis or assessment of character is then made from the thinnest slice of reality, and the encounter with the famous person then becomes an anecdote to be repeated and repeated. This robs the famous person of just being a person, of being rude or tired, or a bit off. This is actually the most damaging kind of theft because it is the loss of the ability to be unselfconscious, which is just another way of saying the ability to be free. Instead the famous person is watched and photographed and reported on to the extent that it would put the most gnarly surveillance state to shame. But we call it fame and hold it out as something to aspire to. The self-consciousness that results from this level of fame can become a sort of prison. That is why you often see the famous person create and develop shields in the form of a posse of friends and associates that always accompanies them in public. Or the famous person becomes a recluse. Or they use drugs and alcohol as a shield to dissociate from the crippling and unnatural self-consciousness of always being watched and wanted. The Spotify podcast is titled Who is Daniel Johns, but it’s a question that could be asked of any famous person. Who is Britney? Who was Amy? Who was Kurt? The famous person has a secret self, probably in order to actually survive, and what we see is projection, PR, image and our own desires reflected back at us. But fame can create a hunger in the media and for fans to possess and know the real who of that person – the secret sauce, the authentic essence, the unguarded moment (the “who” is so essential to the fame enterprise that Australia’s leading celebrity magazine is simply called Who). What fame is good for, is it allows the famous person to get into the place where art is made – and for the true artist that’s the only place they really want to be. The fame gives them the money, or the reputation or the connections to create something that’s going to light them up. Enough money and enough runs on the board, and they even get a free pass to fail a bit – do a record no one buys, or write a bad book or do strange collaborations with people that have always fascinated them. The fame is like something real and tangible in an account that they can draw down on. If they suffer enough and are successful enough, they too can be free. Of course this is like someone enduring 30 years of misery working a desk job at an insurance firm so they can spend their retirement in a fishing boat off the gulf of Mexico, when in actual fact that choice was always available to them. You just do it. What was stopping them at 25 doing what they are now doing at 65? Just go to Mexico and drop a line in the water. People have been doing it for thousands of years without a million dollars in the bank. And this is the horrible irony – get famous enough and they just might be able to buy back the freedom that they had before they were famous. The joy at the end of the Daniel Johns podcast is that you can see he’s made his break for the border – that freedom is there for him in a way it wasn’t before. “I have been learning that the longer I’m away from people’s opinions the stronger I become,” Johns told The Project when promoting the podcast. “Art is not a way to receive validation. I believe it’s a way to feel connected to whatever this is and not a way to make people feel something for you. I’m not sure what I’m doing. I am sure how I want to do it though.”“It was part of the Australian dream to have the huge backyard and the big brick barbecue,” says Ross Dobson, author of Firepit Barbecue. In the 1970s, timber was the fuel of choice, although back then “they didn’t wait for the coals to develop”, he says. We’ve since seen the advent of the gas barbecue, and now a growing swing back to what some call “live fire”. Jay Beaumont is behind Meatstock, a barbecue festival that pulled in as many as 20,000 punters in Sydney and 15,000 in Melbourne in pre-pandemic years. Before establishing the event in 2015 he was a founder of the Australasian Barbecue Alliance, billed as the “the home of low’n’slow” down under, referencing the cooking style prevalent in US barbecue culture. Several years ago, Beaumont says, a push back to wood and charcoal began, driven by the flavour of wood, which isn’t imparted by gas barbecues unless you’re using a small smoker box and wood chips. It was, he says, “the rebirth of barbecue in Australia”. The US and, in particular, its south – where you could argue that barbecue comes after only politics and religion – is the influence, through media both traditional and social, as well as travel and a wave of barbecue restaurant openings across Australia. Plus streamers including Netflix have given global barbecue culture the Chef’s Table treatment. As a result, the barbecue market is booming, with choice way beyond the brick-built ’cue of old, or the Weber kettle that for many is synonymous with the dark art of getting your snags just right. It’s rich pickings for the gadget- and brand-obsessed. Caroline Harkin has been distributing barbecues and smokers for 15 years. She’s seen a “real culture” grow in Australia. Harkin could talk for days on the likes of the Big Green Egg, a versatile ceramic grill, which does indeed look like a giant egg – albeit one that utilises Cordierite, a silicate ceramic developed for space shuttle re-entry. Versatility and design aesthetic seem to be a selling point with the Egg, as well as competitors like the Kamado Joe, another ceramic offering. They’re beyond a grill, also being used for smoking, and even baking. Harkin likens the Big Green Egg to a tandoor. Both products come with a hefty price tag, starting above $1,000, which goes up to $4,000 for larger models. Whether that cost is worth it will depend on your frequency of use, and how you barbecue. For home cooks pushing their backyard or balcony skills with longer low and slow cooks, or even breads, these ceramic barbecues are perhaps a gold standard option for temperature control and ease of use. But this kind of outlay is far from essential. Leon Tartaglia and Cory Frayling started barbecuing seriously three years ago, dusting off a Weber kettle that Tartaglia’s dad had long since abandoned. “It’s like joining a cult,” laughs Tartaglia of the ’cue community. Frayling says: “We just started cooking burgers on it, then taking a few photos, sharing them on our Instagram page.” Using YouTube as an endless source of reference, they were soon “taking risks and doing showstopper cooks that a lot of people in the backyard will be scared to do early on”. Documenting prime rib roasts and three-hour cooks under their @cheatmeats Instagram account, they now have 292,000 followers and, after just nine months on TikTok, they’ve racked up an audience of 400,000. Tartaglia and Frayling’s origin story mirrors many, who tell me they started on borrowed or even verge-salvaged barbecues. A basic kettle with a dome-shaped lid can be picked up new for $100. It’s perhaps the training wheels of the barbecue world, but no less effective with a bit of practice. While many of us may have a spiked analogue, ovenproof thermometer for roasts, or just go by look and feel, there’s a plethora of Bluetooth probes that allow you to monitor a cook from your smartphone. This upgrade, rather than a fancy cooker, is Tartaglia’s pick for a gadget worth spending money on. “Look, it does take a lot of the guesswork out of the equation,” he says. “You can buy a wagyu brisket for $450, so you’re not going to just cook it and have a guess on when it’s going to be ready. You are going to use the right instruments and tools.” Dobson, who has several barbecue books under his belt, has come back around to the firepit. It’s not far from the brick barbecues of his youth but he cautions against going big. Our instinct may be that a big fire is dramatic and desirable, but Dobson is mindful of burning more wood than needed, saying: “I bought a tiny one, the size of a wok and that’s what I just ended up using and testing on, because it was just really doable.” As with the kettle, a basic firepit or brazier starts at about $100 from the likes of Bunnings and, like all things barbecue, YouTube has countless tutorials on how to build your own. For Dobson the appeal of the switch from gas is the fundamentals of cooking over coals. Patience is key, so for those who want to fire up and cook quickly gas is still the go-to. “There’s an awful lot of smoke in the beginning,” he warns of using wood. If you don’t wait for the water and oxygen to burn out, “which creates the smoke, you’re going to ruin the food”. “It gets that diesel-like taste. Give it a couple of hours and then you get those glowing hot embers, which is what you’re looking for.”Every year on the 1st of December, Gabrielle Derrick unveils a Christmas window at her regional Victorian cafe. This year, though, she felt an unshakeable urge to decorate early. “Everyone needed a little extra Christmas cheer this year,” she said. “We have lots of people asking about it all year round, so we thought we’d bring the joy early.” In mid-November, the Old Mates cafe in Romsey, in the Macedon ranges, released its special Grinch-themed Christmas window, handmade by the team and complete with a bauble adorned, lopsided tree, Santa’s fireplace and Max the dog on a big red chair. “The community loves it,” Derrick said. “We’ve had lots of customers coming in happy after stopping to have a look.” The little town isn’t the only one rushing to display their Christmas decorations ahead of schedule. Once sacrilegious, families across Australia are dragging out the tree and lights weeks before the turn of summer, either overcome with festive spirit or willing a “crappy” year to be over. Ambiance Christmas Shop Melbourne owner Mel Martino usually puts her tree up in December. This year, it has already been on display for weeks. Martino’s store, on the edge of Queen Victoria Market, hasn’t had international or interstate tourists to bolster sales since retail reopened in Victoria. But she said it had been a “much busier” November than normal. “As soon as we reopened we were busy,” she said. “We’ve been locked up so long people are now raring to go. A lot of customers have said they’re putting trees up early because they’re afraid if we go into lockdown again they won’t be able to buy what they want. “I also think people are just ready to have a lovely happy Christmas. We’re all over lockdowns and Covid … it’s almost as if it’s the first Christmas.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Regional Victorian retiree Jan Milne joined a string of families in her neighbourhood hanging up decorations early this month. She described the sentiment of many in the state as just “wanting 2021 to be over”. “It’s been such a crappy year … we, and others locally just need some joy and relief from it all,” she said. “I do want this year gone. Australia as I knew it has changed, and we need to re-find ourselves. I just smile when I see Christmas lights.” Melbourne mother of three Kelly Jarvis said her kids had been smiling since she put up the tree in early November. They were “so excited” she bought an additional two trees for their bedrooms. “Kids haven’t had much fun this year, so we wanted to maximise the excitement of Christmas,” she said. Moorooduc Christmas Tree Farm manager Jack Walker said this year’s first weekend on 20 November saw sales 20% higher than the same time last year. “We could tell from calls people were planning to come early,” he said. “I think people more than anything are hoping to have a really good Christmas and are finding ways to make it special.” Kmart Chadstone manager Tabitha Johnson said there had been higher demand than usual for Christmas items, particularly decorations like baubles and hanging lights. But delays in international deliveries had also limited the amount of stock on display. “We had a huge shortage coming out of lockdown in October, everyone was interested and knew to get their items early,” she said. “But we’ve also been experiencing delays and haven’t had as many drops as usual … particularly when everyone’s looking forward to it.” It’s not just locked-down states feeling the cheer. Brisbane woman Susan Cullinan normally waits until the start of December to haul out her Christmas boxes, and “gets anxiety” if she sees decorations come out too early. But for the first time in her “considerably long life,” she was drawn to them in November. “Last Christmas was a non-event as I was working on the Red Cross Covid response in Europe, and ended up working all day,” she explains. “With only an early morning call to my family at home to watch them eat seafood and drink champagne. “Being locked down in Covid central away from my loved ones in dark, cold Hungary, I feel like I’m emerging out of the Covid woods now … this year I’m more than ready for Christmas.” Western Australian Tarnya Widdicombe said her Perth suburb had been filling up with Christmas lights for weeks. “I think Christmas all fell a little short last year, and [it was] stressful,” she said. “People want to celebrate more this year. There’s a bit of hope we’re getting back to normal – opening dates are on the horizon, and vaccination rates are high.” For others, this Christmas is about making up for lost time. Wyndham Vale man Brett Lockwood’s house is usually a must-see on any lights tour. Last year, though, Victoria’s Covid restrictions forced him to cancel his annual display – which features, among other things, a life-scale Thomas tank engine truck adorned with Christmas lights. “I was upset every time someone drove past the house,” he said. “This year I just can’t wait to see all the smiling faces … from kids and big kids alike.”Proposals to make pupils in England learn a set of up to 1,700 frequently used words as part of government reforms to French, German and Spanish GCSEs have been rejected by headteachers and exam boards, who warn they will not “inject new life” into the study of modern languages. Nine organisations with an interest in the teaching of languages in secondary schools have written to the government, demanding a rethink of plans to reform the teaching and assessment of modern foreign languages at GCSE level. Candidate numbers have plummeted in recent years and the government has been searching for ways to increase participation in and enthusiasm for language learning. Experts say the latest proposals, though well-intentioned, will not lead to increased uptake among pupils. The organisations behind Thursday’s letter include the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL) the National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT) and the Headmasters’ and Headmistresses’ Conference (HMC) as well as three exam boards. The Association for Language Learning, the Independent Schools Modern Languages Association and the National Association of Language Advisers have also joined calls for a rethink. They are concerned the proposals as they stand do not promote the core communication elements of learning a language – listening, speaking, reading and writing – and could also undermine the teaching of languages in primary education and at A-level. “While the proposals were based on a segment of relevant published research, we note there is a considerable body of research which validates our concerns,” their statement said. “We also note that the proposed model of learning and assessment is a risky one, given the lack of international precedent and absence of independent evaluation.” Geoff Barton, ASCL’s general secretary, said: “There seem to be very few people, language experts included, who agree with the Department for Education’s (DfE) view that this reform is the way to inject new life into the existing modern foreign languages GCSE. “An approach is needed which encourages a love of learning of these subjects. Requiring students to grind their way through a list of words is a fundamentally flawed approach that will not enthuse students and we urge the new ministerial team at the DfE to take a step back and rethink this reform.” A DfE spokesperson said: “Ofsted research shows that students benefit from learning the building blocks of a language first, particularly focusing on vocabulary, phonics and grammar. Our proposals aim to increase pupils’ motivation through this approach, and we will continue to work with professional bodies to achieve this.”When Andy Smith moved from the Lincolnshire countryside where he grew up, to Rotherham, he immediately longed for a return to his rural life. “For the first 24 years of my life I lived in a village, and living in a town is a big difference,” said 37-year-old Smith, who was born in Saxilby. “It made me miss village life. So I thought, how can I combine the missing of village life with my passion for geography?” His answer was to launch a lifelong quest to visit all 10,449 civil parishes in England, documenting his travels via a YouTube channel under a new name – The Village Idiot. “I’ve done 332 so far, but my enthusiasm is not going to waver, I’ll say that much,” said Smith. “It’s probably going to take me the best part of 25 to 30 years to do it. But as long as I’ve got that enthusiasm, I’m going to just keep pushing and pushing.” Smith, who also works as a Hermes delivery driver, usually spends three days a week travelling to different parishes, and puts out a new video about a parish every day. Before setting off, he extensively researches each parish and makes sure he knows its boundaries. He then creates a video a tour of each area pointing out local landmarks and amenities en route, all while wearing his Village Idiot-branded hi-vis jacket and occasionally joined by his wife, Nicola. He starts each of his videos with the same catchy intro: “Hello my name is Andy and I am The Village Idiot, a man with a car, a GoPro and an unhealthy amount of time on my hands.” One thing that helps him stay motivated is the support of his followers, who grew from a small handful in January when he started his mission, to about 2,500 now. “I get a lot of people talking to me from Australia and America, people who have emigrated and who enjoy seeing their village again for the first time in so many years.” He often puts polls out on social media to allow his fans to choose where he goes next, or to vote for their favourite parish. His current personal favourite is Gamston in Bassetlaw, where he got to travel in a light aircraft and film the parish from the sky. Smith says most of the people he meets on his travels are happy to see their little patch of the country getting some positive limelight. “They like the idea of their village being put out there for the world to see. If you live in a town or city, things get covered all the time. Certainly if you live in London, for example, you can turn on the TV and you can see London 10 times a day. But you’re not going to see the likes of these villages every day.” Civil parishes are the smallest type of administrative area in England and are predominantly rural, with many cities wholly or partly unparished. Most parishes have long historical roots, but there has been a revival in recent years and new parishes are being created all the time. Northampton – with a population of 130,000 – became the country’s largest parish in 2020 due to local authority reorganisation, while a small few parishes are so rural or small they have zero inhabitants. Smith admits its a mammoth task but takes it step-by-step by visiting parishes on a district by district basis – although he juggles seven different districts at a time to ensure variety for the viewers on his channel. He eventually anticipates embarking on long roadtrips around the country to visit parishes farther afield. “People have an interest in this, they like what I’m doing, and that’s what is pushing me to keep going with it,” he said. “It’s not gonna die anytime soon.”Police investigating the killing of 18-year-old Bobbi-Anne McLeod, who disappeared from a bus stop in Devon, have confirmed there is no known link between her and a man being held on suspicion of murder. In an attempt to calm growing fears in the community, Devon and Cornwall police also said they were not currently looking for anyone else over McLeod’s death. Detectives in Plymouth were continuing to question a 24-year-old man. A man of 26, who was also arrested, has been released. A “significant number” of inquiries are going on in the city, where McLeod, who was 1.50 metres (4ft 11ins) tall and described as looking much younger than her age, went missing on Saturday evening as she set off to meet her boyfriend. Her body was found on Tuesday. Hundreds of people attended a candle-lit vigil on Thursday evening close to the bus stop where McLeod was last seen. The teenager’s mother, Donna McLeod, sobbed as she paid tribute to her daughter and thanked friends, family and the wider community for their support. Speaking in public for the first time, she thanked people for coming, adding: “Unfortunately, our beautiful Bobbi-Anne has been taken from us, but she will never be forgotten. I’d like everyone to hold their candles up. This is for Bobbi-Anne”. There followed a moment of silence as the entire crowd held up their candles in unison. The family group released about 40 balloons into the sky. Laying flowers just before the vigil, Ellie and Summer, both 18, said they felt “sick” at what had happened. Ellie said: “She was just the nicest kid I’ve ever met in my life, it’s the nicest ones who are taken early, and it’s just horrible. Nobody deserves to be treated like that. It hits home so hard how vulnerable you can be.” Overnight on Wednesday, police guarded a house four miles from where the teenager went missing and crime officers searched it on Thursday. Officers also cordoned off and stood guard on a steep, overgrown path half a mile away. A road near Bovisand beach, seven miles from the bus stop and close to where McLeod’s body was found, also remained closed. The assistant chief constable Nikki Leaper said in a statement: “I can confirm that at this time there is no known link between the suspect and victim and I would like to reassure the public that at this time, we are not seeking anyone else in relation to this matter. “A significant number of inquiries and searches have been carried out overnight and into today in relation to the ongoing murder investigation in Plymouth. These inquiries remain ongoing across a number of scenes in and around the city. “Earlier today, a 26-year-old man who was arrested on suspicion of murder, was released from police custody having been eliminated from the inquiry. A 24-year-old man remains in police custody at this time on suspicion of murder under a warrant of further detention. This warrant enables police to extend the time in which a person can be detained within police custody whilst an investigation is ongoing.” McLeod’s family were due to take part in a candlelit vigil close to the spot where she was last seen alive. One of the organisers, Charlotte Holloway, a community campaigner, said: “It is an absolute tragedy for our city.” Women she had spoken to were expressing anger as well as heartbreak, she said. A neighbour of the McLeods, Tiffany Allan, said the teenager used to play with her daughter, dancing, singing and acting in her front room to the film Frozen. She said: “Bobbi was the quiet one. She kept herself to herself.” Sally Haydon, Plymouth Labour’s police and crime spokesperson, said: “A young woman with her whole future ahead of her should have been able to wait at a bus stop without losing her life. Women in Plymouth should be able to be out and about anywhere in our city without having to worry constantly about their safety, and this just reminds us once again that this is not the case. Urgent action needs to be taken both at a national and local level to address the issues which mean we are seeing these terrible events happening at an alarming level across the country.”One of the hardest things about adjusting to life in late-stage Covid has been the making and seeing through of plans. A sniffle – or, more probably, a child’s sniffle – can get you out of anything and, far from looking like an excuse, still be presented as selfless deference to public health. I have been out twice this week, to Broadway and the Metropolitan Opera, and on both occasions have had to fight the urge to cancel at the last minute. Now it’s Thanksgiving and 53 million Americans – only a fraction fewer than pre-pandemic numbers – are expected to be on the move. It’s a celebration, a reunion, and given the atrophied state of our social muscles, also kind of a drag. For many of us it is strange, simply, to have plans. On the morning of Thanksgiving, my kids and I are travelling 45 minutes north of our home in New York for lunch with friends and extended family. My dad has flown in from London. Other guests are travelling from the midwest, and returning from college campuses. It is the first time we will have attended a party in someone’s house for almost two years, and in the days running up to it, figuring out the rules – or rather, remembering there are rules to figure out – has been hard. Last year, no one was vaccinated. This year, most of the adults present will have had three vaccinations and even the six-year-olds have had one. We’re over the line. Aren’t we? As has been the case since the beginning of the pandemic, there are multiple overlapping realities, not only in terms of what constitutes risk, but of what risk one is willing to tolerate. It was odd, on Saturday night, to attend a play on Broadway and find the theatre jammed to capacity and the streets outside thick with crowds. At the opera on Tuesday, we walked into a world apparently largely unchanged. I don’t usually go to the opera, but a friend had tickets for Eurydice and since the Met is a few blocks from my house, it seemed churlish to say no. Without consulting each other, she and I both turned up in jeans to be greeted, in the foyer, by crowds of people in black tie and evening gowns. It was weird. Making an effort seemed so pre-pandemic. This is a good thing, I guess; no good can come of lethargy. But as a spectacle it also seemed faintly ludicrous. At intermission we stood in the bar, watching in amazement as large numbers of people in what looked like period costume sailed by. Perhaps we would have felt this way even before the pandemic; the opera crowd is so very particular. But after months of not going out, and in our generally degraded physical state – I finally detangled the rats’ nests out of my kids’ hair, but none of us have had haircuts for more than 12 months – the whole scene looked outlandish. Who were these groomed and put-together people, dressing to make an impression? “I wish I could be like that,” said my friend, wistfully. And so to Thanksgiving. With almost 20 million Americans – 91% of pre-pandemic levels – set to pass through airports this week, things are almost back to normal, but not quite. Two days before the holiday, it occurs to our hosts that there are protocols to observe. My children’s school currently has three open Covid cases, and one class is isolating at home. A neighbour’s child has been home for 10 days, isolating after a case in his class. It seems sensible that, in the case of the partially vaccinated kids, we should get Covid-tested. Last year, this would have been a no-brainer. This year, it’s an 11th-hour addition to the running order and, two days before Thanksgiving, we race around trying to find a test site that isn’t overwhelmed. All the city sites are booked. Private test clinics are charging $99 for a test with a 24-hour turnaround, and – incredibly – $389 for results in two hours. The at-home test kits at the pharmacy are sold out. We have one last hope, the free mobile clinics that dot the neighbourhood. So, after ripping the kids out of school on Tuesday morning, I turn up, expecting to find a line around the block. As it is, there’s only a smattering of people. Meanwhile our hosts have sent a message that, depending on where you stand on all this, is either sensible, reckless, or a cheerful indication that we are returning to an idea that animates our basic existence – living is risking and the risks here are small: “If it’s too much bother, don’t worry.” Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistRassie Erasmus and South Africa Rugby have issued a brief apology to Nic Berry and other match officials involved in the first British &amp; Irish Lions Test, performing an embarrassing U-turn by also withdrawing their appeal against World Rugby’s sanctions. Last week Erasmus was banned for two months from all rugby activities and from matchday activities for a further 10 months having been found guilty of threatening Berry, and five other charges. SA Rugby was also found guilty of failing to ensure Erasmus complied with World Rugby’s code of conduct and fined £20,000. Both Erasmus and the union were instructed to apologise to Berry and his team of officials as part of their punishment but instead promptly issued a terse statement outlining their intention to appeal. On Thursday both parties climbed down, however, and apologised, four months after Erasmus’s extraordinary 62-minute video rant came to light. “SA Rugby and Rassie Erasmus wish to apologise to the match officials appointed to the first Test of the Springboks’ Series against the British &amp; Irish Lions,” read an SA Rugby statement. “We also confirm that SA Rugby and Erasmus have advised World Rugby that they withdraw their Notice of Appeal and will not lodge an appeal against the sanctions imposed. “This has been a highly stressful and charged environment with unusual pressures placed on all concerned and we have no wish to prolong that experience for anyone. We have drawn a line under the incident and only wish to look forward. We will respect the outcomes of the hearing, allowing our national teams and rugby operations to plan with clarity for the coming months.” In the full written judgment from the misconduct committee Berry gave powerful evidence regarding the impact of Erasmus’s “character assassination”, saying: “I have spent many years trying to build my reputation as an international referee and in the course of his video which was posted online, Mr Erasmus has caused it immeasurable damage … I feel that regardless of the outcome and any sanctions imposed, my reputation as a referee and person will forever be tarnished.” World Rugby issued a statement in response to South Africa’s, saying the matter is now closed. “World Rugby welcomes the public apology from SA Rugby and Rassie Erasmus to the match officials involved in the first Test between South Africa and the British and Irish Lions this year and the matter is closed.”It is up to France to stop refugees crossing the Channel in small boats, Priti Patel has said after 27 people, mostly Kurds from Iraq or Iran, drowned trying to reach the UK in an inflatable boat. My colleague Sarah Marsh has all the latest developments on this story on a separate live blog, here. Asylum claims made in the UK have risen to their highest level for nearly 20 years, according to new figures from the Home Office, as the head of the Refugee Council calls for less “nationalist posturing” over people fleeing war zones. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, has announced a radical reorganisation of the British army, with an additional £8.6bn to be spent on equipment and a new ranger regiment created to help counter extremist organisations and hostile state threats. Labour has said that this will leave the army “too small” and “too thinly stretched” and that it confirms Boris Johnson has broken a pre-election promise not to cut the size of the armed forces. (See 1.43pm.) HM Revenue and Customs has struck a deal to relocate tax officials into a new office complex in Newcastle owned by major Conservative party donors through an offshore company based in a tax haven, the Guardian can reveal. Downing Street has insisted no decision has yet been taken on a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics. Earlier Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, prompted speculation that the government might stay away when he told MPs that “no tickets have been booked” for ministers for the event. But No 10 said: We have said that the prime minister’s long-standing view is that boycotts don’t work. Our position is the same: no decision has been made on government representation at the games. Labour is calling for an investigation into the conduct and honesty of the Conservative peer Michelle Mone after she repeatedly denied any association with a PPE (personal protective equipment) company it has since emerged she recommended to the government. Hundreds of thousands of parents are missing out on help paying for childcare and billions allocated to the government’s flagship “tax-free childcare” scheme is going unspent, data has revealed. MPs held a debate on international men’s day (last Friday) in Westminster Hall today. The Conservative MP Nick Fletcher, who won Don Valley from Labour in 2019, opened the debate, and he argued that many problems facing men and boys were not receiving enough attention. He focused in particular on the importance of positive role models, and he said masculinity was something that should be celebrated. At this point in his speech speech he suggested that the trend towards having characters like Dr Who played by women was pushing young men into crime. He said: I would also like to reiterate something that seems to be very topical at the moment, although much more for women than men, and that is the need for men to have their own identity and for masculinity to be something that can be celebrated at times, rather than continually vilified. Everywhere, not least within the cultural sphere, there seems to be a call from a tiny, and very vocal, minority that every male character, or good role model, must have a female replacement. One only needs to look at the discussion surrounding who will play the next James Bond. And it’s not just James Bond. In recent years we have seen Dr Who, Ghostbusters, Luke Skywalker, the Equalizer all replaced by women. And men are left with the Krays and Tommy Shelby. Is there any wonder that we are seeing so many young men committing crime? These programmes make crime look cool. Trust me, a lifetime in prison is not cool, and neither is living with the memory of a stabbed son or daughter. The journalist Peter Oborne has launched a new project to catalogue the lies told by Boris Johnson. The website is here. Oborne launched a version of the website soon after Johnson became prime minister, but he abandoned work on it after the 2019 general election. After using crowdfunding to raise money, Oborne was able to hire staff and the new version is more impressive. It is still unfinished – it only covers untrue or misleading statements made by Johnson and his ministers up to February 2020 – but the entries are well researched, with extensive links explaining why comments have been labelled as false. Oborne says the project will be “like painting the Forth Bridge”. He explains: “The task can never be completed because he and his ministers are constantly producing more examples.” In a mission statement, Oborne explains why he feels so strongly about politicians who lie (he has written two books on the subject, focusing on Tony Blair and Johnson). He also explains why he uses a particularly wide definition of lying, covering statements which are “reckless as to the truth”. The Washington Post conducted a similar exercise with Donald Trump, and by the time he left the White House it concluded he had made 30,573 false or misleading claims as president. If you did not know otherwise, you might assume from the website that Oborne is vehemently leftwing. But what makes him particularly interesting – and authoritative – as a critic of Johnson is that, like Johnson, he has spent most of his career as a columnist on rightwing newspapers. He worked for the Daily Telegraph and the Daily Mail, and for several years he was political editor of the Spectator, while Johnson was editor. Often it is people who have worked with Johnson closely who turn out to be his strongest critics. Sonia Purnell, who was Johnson’s deputy in the Daily Telegraph’s Brussels office, went on to write a damning biography of him. Oborne has written his own book about Johnson in which he said: “I have never encountered a senior British politician who lies and fabricates so regularly, so shamelessly and so systematically as Boris Johnson.” Alan Duncan was Johnson’s deputy when Johnson was foreign secretary, and later published diaries describing Johnson as an “embarrassing buffoon”. And when Johnson became PM, at the start his closest adviser was Dominic Cummings. Cummings is now one of his most dangerous enemies. Like Oborne, Cummings believes that Johnson is a liar, although Cummings has also said that this label is sometimes hard to justify because Johnson does not particularly care what the truth is anyway. (Under a strict definition, to lie you have to say something that you know to be untrue.) This is how Cummings put it in a blog earlier this year. [Johnson] rewrites reality in his mind afresh according to the moment’s demands. He lies – so blatantly, so naturally, so regularly – that there is no real distinction possible with him, as there is with normal people, between truth and lies. He always tells people what they want to hear and he never means it. This is from General Sir Mark Carleton-Smith, who as chief of the general staff is head of the army, on the army restructuring announced today. The army says it is the most radical transformation it has undergone for 20 years. Here is more from Sky’s Deborah Haynes on the army restructuring. During his Commons statement Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, was asked by the Lib Dem MP Jamie Stone if the army restructuring announced today would discourage people from seeking a career in the military. Quite the opposite, argued Wallace, who served as an officer in the Scots Guards in the 1990s. In an response that revealed quite a lot about the motivations of people joining the army, Wallace said: I would have stayed in the army if it had looked like this. But I was in an army that I think was hollowed out. Equipment didn’t quite work. The greatest adventure you had was probably every two years going to Northern Ireland, but that was about as far as it went. Hong Kong had closed. And there was a lack of sense of purpose, in my view, and a lack of clearly identified adversary that we were setting ourselves against. That was really important. So I think this army is going to be more exciting, more rewarding, and more enabling for young people to grow their skills. It is going to be more fluid with the integration of the reserves, and allow reserves and regulars to be much more able to move between each other, depending on their personal circumstances .... The determination to be out and about around the world - the one thing soldiers don’t want to be is stuck in a barracks, in the UK, sometimes doing not very much. They want to be out. I was in Oman only the other week seeing them exercising with the Omanis. They couldn’t stop talking about how exciting and fun it was. I was in Poland last week, watching the United Kingdom forces live-firing alongside Polish, United States, Croatian forces, doing a live-firing exercise in Poland. That’s what I want our army to do. This is what John Healey, the shadow defence secretary, told MPs earlier when he said the army restructuring announced today (see 1.21pm) showed Boris Johnson had broken his election promise not to cut the size of the armed forces. Healey said: [Ben Wallace, the defence secretary] cannot say he’s reduced the role of the army. He cannot say the army already has the high-tech kit it needs to replace boots on the ground. He cannot say the threats to the UK have diminished in a day to day – indeed, today he says they’re proliferating. Yet he’s still cutting the army established strength by 9,000 over the next three years, and that’s on top of 16,000 soldiers cut since 2010. The prime minister promised in his election manifesto launch in 2019, on behalf of all Conservative members: “We will not be cutting our armed forces in any form ... We will be maintaining the size of our armed forces.” The prime minister may take the pledges he makes to our armed forces and the public lightly, but we do not. By the time of the next election Britain will have the smallest army in 300 years. Size matters. The defence secretary’s deeper cuts now could limit our forces’ ability simultaneously to deploy overseas and support allies, maintain strong national defences and support our domestic resilience, just as they have been helping the country through the Covid crisis. The Conservative manifesto did not include a promise to maintain the size of the armed forces, but Johnson did make this promise at an event during the election campaign. Healey also said the plan would leave the army too small. He said: I fear that this plan leaves the British army too small, too thinly stretched, too poorly equipped to deal with the threats that the UK and our allies now face, which are growing and diversifying. The Ministry of Defence has now published a summary of its “Future Soldier” plan to restructure the army. And this is what Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, said about it in his opening statement to MPs. The army will now be reorganised to operate on a continuous basis, fielding all the relevant capabilities for this era of constant competition and persistently engaged around the globe supporting our partners and deterring our adversaries. Crucially it will also be an army designed for genuine warfighting credibility as an expeditionary fighting force that will be both deployable and lethal when called upon to fight and win. In the Commons Priti Patel, the home secretary, has just started making a statement about the deaths of 27 people who drowned trying to cross the Channel in a small boat yesterday. My colleague Damien Gayle is covering what she says in our live blog on the tragedy. HM Revenue and Customs has struck a deal to relocate tax officials into a new office complex in Newcastle owned by major Conservative party donors through an offshore company based in a tax haven, my colleague Harry Davies and Rowena Mason report. According to Sky’s Sam Coates, members of the executive committee of the Conservative 1922 Committee gave the impression they liked what they heard after they left their meeting with Boris Johnson at No 10. (See 12.40pm.) Nigel Huddleston, the sports minister, told MPs earlier that the government would “work at pace” on setting up an independent regulator for football. He was responding to an urgent question about the fan-led review of football governance led by the former sports minister, Tracey Crouch. Huddleston said: The report shows that fundamental change is needed in our national game and fans deserve that. We are at a turning point for football in this country. The review is a detailed and worthy piece of work that will require a substantive response and plan of action from across government, but the primary recommendation of the review, that football requires a strong independent regulator, is a recommendation that I and the government endorse in principle today. The government will now work at pace to determine the most effective way to deliver the independent regulator and any powers that might be needed. But Huddleston also said the government could not “commit 100%” to implementing all the report’s recommendations. The report is here (pdf), and here is my colleague Paul MacInnes’s overnight preview story about it. According to Bloomberg’s Kitty Donaldson, Boris Johnson has had a meeting this morning with the executive of the Conservative backbench 1922 Committee, the shop stewards of the Conservative parliamentary party. It must have been a fascinating meeting, although the 1922 executive are a relatively discreet bunch and so we may learn little about what was actually said. Deborah Haynes, Sky’s defence editor, has more on the Wallace statement. And here is her preview story on the announcement. Responding for Labour, John Healey, the shadow defence secretary, says today’s announcement contradicts a promise made by Boris Johnson during the 2019 election campaign not to cut the size of the armed forces. Johnson may take his promises lightly, but Labour does not, says Healey. He says, despite Ben Wallace’s claims, this restructuring is driven by the need to save money. He says this plan will leave the British army “too small, too thinly-stretched and too poorly-equipped” to deal with the threats the UK faces. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, is making a statement to MPs about restructuring the army. The army will have to adapt to face the threats of the future, he says. It will have to be forward-looking and adaptable. It must have not just the best force structure, but it must also restructure on schedule and within budget. He says the army of the future must be leaner and more productive. And he identifies priorities for the restructuring. It must be globally engaged, with regional hubs in places like Kenya. It must be a key contributor to Nato, and capable of fielding a division. It will be equipped with state-of-the-art equipment. It will have integration at its heart, with regulars, reservists and civil servants working together. And the army will benefit the whole of the union. He says there will be a new Ranger Regiment, an elite combat unit. He says there will be a major restructuring of the administrative divisions of the infantry. Numbers will reduce, he says. He also says there will be radical restructuring at the top, with the size of HQ reduced by 40%. The Home Office has said that today’s figures showing asylum claims in the UK at their highest level for almost 20 years (see 11.42am) show the need for the nationality and borders bill. A Home Office spokesperson said: A significant proportion of asylum claims in the last year should have been made in a first safe country, rather than people risking their lives making dangerous crossings, facilitated by people smugglers. Yesterday’s tragedy serves as the starkest possible reminder of the dangers of this. Only our nationality and borders bill will ensure we are fair to those in genuine need and break the business model of criminal trafficking networks. The statistics also show our global points-based system is delivering on the people’s priorities, by welcoming those who have the skills the country need while encouraging businesses to invest in British people. The bill will cut the rights of people who come to the UK to seek asylum, and could lead to them being jailed for up to four years. Lawyers have argued that it would breach national and international law in multiple ways. But the government argues that the measures will make Channel crossings a less attractive option for migrants. Asylum claims made in the UK have risen to their highest level for nearly 20 years, according to new figures from the Home Office. PA Media reports: A total of 37,562 applications were made in the year to September - more than in any 12-month period since the year to June 2004 (39,746) and higher than the numbers seen at peak of the European migration crisis in 2015 and 2016 (36,546). The latest figure is up 18% on the year to September 2020 (31,966), although this will have been affected by the coronavirus pandemic amid restrictions on movement. There were 35,737 applications for the same period in 2019. A total of 67,547 asylum applications were awaiting a decision at the end of September - up 41% year-on-year and the highest since current records began in June 2010. Separate Home Office figures show the overall number of cases in the asylum system - including cases awaiting the outcome of appeals and failed asylum seekers due to be removed from the UK - stood at 125,316 at the end of June 2021, up 14% year-on-year and more than three times the number a decade earlier (37,903 in June 2011). Two columns around this morning are particularly worth reading for what they say about the problems the Conservative party is facing. They both make the argument that Tories are not sure what their government stands for anymore. This is from James Forsyth in the Spectator. One senior Tory MP reports that when he was the guest speaker at a constituency dinner this month, one party member opined that ‘this is not a conservative government’. The MP was taken aback by how many of those present agreed with the sentiment. In part, this is a risk of governing from the centre — the party’s own voter base can feel neglected. But it is worth remembering that after a year and a bit in office, Tony Blair had a list of achievements to reassure the left of his party: the minimum wage, union recognition in workplaces where a majority of workers wanted it, and a 25 per cent increase in aid spending. Johnson has one big achievement to please his base — Brexit — but he needs other things to add to this list. As this senior Tory MP complains, hiring more police officers and nurses isn’t a ‘fundamentally differentiating’ issue between the Tories and Labour. It isn’t just Tory party members who are grumbling, MPs are too. There are obviously plenty of backbenchers who have never liked Johnson and feel that recent events have given them licence to cause trouble. But discontent has spread beyond this group. One veteran MP warns that ‘colleagues are starting to feel that there’s no theme to this government’. And this is from Robert Shrimsley in the FT. Until now [Boris Johnson] has had at least one major project that defined, drove and largely unified his party. The first was Brexit; the second was tackling Covid. There were missteps and rebellions on the way but both issues offered a clarity of purpose. MPs largely stuck with him because they were a team with a shared objective. Suddenly there is no common project. One MP observes: “Conservatives used to be for low taxes and good management of the economy. Then we were for Brexit. Now we are not really sure what we are for.” A Cabinet Office minister has denied that a recent comment by Boris Johnson came close to an admission that the Conservative party has been selling peerages. During questions in the Commons, the SNP’s Brendan O’Hara highlighted the Johnson comment, which involved the PM telling MPs: “Until you get rid of this system by which trade union barons fund other parties we need to continue with this system by which public-spirited people give donations.” O’Hara went on: I believe that the prime minister’s answer comes dangerously close to an admission of selling peerages in direct contravention to the 1925 Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act and is worthy of further investigation. O’Hara said the government should either launch an investigation itself, or refer the matter to the Metropolitan police. But Nigel Adams, a Cabinet Office minister, said there was no need for an investigation. In a comment that provoked laughter from the opposition, he said: The idea that successful people and philanthropists who contribute to political causes should be disqualified from sitting in the legislature is nonsense. There is no link between party donations and nomination to sit in the house of Lords. The Met has already ruled out an investigation into this, saying there was “insufficient information” to justify one. Yesterday we reported on growing frustration in the Treasury at Boris Johnson’s botched handling of important government announcements. Rishi Sunak’s allies could have chosen to deny the rift, but instead a briefing to the Times has, if anything, gone a bit further. In a story (paywall) on the front page of the Times this morning, Steven Swinford quotes a Sunak “ally” as describing the situation at No 10 as “chaotic”. Swinford writes: Rishi Sunak is increasingly frustrated with Boris Johnson’s “chaotic” No 10 operation, his allies said last night. The chancellor believes that there needs to be greater professionalism after a succession of damaging Tory rebellions and government reversals ... One ally of Sunak said: “Rishi is not confrontational but he takes things seriously. He goes through them logically and thinks things through. He’s frustrated with the operation in No 10. Things are chaotic in No 10.” The UK government remains firmly committed to the equality and human rights safeguards within the Northern Ireland protocol, Lord Frost has insisted. As PA Media reports, the Brexit minister made this point in a letter to Amnesty International. PA reports: Article 2 of the protocol commits the UK to ensuring that Brexit will see “no diminution” of the extensive rights provisions that were enshrined in Northern Ireland as a result of the Good Friday peace agreement. EU law underpinned many of the equality and anti-discrimination laws that flowed from the 1998 accord. Amnesty International wrote to Frost expressing concern that article 2 could be jeopardised if the UK government follows through with its threat to suspend elements of the protocol amid its dispute with the EU over post-Brexit Irish Sea trade disruption. Frost has now replied to the human rights organisation to provide assurances. In the letter, seen by PA, Frost said: “The government has always strongly supported article 2 of the protocol, which became operational when the protocol was signed. “Since that point, the government has worked closely with the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission and the Equality Commission for Northern Ireland to set up the dedicated mechanism, funding and supporting both commissions and creating a system in which rights are safeguarded. We have absolutely guaranteed that there will be no diminution of these rights as a result of the UK leaving the EU.” London Underground drivers are to launch strike action tomorrow, which will hit the planned resumption of night tube services, PA Media reports. Members of the Rail, Maritime and Transport (RMT) union will walk out in a dispute over rosters. The union said new shifts are being imposed on staff which will affect their work-life balance. A 24-hour strike on night tube lines - Central, Jubilee, Northern, Piccadilly and Victoria - will start at 4.30am on Friday, with further walkouts planned in the coming weeks. Transport for London warned of disruption to services and advised people to check before travelling. The RMT general secretary, Mick Lynch, said: This strike is about the ripping apart of popular and family-friendly agreements that helped make the original night tube such a success. Instead the company want to cut costs and lump all drivers into a pool where they can be kicked from pillar to post at the behest of the management. This strike action, and its serious consequences in the run-up to Christmas, was avoidable if the tube management hadn’t axed dedicated Night Tube staff and perfectly workable arrangements in order to cut staffing numbers and costs. And Nick Dent, director of London Underground customer operations, said: The RMT’s planned strike action is needless and it will threaten London’s recovery from the pandemic, despite no job losses and more flexibility and job certainty for drivers. “While every other union has agreed to these changes and our staff have been enjoying the benefits of the changes since August, we’re willing to work with the RMT and review the changes after night tube services have returned. We have just had the updated list of statements and UQs in the Commons today. 10.30am: Jo Stevens, the shadow culture secretary, asks an urgent question on the Tracey Crouch review of English football. Around 11am: Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Commons leader, takes questions on next week’s business. Around 12pm: Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, makes a Commons statement on the restructuring of the army. Around 1pm: Priti Patel, the home secretary, makes a statement to MPs on what is described in the official listing as the “small boats incident in the Channel”. Good morning. The main political focus this morning is the response, in the UK and France, to the death of at least 27 people trying to cross the Channel yesterday on a small boat. But my colleague Damien Gayle is covering all the developments around that story on a separate live blog, and so largely I will be leaving that to him. You can read the blog here. In other developments, Keir Starmer has instensified his attack on the government’s social care plans. At PMQs yesterday he condemned them as a “working class dementia tax”, but today he has given an interview to the Northern Echo focusing on the idea that they particularly isadvantage people in the north of England. He told the paper: How does someone in Redcar, where the average house price is £133,000, or Bishop Auckland, where it is £125,000, realistically raise the £86,000 without selling their house? I think most people would say ‘of course I’m going to have to sell my house to pay that sort of money’. You will have to defer the payment to have it taken away from your estate at the end of the exercise. If your house is worth £133,000 and you take £86,000 away, you are effectively depriving people of a significant amount of their inheritance. It is a complete betrayal of people in the north-east who took the government at its word, only to learn that when they gave their word on taxes not going up, they didn’t keep it, when they gave their word on building new hospitals, they haven’t kept it, and now we know that when they gave their word on social care, they haven’t kept it. It is a string of broken promises across the north-east. Labour has also produced this graphic to illustrate how the plans disproportionately help the wealthy. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: Stephen Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, takes questions in the Commons. 9.30am: NHS England publishes figures on GP appointments, and mental health statistics. 9.30am: The Home Office publishes quarterly asylum figures. 9.30am: The ONS publishes long-term migration figures. After 10.30am: Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons makes a statement on next week’s Commons business. 11.30am: Downing Street holds its lobby briefing. Afternoon: Peers hold a debate on Channel crossings. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comAlabama’s capital city of Montgomery is facing legal action or a $25,000 fine for changing the name of a street bearing the name of a Confederate president for a prominent civil rights lawyer. The state’s Republican attorney general acted after Montgomery city council voted to switch Jeff Davis Avenue, named for Jefferson Davis, to Fred D Gray Avenue, the 91-year-old lawyer who represented Rosa Parks and others in cases that challenged the state’s segregation practices. Gray, whom Martin Luther King Jr called “the chief counsel for the protest movement”, grew up on the street and became one of the first African Americans elected as legislators in Alabama since Reconstruction. Across the US, in the wake of the rise of the Black Lives Matter racial justice movement, there has been an increase in efforts to take down statues of figures linked to racism and slavery. But there has also been a widespread backlash, especially among conservatives and Republicans. Alabama’s 48th attorney general, Steve Marshall, has written to Montgomery officials saying the city had violated a state law protecting Confederate monuments and other longstanding memorials and must pay a $25,000 fine by 8 December, “otherwise, the attorney general will file suit on behalf of the state”. Montgomery’s mayor, Steven Reed, the first African American to serve in the post, hit back, saying switching the name was the right thing to do. “It was important that we show, not only our residents here, but people from afar that this is a new Montgomery,” Reed told the Associated Press, adding that the name change was his idea. “We want to honor those heroes that have fought to make this union as perfect as it can be. When I see a lot of the Confederate symbols that we have in the city, it sends a message that we are focused on the lost cause as opposed to those things that bring us together under the Stars and Stripes.” Alabama’s 2017 Memorial Preservation Act, enacted after cities across the nation began to remove Confederate monuments, forbids the removal or alteration of monuments and memorials – including a memorial street or memorial building – that have stood for more than 40 years. Montgomery, sometimes referred to as the “Cradle of the Confederacy” because the alliance was formed there in 1861 and served as the first Confederate capital, was also key to the civil rights movement a century later, including the Montgomery bus boycott. Several Alabama cities have opted to take down Confederate monuments and pay the $25,000 fine, including Huntsville, AKA Rocket City, where the US space program was originally centered, that voted for the removal of a memorial to an unnamed Confederate soldier last year.“Before, I was so worried about doing the same as everyone else, always comparing: ‘She’s on the training pitch so I need to go on the training pitch today,’ and then I’d just break down eventually,” Fran Kirby says. The Chelsea and England forward’s struggles have been well documented. Having exploded on to the international stage in 2015 at the World Cup in Canada, the 28-year-old has seen her stock rise but also has had her progress stunted by injury and illness that have, in her words, meant missing about two years of her career. Now Kirby is flying again, as shown by winning almost every domestic individual award going last season. “Last year I got my first injury while I was away with England so that was quite difficult because I really felt like I was kicking on at my club and I wanted to be here and play well,” she says at St George’s Park before England play Austria in a World Cup qualifier on Saturday. “I’m feeling good at the moment, so I want to make sure I keep building in this team and learning from Sarina [Wiegman, the manager]. It’s good at the moment, the group is in a good place. It’s probably in one of the best places that I’ve been in a long time in this group. Everyone is just ready to go.” The injuries and illnesses have helped Kirby to understand her body and how to get the best out of it. She has reached a point where she feels comfortable explaining those needs. “It comes with, unfortunately, having to deal with a lot of setbacks,” she says. “It’s something that I’ve had to deal with throughout my career, not just the illness but injuries as well and I think each injury, it’s difficult, but I understand now more how to overcome the injury. “It is understanding my body, knowing when I need to take an extra day recovery, knowing when I need to do more recovery; like now I do recovery every day. I’m in the pool every day, I’m doing ice baths every day after training, I’m going late in the evening to do extra recovery at a gym. It is just 24/7. It is just constantly thinking about how can I get my body prepared to go again and again and again.” Wiegman is “really open” to conversations about loading and rest, Kirby says. “I was picking up all these little niggles and not being able to quite give everything when I did come away. “With Sarina coming in, in my first camp, I was rested for two days because we had an honest conversation about how I was feeling and how I was coming into the camp. “Being able to have that honest conversation [is important]. Before it was maybe a case of everyone had to do the same every day and for some people that doesn’t work. If I came in and said I needed an extra day, that was a difficult thing to do.” Wiegman joined England in September from the Netherlands, where she led the team to a home Euros title and a World Cup final. That, says Kirby, has got the team hanging off her every word. “She’s a proven winner. To be in the presence of someone who’s gone to a World Cup final, who’s won a home Euros, you can’t fault that person, you have to believe everything they tell you. None of us have achieved it – I know a few of the girls got to a final before [at Euro 2009] . “She’s brought confidence in and made us feel good about ourselves. She’s come in and said she was shocked at the level we were showing in training and the passion and drive that we have and it’s nice to hear that from someone that’s come from a winning team.” England have struggled for a long time to get the best out of Kirby. The devastatingly clinical form she is in for Chelsea has yet to be matched at international level. That is in part down to the different skill sets of the players around her but also to the different role she is asked to play. “I’ve had some really good conversations with Sarina. We’re both on the same page in the way that we want to play football: we want to keep the ball. I’m expected to be more in the midfield area rather than being higher up the pitch, which is a difference. But it’s one that I’m learning and that I’m trying to understand – and I’m working on my defensive role,” she says with a laugh. “It’s difficult, because I link up so well with Sam [Kerr at Chelsea] and I do try and play the same way. But obviously playing in a different position makes it tough to do the things that I would do at Chelsea at England, but I always want to give 110% in everything that I do and I always want to be a creative player and I always want to be a player that scores goals. So I do think that I need to improve in terms of my final product with England because I’m a bit lower.”Public artwork that pays homage to Ella Adoo-Kissi-Debrah, whose exposure to air pollution contributed to her death at the age of nine, will go on display close to her south London home next year. Breathe: 2022 by Dryden Goodwin will appear at sites close to the South Circular road, which runs within 25 metres of the house where Ella lived. The artwork – a centrepiece of events marking Lewisham’s year as London borough of culture – revisits Goodwin’s 2012 creation Breathe, which depicted his five-year-old son inhaling and exhaling. Goodwin will draw a handful of local environmental activists, including Ella’s mother, Rosamund Kissi-Debrah. Sequences of still images will appear to be animated as people walk or drive by them, giving the appearance of the subjects labouring to breathe. “I’m interested in the way air sustains the body, but can also corrupt the body,” said Goodwin, who is working with Network Rail and Transport for London to identify suitable sites for the installations. The Lewisham-based artist, who is collaborating with the art and science charity Invisible Dust, said Ella’s death had “heightened consciousness of the environmental crisis” in the area. Ella died after an asthma attack in 2013. Last year, in a landmark judgment, a coroner found “exposure to excessive air pollution” had contributed to her death, adding that “the whole of Ella’s life was lived in close proximity to highly polluting roads”. Since her daughter’s death, Rosamund Kissi-Debrah has campaigned to raise awareness of air pollution. Breathe, which was positioned on an 8-metre-high screen on St Thomas’ hospital facing the Houses of Parliament, incorporated more than 1,300 drawings of Goodwin’s five-year-old son. Now a teenager who has grown up in Lewisham, he will also feature in Breathe 2022. The artwork is part of an extensive programme that will mark Lewisham’s year as London borough of culture. They include a mass performance of dance by 200 local performers highlighting the positive impact of migration in the area and a celebration of Lewisham’s musical heritage, including pop, grime, afrobeat, jazz, global, classical and punk, and featuring Dave Okumu and Linton Kwesi Johnson. • This article was amended on 26 November 2021 to include reference to Invisible Dust, the charity with which Dryden Goodwin is collaborating.The electrical engineer Eric Ash, who has died aged 93, made major contributions to controlling and manipulating electrical, optical and acoustic waves for signal processing and imaging applications. Already established as a leading figure in this field when he arrived at University College London in 1963, he undertook research that proved invaluable in televisions, mobile phones, satellite communications and imaging systems. His particular interest lay in surface acoustic waves (SAW) – sound waves that travel on the surface of crystals, discovered by Lord Rayleigh in the 19th century. Compared to microwaves, which have similar frequencies, surface acoustic waves have very small wavelengths, and so practical devices using them can be made very compact. As Ash put it, surface waves “hug the surface”, and so can be influenced by cleverly designed patterns of electrodes. Electrical signals can be transformed into sound waves and back again, achieving clever signal shaping and manipulation on the way. For electrical engineers, one of the most basic building blocks is the filter, extracting a useful signal from the background noise found in any system. With great ingenuity, Ash found that acoustic waves could be manipulated using readily available materials and conventional manufacturing processes to allow a set of exact frequencies to pass, initially for improvements in military radar systems. Ash was mildly amused but proud of the fact that the SAW devices he pioneered ended up in the receiver of practically every television on the planet, and continued to play a huge role in modern electronics. Their use extends beyond radar to mobile phones – there are at least two of them in every mobile now – garage-door openers and indeed anywhere where a precise set of frequencies must be defined, performing functions that are almost impossible to replicate in conventional electronics, on a tiny footprint compatible with integrated chip technology. Ash also examined the fundamental properties of imaging systems and ways of designing them, using all types of waves. His paper on the Super-resolution Aperture Scanning Microscope (Nature, 1972) marked the first experimental demonstration, with electromagnetic waves, of subwavelength resolution imaging – the ability to image objects smaller than the wavelength. This led to the imaging of the tiniest of objects, much smaller than the wavelength of light. Ash’s group at UCL was the first in the UK to explore the potential of acoustic microscopes, using ultra high frequency sound to probe the internal features of solid materials, so enabling the non-destructive internal testing of structures and components. Acoustic microscopy has a vast array of applications in subsurface imaging; inside solid, opaque structures; within cells and other biological matter; in testing electronic components; and even in the non-invasive analysis of paint layers in paintings and other art and culture heritage objects. In 1986 this work brought him the Royal Society’s Royal medal. At UCL he developed one of the world’s leading electronic engineering departments, becoming professor in 1967 and its head in 1980. He was kind and encouraging to many generations of students, and paid particular attention to the difficulties many women faced in making progress in the predominantly male world of engineering. He remained primarily a hands-on research scientist and industry consultant until he went as rector (1985-93) to what is now Imperial College London. In modernising and redefining the institution he oversaw the merger of St Mary’s Hospital Medical School with it, raised the number of female students and insisted that all communication was carried out by email. At informal breakfasts he made scrambled eggs for professors and students, and interrogated them over the progress of their research, demonstrating a rigour tempered by a mischievous sense of humour. Asked in one interview to set out the top qualities required to be successful, Ash listed curiosity and focus. The third attribute was, he said, “a cussedness and grim determination. Because it isn’t always fun, and one can be working for a long time on something, and then find out that it’s no use.” Born Ulrich Asch in Berlin, he was the younger child of Dorothea (nee Schwarz) and Walter Asch, a German-Jewish lawyer. In 1938 the family fled to London to escape the Nazis, and, now known as Eric, he went from University College school, north London, to Imperial, where he gained a BSc (1948) and a PhD in electrical engineering (1952), under the Nobel laureate Dennis Gabor. At Stanford University, California, he was able to escape rationing: it felt like “being transferred into heaven”. There he met Clare Babb, a drama student waitressing to pay her way through graduate school, and they married in 1954. The couple moved to Britain, and Ash went to what was then Queen Mary College, London, followed by Standard Telecommunication Laboratories (1955–63) in Harlow, Essex, and UCL. He chaired the BBC’s science advisory committee, acted as a trustee of both the Royal Institution and the Science Museum, and served as a member of the Advisory Council of the Campaign for Science and Engineering. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society (1977), and later its treasurer and vice-president (1997-2002), he was knighted (1990) and made emeritus professor of UCL (1993). Ash became known for cycling around London, and was still using two wheels in his 90s. Passionate about the environment, in 2002 he led a Royal Society report on economic instruments to help reduce carbon emissions and was one of the first to argue for a carbon tax. In a Wolfson lecture in 2014, he insisted that science could still produce effective solutions to tackle the climate emergency. He enjoyed skiing, tennis and playing the violin. A global citizen at heart, he welcomed visiting academics and friends for dinner to the family home in Islington, north London. He is survived by Clare, their five daughters and 11 grandchildren. • Eric Albert Ash, electrical engineer, born 31 January 1928; died 22 August 2021Time to wrap up UK shoppers face the sharpest rise in prices in 30 years this month, as fears of Christmas shortages spur people to get their purchases sorted early. Two more UK energy firms, Orbit and Entice, have collapsed, leading to more criticism of regulator Ofgem, as taxpayers face a £1.7bn bailout of Bulb. One in 10 UK families – about 3m households – are facing a cost of living crunch this winter, unable to cover even basic bills such as food and heating, according to Citizens Advice. The pound has hit its lowest level against the US dollar this year, after some US central bank officials suggested they could end their bond-buying stimulus programme faster than expected. Some analysts think the Fed could complete tapering by next March, three months earlier than anticipated. The latest minutes from the European Central Bank’s policy meeting show that supply chain problems have lasted longer than thought... ...but the head of the WTO remains hopeful they’ll be temporary. Consumer confidence in Germany has fallen, as the fourth wave of Covid-19 hits morale and puts people off spending. Germany’s economy also grew less strongly than expected in the last quarter, with business investment, government spending and net trade all dragging on growth. China’s CO2 emissions have dropped, suggesting that power cuts, curbs on polluting industries, and the property slowdown have hit economic growth. The pub and restaurant group Mitchells &amp; Butlers has warned that problems caused by Brexit and rising costs will hurt the hospitality sector, just as businesses return to profit after the easing of pandemic restrictions. Multipack crisps are still the item in shortest supply at UK shops, after production problems at Walkers, followed by painkillers, frozen turkeys, sparkling water and fresh pork. Goodnight. GW Stock markets across Europe also had a solid day, with the Stoxx 600 ending 0.4% higher tonight. France’s CAC and Spain’s IBEX both gained 0.5%, with smaller rises on Germany’s DAX (+0.25%) while Italy’s FTSE MIB was flat. Britain’s FTSE 100 has posted its fourth daily rise in a row. After a quiet session, with Wall Street closed for Thanksgiving, the blue-chip index has closed 24 points higher at 7310, up 0.33% today. Hospitality firms finished the day on top of the risers, with catering firm Compass (+3.2%), and hotel groups Whitbread (+2.8%) and InterContinental (+2.8%) leading the way. Vodafone led the fallers, down 3% after its shares went ex-dividend today. Cyber-security firm DarkTrace also lagged, down 2%, and is likely to be ejected from the index after next week’s reshuffle. After that earlier confusion, Ofgem have now confirmed that Entice Energy has collapsed, alongside Orbit Energy. Entice Energy supplies around 5,400 domestic customers and Orbit Energy supplies around 65,000 domestic customers, the regulator says. Their customers will now be transferred to a new supplier. It means 25 suppliers have now collapsed since the start of August, with Bulb, the biggest casualty, becoming the first to be placed into a special administration” process. Gillian Cooper, Head of Energy Policy at Citizens Advice, says the regulator faces serious questions. “The increases in global gas prices we’ve seen this year have been significant, but should not have led to the collapse of 25 firms. “As suppliers continue to fall like dominoes, it’s clear the market is not functioning as it should and there are serious questions for Ofgem to answer about how this has been allowed to happen.” Brrrrr it’s cold out there today in Europe, in a cold snap that is pushing up power prices: Bloomberg’s Stephen Stapczynski has the details: Americans sitting down for Thanksgiving lunch also face the sharpest jump in prices in 30 years. Jim Reid of Deutsche Bank explains, in his Chart Of The Day (below): If the American Farm Bureau Federation is right, then your Thanksgiving meal this year will be the most expensive on record, up +13.7% since last year, the second highest increase in the 36 years they have run the survey, only behind the +16.8% increase in 1990. Over the very long term agriculture prices tend to decline in real terms. A look at p.43 of our last annual long-term study (link here) shows that wheat for example has an annual real return of -1.1% p.a. over the last 150 years. However as the second line on the chart from the FAO (UN Food &amp; Agriculture Organization) shows, real international food prices have climbed to their highest since 1975 after last year being lower than where they were when their data started in 1961. So even food, which normally falls in price in real terms over the long run, is soaring in price in 2021. Inflation is becoming more and more broad based across the economy as we hit the home straight of this year. The head of the World Trade Organization said on Thursday that she expects global supply chain problems to be short-lived, saying that they will go into 2022 but not beyond, Reuters reports. “Our assessment of this situation is it is not a structural issue. It’s a transitory issue,” Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala told a media briefing, saying she expected them to stretch into 2022 and then work themselves out after several months. Supply chain problems have emerged as the global economy has pulled out of a pandemic-induced recession and threaten to slow recovery. They have already stoked inflation. Another UK energy supplier has gone bust, following the collapse of Bulb earlier this week, bringing the number of households affected by a supplier failure closer to the 4m mark. Orbit Energy confirmed it was the latest casualty of the energy market crisis, as companies unable to withstand higher wholesale prices go under. The latest collapse was announced by the energy regulator Ofgem in a tweet that also named Entice Energy – but the post was later deleted. A spokesperson for Entice could not be reached for comment. An Ofgem spokesperson said the tweet was sent in error. However, Orbit later updated its website to say it was ceasing to trade. It added: “Ofgem, the energy regulator, is appointing a new supplier for its customers. Customers need not worry, their supplies are secure and funds that domestic customers have paid into their accounts will be protected if they are in credit.” Poland has announced a 10 billion zlotys (£1.8bn) package to help its citizens cope with the jump in inflation. The programme will temporarily cut taxes on petrol, gas and electricity and provide cash payments to households, to cushion the cost of living squeeze. Associated Press has the details: Poland’s Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki said Thursday that starting in December the government will cut tax on fuels and on energy and will offer bonuses to hardest hit households next year to counter inflation that has reached its highest level since 2001. Morawiecki said that the so-called “anti-inflation shield” will cost the government some 10 billion zlotys ($2.4 billion) while additional funds will come from spending cuts. He blamed the inflation, which was 6.8% in October, year-on-year, on higher energy costs, saying they stem from Russia’s gas policy, the European Union’s climate policy and CO2 emission certificate prices, as well as on bonuses that were paid out to help businesses survive the COVID-19 pandemic. Prices have risen on foods, fuels and energy. “We are offering a large reduction of tax, in order to cushion the effects of the inflation,” Morawiecki said. Mexico’s economy shrank by more than expected in the last quarter as the Covid-19 pandemic hit businesses. Mexico’s GDP fell by 0.4% in the third quarter of the year, updated data show, twice as bad as the 0.2% contraction first reported. A nearly 1% contraction in tertiary activity, which includes services and transport, hit the economy, as the Delta variant hit service sector companies. Global supply chain disruptions have weighed on a recovery in manufacturing, with ‘secondary activity’ such as factories only rising 0.3%. The global supply chain problems pushing up the cost of UK goods in the shops, and weighing on the eurozone recovery are partly due to delays at China’s ports. Bloomberg has looked into this, and found that China’s tough quarantine rules are hitting the shipping industry’s recovery: China’s increasingly extreme Covid Zero policies are standing in the way of a full recovery for the shipping industry and prolonging a crisis that’s snarled ports and emptied shelves worldwide. In its attempts to keep the virus out, China’s continued to prohibit crew changes for foreign crew and recently imposed as much as a seven-week mandatory quarantine for returning Chinese seafarers. Even vessels that have refreshed their crew elsewhere have to wait two weeks before they’re allowed to port in China. To comply, shipowners and managers have had to reroute ships, delaying shipments and crew changes, adding to the supply chain crisis. “China’s restrictions cause knock-on effects,” said Guy Platten, the secretary general of the International Chamber of Shipping, which represents shipowners and operators. “Any restrictions to ship operations have an accumulative impact on the supply chain and cause real disruptions.” Carbon dioxide emissions in China have fallen for the first time since last year’s lockdown, a report today shows. It’s a sign that the downturn in China’s property sector, energy shortages, and the clampdown on polluting industries have all hit factory output. Emissions declined by about 0.5 per cent in the three months to the end of September, according to data published by Carbon Brief, a climate research and news service. It is the first decline since the first quarter of 2020, when the pandemic forced China to impose lockdowns and travel restrictions. It might show that China will hit peak emissions earlier than forecast. Alternatively, Beijing could stimulate its economy again, leading to a pick-up in emissions. Carbon Brief’s Simon Evans has tweeted the details: The supply chain problems hitting the euro area have lasted for longer than policymakers expected. The minutes of the European Central Bank’s last meeting, at the end of October, show that governing council members “widely acknowledged that supply bottlenecks were lasting longer than initially thought”. Some EB officials pointed out that firms relying on “just-in-time” delivery systems had suffered most, raising the question of whether future systems would return to relying more on inventories and buffers. Others suggested that the move towards more globalisation in manufacturing could reverse, the minutes say, adding: Overall, however, it was stressed that supply bottlenecks would gradually fade away as supply reconnected with demand, even though this was taking longer than expected. The meeting also discussed the surge in energy prices, which could increase the likelihood of “scarring effects” that could hamper future growth. But policymakers pushed back at the idea that Europe faces stagflation, pointing out that the euro area is still seeing robust growth, while a 1970s-style wage-price spiral is less likely today: In this context, it was recalled that stagflation experiences in the 1970s occurred in a different environment, in which indexation allowed wages to react to energy prices and thus sustained both stagnation and inflation. Sterling has now slipped to its lowest level of the year against the resurgent US dollar. The pound eased by 0.1% against the dollar to $1.3304, the lowest since last December. Uncertainty over when the Bank of England might raise interest rate, and last night’s hawkish tone in the Federal Reserve minutes, are weighing on the pound. Jeremy Thomson-Cook, chief economist at international business payments firm Equals Money, says: The only news to note [yesterday] from the UK were comments made by BoE member Silvana Tenreyro, where she commented that she would not want to say that we could see a rate rise in December or February and that any decision would be backed by economic data. Similar rhetoric as BoE governor Bailey’s comments about the BoE not providing forward guidance. Meanwhile, the dollar benefited from yesterday’s big fall in jobless claims, which adds to pressure to slow the Fed’s stimulus programme faster: We also saw a shift in sentiment from Fed member Daly saying that she sees the case for speeding up tapering. Her comments suggested that should the job market continue to improve and inflation continue to climb higher, then she sees the case for an acceleration of taper. The jump in prices in UK shops this month adds to evidence of surging price pressures in Britain. Inflation was already at a 13-year high and companies have been warning for months that their input cost had surged due to pricier raw materials, shortages, and wage pressures. It may push the Bank of England to raise interest rates next month for the first time since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, as Reuters points out here. Here’s more details of the CBI’s retail survey: UK shoppers face the biggest price rises in over thirty years this Christmas, as fears of shortages send people rushing to the shops early. The Confederation of British Industry’s quarterly Distributive Trades Survey has found that selling prices in November grew at the fastest pace since May 1990, with a balance of 77% of firms reporting higher prices than a year ago. Prices are expected to grow at a broadly similar pace next month, the CBI adds. Its monthly retail sales balance - which shows whether annual sales growth is rising or falling - rose to a three-month high of +39 in November from +30 in October. And a measures of sales for the time of year leapt to +35 from -1, its highest since September 2015. Retailers were also less worried about supply shortages. Stock levels in relation to expected sales were broadly adequate (-2% from -23%), having hit a series of record lows this year. They’re expected to be good next month, the CBI says (+4%). Ben Jones, CBI lead economist, says fears of shortages encouraged people to start their festive shopping earlier: “Christmas seems to have come early for retailers, with clothing and department stores in particular seeing a big upward swing in sales volumes in November. “It seems likely that reports of supply chain disruptions prompted consumers to start their Christmas shopping early. And there are encouraging signs that retailers’ efforts to help avoid any festive disappointments may be paying off, with stock levels seen as adequate for the first time in seven months. “Overall, retailers are becoming more optimistic, with both employment growth and investment intentions picking up strongly. Cost pressures remain a very real concern, however, with selling prices growing at the fastest pace since 1990.” The survey also found that internet sales were lower than a year ago, the first time in the survey’s 20-year higher history. That may be because England entered its second lockdown in November 2020, forcing non-essential shops to close. Web sales are expected to rise in December, as people get their Christmas shopping orders in. Sweden’s central bank has kept interest rates at the current record low of zero, and indicated that the first hike could come in 2024. The Riksbank left policy unchanged this morning, arguing that currently above-target inflation would ease back next year, saying: “If inflation is to be close to the target in the longer term, cost pressures need to increase more permanently. This requires continued support from monetary policy. It also stuck to its plans to maintain its balance sheet through next year before allowing the portfolio to decrease gradually. David Oxley, Senior European Economist at Capital Economics, told clients that the Riksbank had injected a ‘dash of hawkishness’: “While the Bank is in no rush to raise the repo rate, the insertion of a rate hike into the end of its three-year projection period means it is no longer as decidedly dovish” The pub and restaurant group Mitchells &amp; Butlers has warned that problems caused by Brexit and rising costs will hurt the hospitality sector, just as businesses return to profit after pandemic restrictions eased. The company, which owns pub chains including O’Neill’s and restaurant brands such as Harvester, said Brexit was still “an important event for the market” and had created risks for the sector, most notably around the supply and cost of products and workforce shortages. It said higher energy bills and increased staff wages were also weighing on the sector. Mitchells &amp; Butlers – which also runs All Bar One, Toby Carvery and Miller &amp; Carter – said customers began to return to its 1,600 UK venues when lockdown restrictions were relaxed in the spring. Its sales bounced back in August and September and it is now receiving bookings for Christmas parties. Announcing its annual results, the group said its suburban locations were trading better than those in city centres, as continued home working meant people visited their local rather than a branch near their workplace. Footfall in major cities has been slowly increasing in recent months, a trend the company expects to continue.... More here: Vacancies at UK companies remain high, with online job adverts last Friday still around 44% higher than the pre-pandemic level. The highest level of job adverts relative to its February 2020 level continues to be in “transport, logistics and warehouse” at 382%, while the largest weekly increase was in the “travel and tourism” category, rising by 11%. The Office for National Statistics’ weekly indicators also show that almost four in 10 hospitality firms said they were short of workers last week. The number of flights into and out of the UK hit its highest since the first lockdowns in March 2020 - following the reopening of travel to the US earlier this month. Multipack crisps are still the item in shortest supply at UK shops, following production problems at major producer Walkers. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) reports that 20% of stores visited between 19 and 22 November 2021 had limited supplies of crisps, and 4% had run out. That’s slightly better than a week earlier, when 26% were short of supplies, and 4% had empty crisp shelves. Crisps supplies have been disrupted by an IT computer upgrade at the world’s biggest crisp factory. Leicester-based Walkers said last month that the glitch forced it to slow production, forcing the company to prioritise its most popular varieties – including cheese and onion, ready salted and salt and vinegar, as well as Quavers and Wotsits. Kantar Public’s survey of 275 stores also found that paracetamol and ibuprofen were also in relatively short supply. Buying fresh pork could be a challenge too, with 12% of stores only offering short supplies and 2% running out. Shops were most likely to have run out of frozen turkeys, after consumers snapped them up quickly in recent weeks. Some 10% of shops didn’t have any frozen turkeys, while another 3% had limited stocks. The beer shelves are heaving, though, with only 2% of shops having low stocks. However, a group of 48 wine and spirits companies yesterday warned that Britain is facing a Christmas alcohol shortage unless the government does more to address the lack of HGV drivers. Shares in French spirits maker Remy Cointreau have surged to a record high after lifting its profit forecast after strong sales this year. The maker of Remy Martin cognac and Cointreau liqueur beat forecasts with a 104.5% jump in operating profits in the first half of this year. This is due to “excellent momentum” in China and the United States as well as a strong recovery in Europe, the firm says. This pushed shares up 10% this morning, meaning they’ve jumped 35% so far this year. Remy Cointreau now expects “very strong” growth in organic operating profits this year, and strong sales too. Chief executive officer Eric Vallat said in a statement. It has been an amazing semester for Remy Cointreau, reflecting our market share gains and the solid progress made on our strategic priorities. These results will reinforce our ability to become the worldwide leader in exceptional spirits,” The UK government has begun to count the cost of Bulb Energy’s collapse as many begin to wonder whether it is a fair price to pay for policymakers’ failure to spot a looming market breakdown. My colleague Jillian Ambrose writes. The life-support scheme set up to allow Bulb to keep supplying gas and electricity to its 1.7 million customers through the winter months could cost taxpayers up to £1.7bn, or £1,000 per customer, according to a court application to hand the company to a special administrator. Officials are understood to be focused on finding a quick exit strategy from the arrangement as early in the new year as possible to help limit the eye-watering costs, as signs of the supplier’s “unsustainable” business model grow clearer. Accounts for the collapsed supplier show a clear trend of growing losses and spiralling debts as it paid heavily to build its book of customers. In 2018, the company was believed to have around 300,000 customers and accounts showed debts of £26m. But by March 2020 Bulb’s dash for growth meant about 1.6 million customers and liabilities of £223m – with debt repayments due by the end of this year. “It looks like Bulb didn’t buy their energy far enough in advance and were surviving hand to mouth on borrowed money. That’s irresponsible, really,” said one source close to the government. Here’s the full story: And here’s reaction from ITV’s Joel Hills: And economist Shaun Richards: The Federal Reserve rang the first big ‘inflation alarm bell’ last night, says Neil Wilson of Markets.com, with the news that some policymakers believe its stimulus package could be wrapped up faster than thought: Will the Fed raise rates sooner than expected? Inflation the highest in 30 years, a labour market tighter than at any point since the great financial crisis and no Fed action - yet. No wonder we are starting to see them talk about a quicker taper, which would provide the ‘optionality’ to maybe raise rates a bit sooner than expected. We’ve been saying for some time that the Fed cannot ignore all this hard economic data, yet it seemed to be turning a blind eye to all the evidence. Recently though we have seen that it can adjust its uber-dovish stance to something less accommodative, albeit the pace of such transition has been glacial. But the Fed is going up a notch. We got really the first big ‘inflation alarm bell’ if you like from the FOMC, as minutes from the last Fed meeting said: “Various participants noted that the Committee should be prepared to adjust the pace of asset purchases and raise the target range for the federal funds rate sooner than participants currently anticipated if inflation continued to run higher than levels consistent with the Committee’s objectives”. Wow, that is a step-change and shows at last the persistence of the inflation and inflation expectations dynamics are starting to worry them. European markets have opened higher, with the Stoxx 600 index up around 0.4%. European equities hit a three-week low earlier this week, as fears of fresh lockdowns rippled through markets. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets thinks it could be a subdued day: Most of the attention is likely to be on how the new German government deals with the Covid emergency unfolding across its health system. Last night’s Fed minutes would appear to show a central bank that is becoming increasingly anxious about rising prices and their effect on the US economy. Unsurprisingly the pace of the taper was a topic for discussion, with some participants wanting a faster taper than the current $10bn in US treasuries and $5bn in mortgage-backed securities. Over the last two meetings there also seemed much less confidence that what we are seeing is transitory in nature, when it comes to inflation. In the City, the FTSE 100 index has made a quiet start to trading, up just 9 points or 0.11% at 7295 points. Copper producer Antofagasta leads the risers, up 2%, followed by industrial equipment rental company Ashtead. But telecoms operator Vodafone (-4%) is leading the fallers followed by tobacco firm Imperial Brands (-2.7%) after the pair went ex-dividend, with commercial property group British Land also lower (-1.5%). Here’s Victoria Scholar, Head of Investment at interactive investor, on today’s German economic data: “The GfK consumer sentiment index in Germany slumped to -1.6 in December while the previous reading was revised from negative to positive. The latest confidence reading, which was the lowest since June highlights consumer concerns about inflation and impact on purchasing power combined with fears about restrictions and lockdowns as COVID-19 cases rise. Meanwhile Germany’s third quarter GDP grew by 1.7%, less than initially estimated and below analysts’ consensus with growth still 1.1% below pre-pandemic levels. The figure was softened by a decline in government spending, exports, and a drop in investment. Entertainment and recreation remain the bright spots growing 13.5%, while supply chain bottlenecks delayed deliveries in the auto sector.” Germany’s economy grew more slowly than previously thought over the last quarter, in another sign that its recovery is faltering. German GDP rose by 1.7% in July-September, updated data show, down from 1.8% previously reported -- with household spending providing the only boost to growth. That’s a slowdown compared with Q2, when Germany’s economy grew by 2.0%. It’s weaker than the wider eurozone, which grew by 2.2% in Q3, but faster than the UK’s 1.3% growth. Statistics body Destatis reports that German household spending rose by 6.2% during the third quarter of the year. That shows consumers drove the recovery over the summer, as hospitality venues such as bars and restaurants reopened. However company investment and government spending both declined, while imports and exports both fell quarter-on-quarter, and net trade weighed on growth. German consumers are also less willing to make purchases, just as they head into the festive season. GFK’s survey found that people’s propensity to buy has fallen to a nine-month low, with the indicator halving to 9.7 points. This weakness is likely to weigh on Germany’s economy this quarter, especially as yesterday’s IFO survey showed a drop in business confidence. Consumer confidence in Germany has been hit by the surge in coronavirus infections, and the jump in inflation hitting households this winter. The GfK institute’s consumer sentiment index, based on a survey of around 2,000 Germans, fell to -1.6 points heading into December, down sharply from 1.0 points a month earlier. That’s the lowest reading since June, and below expectations. GfK economist Rolf Buerkl said the fourth wave in the COVID-19 pandemic, with skyrocketing infection rates and hospitals reaching capacity limits, was causing concerns that more restrictions for shops and restaurants were on the cards. “Consumer sentiment is currently being squeezed from two sides. On the one hand, the number of cases in the fourth wave of the coronavirus pandemic is exploding, which threatens to overwhelm the health system and could lead to further restrictions. On the other hand, the purchasing power of consumers is dwindling due to a high inflation rate of four percent” This slide in consumer morale in Europe’s largest economy will dampen business prospects for the upcoming Christmas shopping season, Buerkl adds: “The outlook for the upcoming Christmas season is now somewhat bleak.“ Some German states have already cancelled this year’s Christmas markets, due to concerns about the surge in Covid-19 cases, but others are going ahead. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. America’s central bank could wrap up its stimulus programme and raise interest rates earlier than expected, with inflation at a 30-year high and the jobs market improving. The minutes of the Federal Reserve’s most recent meeting, released last night, show that some policymakers are moving towards ending its bond-buying scheme sooner than thought, given the US’s high inflation rate which hit 6.2% last month. The Fed started tapering its $120bn/month asset purchase scheme at this month’s meeting, cutting it by $15bn per month -- at which rate it would end by next June. But the minutes drop a clear hint that tapering could be speeded up: “Various participants noted that the (policy-setting) Committee should be prepared to adjust the pace of asset purchases and raise the target range for the federal funds rate sooner than participants currently anticipated if inflation continued to run higher than levels consistent with the Committee’s objectives.” Some more dovish Fed members stressed they should take a “patient attitude” toward incoming data given supply chain problems and the pandemic. However... Participants noted that the Committee would not hesitate to take appropriate actions to address inflation pressures that posed risks to its longer-run price stability and employment objectives. The prospect of the Fed tightening policy faster than expected has weighed on the pound and the euro in recent weeks. Last night, sterling touched its lowest level of 2021, trading at just $1.3325 to the US dollar. The euro is even weaker - at its lowest against the US dollar since July 2020, and near a 21-month low against the pound. The FOMC Minutes suggested the doves on the committee are “in retreat”, says Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at OANDA: The committee noted that inflationary expectations in the near term could exceed forecasts and that a faster tapering is not out of the question. It is probably the last item that weighed on markets the most. Once again, currency markets were the pressure relief valve, with the US Dollar spiking once again, helped along by a soggy German IFO [business climate survey], fears of virus lockdowns and ECB officials pouring cold water on rate hikes. The news yesterday that US jobless claims have plunged to the lowest level since 1969 could also encourage the Fed to tighten policy faster. Deutsche Bank expect the Fed to press down on the taper accelerator in December, by doubling the cuts to its purchases of US government debt (Treasuries) and mortgage-backed securities. That would wrap the scheme up three months sooner than planned, as DB strategist Jim Reid explains: This would bring monthly reductions in Treasury purchases to $20bn [up from $10bn] and MBS purchases to $10bn [up from $5bn], which would bring the end of taper forward to March. In line, they’re bringing their call for liftoff forward a month to June 2022. Something for investors to ponder. Although...Wall Street is closed for Thanksgiving, while European stocks are expected to open higher despite concerns about the fourth wave of Covid-19. The agenda 8.30am GMT: Swedish central bank interest rate decision 9.30am GMT: Weekly real-time indicators of economic activity and social change in the UK 11am GMT: CBI distributive trades survey of UK retail sales in October 12.30pm GMT: European Central Bank publishes its Monetary Policy Meeting AccountsThanks for following the live updates. The blog will be closing shortly, so below is a summary of the main news of the day after at least 27 people died trying to cross the English Channel. It is up to France to stop refugees crossing the Channel in small boats, Priti Patel has said after 27 people, mostly Kurds from Iraq or Iran, drowned trying to reach the UK in an inflatable boat.Making a statement to MPs, the home secretary said that while there was no rapid solution to the issue of people seeking to make the crossing, she had reiterated a UK offer to send more police to France. Patel is facing three legal challenges over her controversial plans to push back refugees on small boats in the Channel who are trying to reach the UK. Several charities including Care4Calais and Channel Rescue are involved in two linked challenges arguing that Patel’s plans are unlawful under human rights and maritime laws. Freedom from Torture is involved in a third challenge. France said on Thursday it will beef up the surveillance of its northern shores, but migrants huddling in makeshift camps said neither that nor a tragic drowning the day before would stop them from trying to cross the Channel to Britain. French president Emmanuel Macron also appealed to neighboring European countries to do more to stop illegal migration into France. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has said authorities are “not doing enough” to diminish the “power” of people traffickers aiding migrants to embark on sea crossings to the UK. Jeremy Corbyn has called on the government to concentrate on the causes of mass migration, rather than trying to stop people getting to the UK. Priti Patel has said she will ask the BBC and other media to reflect on their use of language after widespread use of the term “migrant” to describe the people who drowned in the Channel on Wednesday. Labour MP Olivia Blake has criticised the home secretary, Priti Patel, for her stance on refugees crossing the Channel. Earlier on Thursday, Patel said it is up to France to stop crossings in small boats. Patel told the Commons she had just spoken to her French counterpart, Gérald Darmanin, following the disaster in which 17 men, seven women and three adolescents – two boys and a girl – were killed. “I’ve offered to work with France to put officers on the ground and do absolutely whatever is necessary to secure the area so that vulnerable people do not risk their lives by getting into unseaworthy boats,” she said. France said on Thursday it will beef up the surveillance of its northern shores, but migrants huddling in makeshift camps said neither that nor a tragic drowning the day before would stop them from trying to cross the Channel to Britain. Seventeen men, seven women and three teenagers died on Wednesday when their dinghy deflated in the Channel, one of many such risky journeys attempted in rickety, overloaded boats by people fleeing poverty and war in Afghanistan, Iraq and beyond. The deaths deepened animosity between Britain and France, already at odds over Brexit, with Prime Minister Boris Johnson saying France was at fault and French Interior Minister Gerald Darmanin accusing Britain of “bad immigration management”. With relations fraught over Brexit and immigration, much of the focus on Thursday was on who should bear responsibility, even if both sides vowed to seek joint solutions. President Emmanuel Macron defended Paris’s actions but said France was merely a transit country for many migrants and more European cooperation was needed to tackle illegal immigration. The day after 27 people died trying to reach Britain in an inflatable dinghy, charities said the Channel dividing Britain from France was sure to claim more migrants risking everything to flee war and poverty across the Middle East and Africa. “Unless we see this as a catalyst for proper systemic change, this will keep happening again and it will get worse,” said Kay Marsh, who works for the migrant charity Samphire in Dover, Britain’s gateway to Europe. “The deterrents aren’t working.” The UK will not be able to take back full control of its immigration and asylum policy unless the government scraps the Human Rights Act, Conservative MP Scott Benton said. The MP for Blackpool South said the deadliest day of the crisis on record underlines “why we need to do everything possible to make these dangerous routes unviable”, including scrapping the Human Rights Act. He said: “There is nothing compassionate or moral about allowing criminal gangs to exploit vulnerable people. “The leader of the House has already mentioned the Borders Bill but I fear that we won’t be able to gain back full control of our immigration and asylum policy unless we scrap the Human Rights Act (HRA).” Benton asked for a parliamentary debate “on alternatives to the HRA”. Commons Leader Jacob Rees-Mogg acknowledged “concerns” about the Human Rights Act have been a “theme” during the session of Business Questions, where Benton’s comments were made. He said: “We must be able to govern ourselves in this country in a way that secures safety and wellbeing for people trying to come here and people who are already here. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has said authorities are “not doing enough” to diminish the “power” of people traffickers aiding migrants to embark on sea crossings to the UK. He told the BBC’s Political Thinking podcast: “To be honest, I’m sick of the Home Secretary playing to the headlines on this with grand statements about what she’s going to do, turning boats back and all the rest of it, but actually not achieving anything in relation to this issue. “We need to be working with the French in the camps, working upstream on law enforcement because in the camps, among the problems, is the pull, the power of the people smugglers is far greater than those of the authorities because we are not doing enough work to break that link. “If the people smugglers say, ‘It is your turn, you’re on the boat this morning, here it is’, then desperate people who have got as far as the northern coast of France are more likely to do what the smugglers are telling them to do than the authorities giving them the support that they need.” The National Crime Agency has released a statement on the events that unfolded on Wednesday, with their deputy director Andrea Wilson saying: What happened in the English Channel yesterday was a tragedy, and our first thoughts have to be with the families and loved ones of those who died. The exact circumstances of this incident remain under investigation, but we know a high percentage of these attempted crossings are facilitated by organised criminal networks, who do not care about the safety or security of those they transport. They think nothing of putting vulnerable people in incredibly dangerous situations, just so they can exploit them for profit. A French judicial investigation into these deaths is now underway and we have offered our French counterparts the full support and resources of the NCA. Our international liaison officers are already working closely with French law enforcement partners. Together we are determined to find those responsible for these deaths so that they can be held to account for their actions. A new body was found on the northern French coast, newspaper La Voix du Nord reported on Thursday, saying that no link could be established to a drowning a day earlier, when 27 migrants died trying to cross the English channel in a rubber boat. The French newspaper reported on its website that a corpse had been found on the beach of Sangatte, west of Calais. It said that the identity of the victim was not known and that the state of the body indicated that it had spent more than 24 hours in the water. Hundreds of people are at risk of drowning in the Mediterranean, in a boat off the coast of north Africa that is currently disintegrating, according to Alarm Phone. In a reminder that the Channel is not the only European sea where people are continuing to die as they try to make desperate crossings, a new post by Alarm Phone says there are about 430 on board the boat, including dozens of children. Alarm Phone is a hotline for people on boats in distress. It does not coordinate or undertake rescues, but raises awareness of crises. The post said that activists had repeatedly informed authorities in Rome and Malta of the emergency. “MRCC Rome has informed us that they were not the ‘competent authority’ in this case, while RCC Malta simply hangs up the phone when we try to relay information on the case,” it says. Read more here. Jeremy Corbyn has called on the government to concentrate on the causes of mass migration, rather than trying to stop people getting to the UK. During the Commons debate on yesterday’s tragedy in the Channel, the former leader of the Labour party, who currently sits as an independent MP, said: “Does the home secretary (Priti Patel) accept that the only way in which people traffickers and gangs can operate is because of the absolute desperation of people across Europe and indeed across the world? “And instead of concentrating on more frontiers, more barbed wire, more surveillance, not just in this country but all across Europe, what we should be doing is looking at the causes of asylum in the first place: the environmental disasters, the wars, the abuse of human rights, the poverty?” Priti Patel replied that the government is working to address these issues with the international community, adding: “Migrants are not just in the hands of people smugglers, they are travelling through safe countries where there are functioning asylum systems in these safe countries where they could claim asylum. That also is something that all international partners should be supporting.” Amnesty International has called on the UK government to “take decisive action” to prevent more deaths in the Channel, as it warned that the dangerous journeys take place because the government will not provide a safe alternative for people to exercise their right to claim asylum. In a statement responding to the quarterly immigration statistics, released earlier on Thursday, Amnesty said deaths of people crossing the Channel have risen because the government provides no safe and legal routes for people to enter the UK. Steve Valdez-Symonds, Amnesty International UK’s Refugee and Migrant Rights director, said: In the wake of the devastating tragedy at the Channel yesterday, the UK government must urgently take decisive action to prevent more loss of life. The UK must make it a priority to share responsibility with other countries to receive people into its asylum system – they must do this by providing safe and legal routes and encourage others to do the same. We must remember that dangerous journeys take place because the government provides no safe alternative for people to exercise their right to seek asylum here. The Afghanistan Citizenship Resettlement Scheme is one example of the government’s fundamental failure to provide safe routes – a scheme announced in August that has still not opened – ministers cannot even guarantee it will open anytime soon. The UK’s failure to play its part in providing protection to people who are fleeing conflict and persecution is even more distressing at a time when the Home Office is trying to push through its draconian nationality and borders bill. This new policy will further exacerbate the asylum system and continue to punish and exclude people seeking safety. If the government is truly concerned with tackling these gangs and their abuse of people, they must set up safe asylum routes, so people no longer need to depend on smugglers. We desperately need a new approach to asylum – including genuine Anglo-French efforts to devise safe asylum routes, a major overhaul of the painfully slow applications system, an end to the use of dangerous and unsuitable accommodation facilities like Napier Barracks, and a political approach based on real humanity. Priti Patel has said she will ask the BBC and other media to reflect on their use of language after widespread use of the term “migrant” to describe the people who drowned in the Channel on Wednesday. The home secretary made the undertaking after an intervention by the SNP MP Brendan O’Hara, who said: “Last night I tuned in to the BBC 10 o’clock news to get the latest on this terrible disaster and I was absolutely appalled when a presenter informed me that around 30 migrants had drowned. “Migrants don’t drown. People drown. Men, women and children drown. “So will the secretary of state join me in asking the BBC News editorial team and any other news outlet thinking of using that term to reflect on their use of such dehumanising language and afford these poor people the respect that they deserve.” Patel said: “Even during the Afghan operations and Op Pitting I heard a lot of language that quite frankly seemed to be inappropriate around people who were fleeing. “So yes, I will.” The EU commissioner in charge of migration is to speak to her French counterpart about the migration crisis in the Channel, writes Jennifer Rankin, the Guardian’s Brussels correspondent. Ylva Johansson, a Swedish Social Democrat in charge of the EU’s migration policy, will meet Gérald Darmanin, the French interior minister, later on Thursday to discuss how the EU can help France deal with people crossing the English Channel in small boats Johansson suggested there could be more EU funds for France via the EU border agency, Frontex. What more can we do from the European Commission? We can support even more from Frontex. We can support financially and I will talk to the French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, later this afternoon to discuss this directly with him. Of course we need European cooperation and help and support to prevent these kind of tragedies from happening. It’s a tragedy for each life that is being lost. That is why it is so important to prevent these extremely dangerous journeys. The French President Emmanuel Macron has called for an emergency EU meeting since the tragedy where at least 27 people lost their lives, including three children and a pregnant woman. EU home affairs ministers are due to meet on 9 December, a meeting the UK would have taken part in before Brexit. Lewis Goodall, the policy editor of BBC Newsnight, has tweeted an updated breakdown of the 27 casualties of Wednesday’s tragedy. A survivor of the perilous journey from Syria to the UK has criticised the lack of refugees’ voices in the debate on migration. Ahmad Al-Rashid, originally from the wartorn city of Aleppo, was granted refugee status after he arrived in the UK in the back of a lorry following a perilous 55-day journey that involved sea crossings and a stay in the Calais “jungle”. According to his own tweets, he had been booked to speak on BBC Radio 4 this morning, but the booking was cancelled at the last minute. “Just have been informed by the BBC that they won’t be speaking with me this morning as they ‘needed to change some of the items’,” he posted on the microblogging site. “Not a single voice of people who lived through those journeys and know what it means to leave everything behind. The narrative on migration is so toxic and politicised beyond disgusting,” he added. Priti Patel has told MPs she has once again made an offer to her French counterpart to begin joint patrols to prevent people attempting to cross the Channel by boat. In a statement to the Commons this afternoon, the home secretary said she had earlier spoken with Gérald Darmanin, the French interior minister, in an effort to find solutions to the developing crisis. “I’ve literally just spoken again with my French counterpart, Minister Darmanin, and I’ve once again reached out and made my offer very clear to France in terms of joint France and UK cooperation, joint patrols to prevent these dangerous journeys from taking place,” Patel told MPs. “I’ve offered to work with France to put officers on the ground and do absolutely whatever is necessary to secure the area so that vulnerable people do not risk their lives by getting into unseaworthy boats.” Patel said there was “no quick fix” to the migrant crisis, but added that she was glad Emmanuel Macron, the French president, had “indicated his determination to stop the vile people smuggling gangs” and to work closely with all partners across Europe. “What happened yesterday was a dreadful shock, it was not a surprise but it is also a reminder of how vulnerable people are put at peril when in the hands of criminal gangs,” Patel said. “There is also no quick fix. This is about addressing long-term pull factors, smashing the criminal gangs that treat human beings as cargo and tackling supply chains.” As we mourn those who have died in the most horrendous circumstances I hope the whole house can come together with this simple message that crossing the Channel in a small boat is not the way to reach this country, Patel concludes. The government’s new plan for immigration, which will be put into law through the nationality and borders bill. will address “underlying and core factors” by bringing in a range of measures to handle migration, including life sentences for people smugglers, says Patel. However, the authorities are not waiting until the bill passes. She says the national crime agency is taking action at every level and claims it has dismantled 17 organised crime groups. “This is a complicated issue and there is no simple fix.” The UK has given “generous and unflinching support” to France to deal with the crisis, Patel says. Given the chance traffickers will always find people to exploit and manipulate. Some of them don’t even know they are coming to the UK, Patel says. Priti Patel is beginning her statement to the Commons on the tragedy in the Channel yesterday. Information is still being gathered about the situation in France, she says. Emmanuel Macron has called for stronger European cooperation on irregular migration after 27 people died on Wednesday when their dinghy deflated in the English Channel. “We need stronger European cooperation in this area. France is a transit country,” Macron said during a press conference in Zagreb. “I will also say very clearly that our security forces are mobilised day and night,” the president added, according to the Reuters news agency. Scenes of people continuing to arrive on England’s coast in small boats on Thursday showed the need to crack down on people smuggling, Downing Street has said. The PA Media news agency quoted the prime minister’s official spokesperson as saying: “It illustrates that we absolutely need to step up our work with our French counterparts to dismantle this horrific trade which preys on vulnerable people. “It demonstrates that it is still ongoing despite the horrific tragedy we saw yesterday, and more needs to be done. “That’s why the prime minister spoke to President Macron yesterday, it is why the home secretary is speaking to her counterpart today.” Martin Chulov, the Guardian’s Middle East editor, last week asked Masrour Barzani, the prime minister of Iraq’s Kurdish area, about Kurdish migrants fleeing to Europe. This is what he said: Unfortunately, it looks like that these people have been exploited by a number of people, let’s say ‘travel agents’, human traffickers, some political merchants, if I may say that, and of course some people from within Belarus as well. These people did not leave this area under any sort of pressure, and they were not legally pursued, or imposed with any restrictions on their travel, so most of these people travelled freely on their own will through airlines and official channels. “After they went to Belarus, spending some time in hotels, they were directed to the border to cross into the European Union. Unfortunately, the situation with the cold weather and, from what we’ve seen from TV and video footage, it’s very concerning because some of them have children, and these children are innocent people who are unfortunately paying the price for what looks like to be a political game. “Many want to go to Europe in search of a different opportunity; it’s not the flee of desperation. They’re going there [to seek different opportunities] and I hope that the truth is told and the world knows that these people went there like every other immigrant wants to travel and go in search of different opportunities in different parts of the world, but if they want to return, they can always return here. “In fact, many of the people who have gone, have spent thousands of dollars to travel agents and some individuals. So, if they could come up with thousands of dollars to pay for their trip, I’m sure if they wanted to work together, they could have created their own jobs here. As we’ve seen in many parts of Kurdistan, I’ve seen entrepreneurs in Sulaimani, in Duhok, in Erbil, that have started their own small jobs and the government has also been supportive of them to do that.” The tragedy in the channel this week took place against a backdrop in which the home secretary, Priti Patel, has used language aimed at appeasing the far right, according to antifascist campaigners, reports Ben Quinn. Rosie Carter, director of policy at Hope Not Hate, said the deaths of dozens of people happened in a climate “that demonises migrants, with a government that attacks those who attempt to protect the lives of people seeking sanctuary”. “It happened in a climate where the home secretary has nonchalantly spoken about defying international law, putting gunboats and wave machines in the channel, and consistently hardened her rhetoric to score political points and appease the far-right. “Using immigration as a political football puts lives at risk. We cannot forget that the never ending ‘immigration debate’ that fills our newspapers and television screens is a debate about people’s right to live.” A far-right activist who was this month banned from setting foot in Dover was meanwhile on trails overlooking the town broadcasting footage of his encounters with members of the press. We will have a live feed of Priti Patel’s statement in the Commons on what the government is describing as the “small boats incident in the Channel”. The feed will be embedded at the top of the blog before the start of the statement, expected from 12.45-1pm. There has been criticism on Twitter at the government’s choice of words to describe the tragedy, in which 17 men, seven women – at least one of whom was pregnant – and three children died, according to the latest estimates. Here is a Twitter thread by Channel Rescue about their plans to take legal action against the home secretary over her “pushback” policy. They are also promoting a gov.uk petition calling on the government to reform its policy on Channel crossings. Priti Patel is facing three legal challenges over her controversial plans to push back refugees on small boats in the Channel who are trying to reach the UK, Diane Taylor reports. Several charities including Care4Calais and Channel Rescue are involved in two linked challenges arguing that Patel’s plans are unlawful under human rights and maritime laws. Freedom from Torture is involved in a third challenge. The Guardian has revealed that government lawyers have warned Patel she is likely to lose any legal challenge against her pushbacks policy. The Guardian reporter Ben Quinn has been in Dover, where he witnessed the arrival of a group of people who had made the crossing over the Channel early this morning. Heads in hand and with Red Cross blankets draped over their shoulders, men and women waited on a red double decker bus parked at UK Border Force facilities hours after being brought into Dover in the early hours of Thursday morning. What are believed to be the possessions of more than 50 people, picked up after attempting perilous crossings of the Channel, could be seen being transferred into a van by contract staff. A Border Force cutter picked up one group before 4am while a lifeboat brought in another group separately before 5am. They were waiting on the double decker bus at 11.30am. Looking out in the direction of France from the facility, where initial processing takes place under a large white marquee after people are brought up from a gangway, sea conditions appeared calm although wind speeds are considerably stronger than yesterday. Today, winds are 17-25mph compared with 4-6mph for much of the day yesterday, when the tragedy at sea claimed the lives of dozens of people. A number of Border Forces vessels could be seen moored in the harbour meanwhile, as an aircraft that appeared to be a search-and-rescue plane flew over the town. A French lifeboat worker has described the scene that met rescuers trying to save the lives of those lost in yesterday’s tragedy in the Channel. Charles Devos described seeing “a flat, deflated inflatable boat with the little air that remained helping it float” surrounded by bodies of the drowned, according to the AFP news agency. French officials said earlier three helicopters and three boats had searched the area, finding corpses and people unconscious in the water, after a fisher sounded the alarm. Earlier, Sky News obtained a picture it said showed the remains of the dinghy. The prime minister of Iraq’s Kurdish region has said his authorities are attempting to establish the identities of any potential Kurdish victims of yesterday’s migrant boat tragedy. Masrour Barzani said he was “deeply saddened” by the deaths, and that his thoughts were with the families of the victims. Progress has been made in stopping people from crossing the Channel in small boats, a Cabinet minister has told the Commons, as he answered questions about yesterday’s tragedy. Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister overseeing the response to the current migration crisis in the Channel, said 20,000 crossings had been stopped in 2021 but the UK would continue to work with the French authorities to avert further tragedies. Philip Hollobone, the Conservative MP for Kettering, had Barclay to persuade Whitehall officials to “come up with constructive solutions” rather than “coming up with reasons why something can’t be done”. Barclay told the Commons: “Firstly, I and I’m sure all members across the House join the prime minister in saying how deeply saddened we all are by the terrible tragedy that we saw yesterday. “In response to the challenge of small boats it is a whole-of-government endeavour and it is right therefore that we work across the whole of government to look at all aspects of that journey – both upstream, our processing, our legal framework – and approach that across government. “He will be aware that progress has been made – 20,000 crossings have been stopped so far this year – but we will continue to work with the French in partnership to ensure that we can avert tragedies as we saw yesterday.” An emergency protest is being called for outside the Home Office on Thursday evening, demanding an end to deaths in the Channel. Ben Smoke, politics editor of Huck magazine, has posted details on his Twitter feed. Speakers from the campaign groups Sisters Uncut, Migrants Organise, Soas Detainee Support, Channel Rescue and Kurdish People’s Assembly are expected to address the rally. Smoke told the Guardian: “The tragic deaths in the Channel yesterday are the responsibility of our government and their hostile environment policies. We have seen time and time again that building our walls higher doesn’t stop people coming, it simply makes the fall more deadly. “It’s time for Priti Patel to rethink her disastrous and deadly border policies and open up safe routes of passage for all. It’s the only way to stop the needless loss of human life in the channel, and we’ll be telling her so outside the Home Office tonight.” A spokesperson for Sisters Uncut said: “We are devastated at the loss of more than 30 lives as they attempted to seek refuge in the UK. People are drowning on our shores because our governments deem them unworthy of life. “For this to happen just 24 hours after Priti Patel opens her inhumane detention centre for migrant women is disturbing, a bold display of her disdain for our communities, a cruel and murderous punishment for those just trying to find a safer life. “The torture that meets people who are fleeing violence and seeking safety in our country must come to an end.” Newly released Home Office figures have shown that asylum claims have risen to their highest level for nearly 20 years, and higher than at the peak of the European migration crisis in 2015-16. A total of 37,562 applications were made in the year to September – more than in any 12-month period since the year to June 2004, when 39,746 applications were made. At the peak of the European migration crisis in 2015 and 2016, 36,546 applications were made. The latest figure is up 18% on 31,966 applications made in the year to September 2020, although this will have been affected by the coronavirus pandemic amid restrictions on movement. There were 35,737 applications for the same period in 2019. A total of 67,547 asylum applications were awaiting a decision at the end of September – up 41% year on year and the highest since current records began in June 2010. The Archbishop of Canterbury has described the deaths of 27 people in the Channel on Wednesday as “a devastating loss of human life”. Justin Welby, who is the head of the Anglican church, called for reform “across frontiers” of the system for immigration and asylum. He said: “This was a devastating loss of human life - each person a child of God. Praying for all those suffering agonising grief today. We need a better system based on safety, compassion, justice and cooperation across frontiers. This cannot go on.” If you have been affected by this story or want to share news tips or information directly with our journalists then please get in contact by filling in the form here. You can also contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. The deaths of 27 people trying to cross the Channel on Wednesday should “act as a wake-up call to make the world a better place”, the chair of the Refugee Council has said. In an article for the Guardian, Enver Solomon accused the UK government of unfairly labelling those who try to make the crossing as “economic migrants”. He goes on: The reality is different. An analysis by the Refugee Council published last week shows that almost all arrivals in the 18 months to June this year were from 10 countries, such as Iran, Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Sudan, Eritrea and Afghanistan where persecution is not uncommon. More than six out of 10 people from these nations seeking asylum in the UK are granted refugee status or protection. For the top five countries it is higher at seven out of 10. French authorities are now estimating that 27 people lost their lives in yesterday’s Channel crossing tragedy, a slight downgrade on the figure of 31 that was originally announced on Wednesday. Speaking on Thursday morning, Gérald Darmanin, France’s interior minister, gave the figure of 27. Two survivors, one Iraqi and one Somali, were being treated for hypothermia, Darmanin told RTL radio. The French state-backed news agency Agence France-Presse reported that prosecutors in Lille were saying that 17 men, seven women and three minors were among those who lost their lives. So far five people have been arrested in connection with the tragedy. The Refugee Council has called on the UK government to urgently adopt “fairer, more compassionate and effective” solutions to allow people to reach the UK and claim asylum. In a statement published on its website, the NGO said the government must “commit and deliver the expansion of existing safe routes” for migrants, including “an annual resettlement target of at least 10,000 refugees”. This should be done via “a humanitarian visa system to allow people to apply for a visa to enter the UK for the purposes of claiming asylum”, so that no one needs to make the perilous journey across the Channel in a small boat. “Behind every single person that needlessly lost their life last night will be a person who was looking for safety, for protection and who had hope of a new life that now will never be realised,” the Refugee Council statement says. “No one should ever feel their only option for their future is to cross the world’s busiest shipping lane in a dinghy. “Rather than tougher measures that seek to punish and push away, or inaccurate and false statements that seek to dehumanise and, at worse, demonise people who cross the channel, we call on the government to adopt a fairer, more compassionate and effective set of solutions.” Founded in 1951, following the creation of the UN Refugee Convention, the Refugee Council is a leading charity working with refugees and people seeking asylum in the UK. You can read the statement in full here. Sky News has obtained a picture of the remains of the dinghy that capsized in the Channel on Wednesday. Before giving her statement in the Commons, Priti Patel will be speaking with her French counterpart on Thursday morning about ways to stop people trying to reach the UK from France in small boats. Kevin Foster, the immigration minister, mentioned on BBC Breakfast that the conversation would be taking place. “The home secretary will be speaking to her French counterpart later this morning,” he said. The home secretary, Priti Patel, will make a statement in the Commons today on the deaths of the more than 27 people drowned while trying to cross the Channel in an inflatable boat. The government’s decision to say the statement will be about a “small boats incident” could be seen as an inappropriate choice of words. The MP for Dover, Natalie Elphicke, has called for increased patrols on the beaches of France to stop people embarking on the dangerous trip across the channel to the UK. Elphicke told BBC Breakfast: “Yesterday we saw footage of French police standing by while people got the boat ready, picked up the engine and took to the water on the French side. They did absolutely nothing. That’s unacceptable and that’s got to change. “The British are standing by willing to put people to help, the EU I’m sure will come to the French’s aid as well, this is a humanitarian crisis on the shores of France, these people smugglers must not be allowed to continue to ply their trade and put people’s lives at risk in these wintry seas.” But her counterpart in Calais, Pierre-Henri Dumont, said he did not think that more patrols around the French border was the solution. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I’m not sure that having more police officers or more materials on the French shore will help to stop these crossings because we have 200 or 300 kilometres of shore to monitor 24/7. “It only takes five to 10 minutes to take a boat and put it at sea filled with migrants, so I’m not sure it is only a question of money and the number of men.” Asked about the UK’s proposal to provide patrols of the French beaches, Dumont added: “No, that wouldn’t work. To monitor all the shore would take thousands of people. “There is also a question of sovereignty - I’m not sure the British people would accept it the other way round, with the French army patrolling the British shore.” The Guardian’s Paris correspondent, Angelique Chrysafis, has sent these front pages of French papers that are leading on the tragedy in the Channel. La Voix du Nord, the local paper on the northern French coast, headlined on the tragedy “that everyone feared would happen”. Le Parisien: Tragedy off the coast of Calais The secretary general of l’Auberge des Migrants, a French humanitarian organisation, has criticised French and British officials’ attempts to blame people smugglers for yesterday’s Channel tragedy. Maya Konforti told the French TV channel BFMTV the British government and French interior minister were blaming smugglers, but “the existence of smugglers is in response to a need; a need because there’s no legal way to go and seek asylum in Britain”. She said the NGO was working to identify the bodies, contact the families, organise the funerals and repatriate the bodies. “When it’s one or two people it’s manageable, but with 31 people, we don’t know how we’re going to do it,” she said. “It will be very, very complicated and it will also be very, very expensive.” She added: “We were sure this would happen one day, but up until now ... when there have been deaths, it was one or two at a time, but this is a catastrophe.” Just hours after the search for people lost in the tragic capsizing of an inflatable boat in the Channel, more undocumented migrants have arrived in Dover after making the perilous journey across the narrow, freezing strait. A group of people wearing life jackets and wrapped in blankets were seen huddled together on board an RNLI lifeboat before disembarking in Dover on Thursday morning, according to the PA Media news agency. The fall-out from yesterday’s tragedy in the Channel is continuing today, with crisis meetings expected in Paris and London. We will be keeping you updated throughout the day with the latest news on the developing crisis. Safe Passage, a charity that specialises in securing futures for unaccompanied minors, has called for Priti Patel to resign after the tragedy in the channel, writes Lisa O’Carroll. The charity’s chief executive, Beth Gardiner-Smith, said the failure to provide safe routes for those fleeing Afghanistan and other countries of conflict was a factor in the rise in numbers risking their lives to reach British shores. “More and more people are risking the freezing, frightening journey across the Channel in small, unstable boats since the government closed safe routes to the UK last year. “Choosing to play politics with people’s lives, the government has failed to prevent people risking the crossing and this is the result. The government must act now to save lives by opening safe routes to the UK, and scrap their unworkable plans in the Nationality and Borders Bill which will only make the situation worse,” she said. Our live coverage of the Channel crossing tragedy will pause for a short while. If you’ve been following along, thanks for joining us and you can catch up with any new developments by following our story here. British and French leaders have traded accusations after at least 27 people died trying to cross the Channel on Wednesday. In a phone call with Boris Johnson on Wednesday night, French president Emmanuel Macron stressed “the shared responsibility” of France and the UK, and told Johnson he expected full cooperation and that the situation would not be used “for political purposes”, the Élysée said. The British prime minister renewed calls for France to agree to joint police patrols along the Channel coast, and said Wednesday’s incident highlighted how efforts by French authorities to patrol their beaches “haven’t been enough”. Read the full story here. The number of people who have made the perilous journey across the English Channel in small boats to the UK has tripled since 2020, figures reveal. The total number of people who made the crossing this year is thought to be more than 25,600, according to Home Office statistics. The Home Office also confirmed earlier this month that the number of refugees who had to be rescued reached 1,131 on a single day – the second highest daily figure since the current crisis began in 2019. Despite the increasing numbers of small boat arrivals, the UK continues to see far fewer boat arrivals and asylum claims than many of its European counterparts. The UK government has repeatedly promised to make such crossings “unviable” and pledged tens of millions of pounds to France to help tackle the issue. Here’s a run-down of what the British papers have had to say following the worst documented migrant Channel disaster. The front pages were dominated by the crisis with coverage veering from sombre reporting to accusations that the French authorities did not do enough to prevent the tragedy. The UK House of Commons is set to hold a debate on “the numbers of migrants arriving in the United Kingdom illegally by boat” just before midday on Thursday, according to a recently released parliamentary schedule. Earlier this month, Boris Johnson ordered a review into Channel small-boat crossings to find a way of cutting the number of people making such voyages from France. The British prime minister is said to have grown exasperated that there are no policies in place to tackle the issue. The new borders and nationalities bill is currently going through parliament. Priti Patel said she is considering strict new rules at detention centres for people who have crossed the Channel from France, which could could result in their asylum claims being rejected. More than 24,500 people are thought to have arrived on the south coast this year, more than three times the approximately 8,500 arrivals documented in 2020. Two survivors of the dinghy that capsized off the coast of northern France are believed to be in intensive care in Calais Hospital as the bodies of those who tragically drowned await to be transported from inside a warehouse in the port city. Photos of the rescue operation taken late on Wednesday evening show French police sealing off an area at Calais harbour. A man was also seen wheeling a gurney into a warehouse in the port of Calais, believed to be holding the bodies of 27 people recovered from the sea. The British Red Cross has described the drowning deaths of at least 27 people as “truly heartbreaking” and called on the UK government to “rethink its plans” regarding the nation’s asylum system. “Our thoughts are with the loved ones of those tragically lost their lives today in the English Channel. It’s truly heart-breaking,” the organisation said. Mike Adamson, the organisation’s chief executive, said “there are no simple answers” but urged the government to “rethink its plans for making the UK’s asylum system harder to access”. “Nobody puts their life at risk unless they are absolutely desperate and feel they have no other options,” he said. “Everyone deserves to live in safety and it should be unacceptable to us that people have no choice but to make dangerous crossings in their search for this.” As politicians in both France and the UK publicly lament the drowning deaths from earlier today, those familiar with the migrant situation say the tragedy was “predicted and predictable”. Late Wednesday evening, British prime minister Boris Johnson said he was “shocked, appalled and deeply saddened” by the news dozens of desperate people drowned off the coast of northern France in an attempt to teach the UK in a dinghy. French president Emmanuel Macron added that France “will not allow the Channel to become a cemetery”. However, BBC Newsnight policy editor Lewis Goodall said he understood about 25 boats had attempted the crossing during the day on Wednesday. “We had been told that many would attempt to cross the Channel overnight due to rapidly worsening weather,” he said, adding that the numbers involved and the quality of boats made the tragedy inevitable. “The grim truth is today was predicted and predictable,” Goodall said. “I’ve been told today people were still trying to cross the Channel earlier this afternoon. The terrible weather expected in the coming days means people know this is their last chance to make it to the UK for a while.” Migrants camp for the night near the harbour in Calais after dozens drowned when their boat capsized leaving the area just hours earlier. The men and women - from Sudan, Eritrea and Kurdistan - live in threadbare camps scattered along the city and major ferry port in Northern France. Now at the centre of a political storm, many remain undeterred in their plans to seek safety in the UK. A report from Human Rights Watch, earlier this month, using data from local charities, estimates there are still about 2,000 migrants “in wooded areas, in and around disused warehouses, and under bridges in and around Calais”, including about 300 unaccompanied children. Several hundred more are camped in a forest near Dunkirk. British prime minister Boris Johnson has called on France to agree to joint police patrols along the French Channel coast after the leaders appeared to trade blame late on Wednesday evening. Downing Street said they had agreed to “keep all options on the table” in their efforts to break up the human trafficking gangs responsible for putting desperate people at risk in one of the world’s busiest sea lanes. Immigration compliance minister Tom Pursglove confirmed that Johnson had renewed a previous offer to send UK police and Border Force officers to mount joint patrols with the French, according to the Associated Press. Pursglove said the last incident showed the two countries needed to deepen their co-operation in dealing with the issue. “The Prime Minister and President Macron have had exactly that discussion this evening. That is something that I am very keen to see happen,” he told BBC2’s Newsnight. “It is the case that in the past we have offered to host and to help with joint patrols. I think that could be invaluable in helping to address this issue. I really do hope that the French will reconsider that offer.” French president Emmanuel Macron warned Boris Johnson to stop the “politicisation of migrant flows for domestic gain”, according to a Reuters report. The leaders spoke during an urgent phone call late Wednesday night. Johnson said he was “shocked and appalled” by the tragedy and suggested the French government had not always approached the problem of the crossings “in a way we think the situation deserves”. People trafficking gangs were “literally getting away with murder”, he said. However, Macron stressed “the shared responsibility” of France and the UK and told Johnson he expects full cooperation from the British and that they do not use the tragic situation “for political purposes”. France’s government is holding an emergency meeting Thursday morning to discuss next steps. Macron advocated an immediate funding boost for the European Union’s border agency, Frontex, and an emergency meeting of European government ministers, according to his office. “France will not allow the Channel to become a cemetery,” Macron said, adding: “Europe... is in mourning tonight.” He promised “everything will be done to find and condemn those responsible” and that “France will not let the Channel become a graveyard”. Mirelle Clapot, a member of the French National Assembly, said that the only solution can be found through co-operation during an interview with BBC Two’s Newsnight. “France has some limited means and resources and I think France does its best but it’s really facing a challenge. “The smugglers are becoming more and more powerful and want to make more and more money and so they convince these poor people that it’s time to cross the channel even when it is very cold and very dark.” She said that the state had tried to propose other places to live in France but the migrants “have one obsession - to cross the channel”. The tragedy is the worst-ever incident involving migrants in the Channel, according to French maritime authorities. It is being reported by the AFP news agency and other French media outlets that the death toll has been revised down to 27, from the 31 announced earlier this evening. This was confirmed by the French interior minister Gérald Darmanin tonight. It comes as the French president Emmanuel Macron warned Boris Johnson to stop the “politicisation of migrant flows for domestic gain”, according to a report from the Reuters news agency. Here is a round-up of everything we know so far about the tragedy in the Channel tonight, which saw dozens of desperate people drown off the coast of northern France and they tried to reach the UK in a dinghy. At least 31 people including five women and a young girl have died trying to cross the Channel to the UK in an inflatable dinghy, officials say, in what is the deadliest incident since the current crisis began. Two survivors are in intensive care while police have arrested four people suspected of being linked to the drownings. The International Organisation for Migration said it was the biggest single loss of life in the Channel since it began collecting data in 2014. It has been reported that the boat that capsized in the Channel tonight was hit by a large ship, according to La Voix Du Nord, a regional news site in northern France. There has been no official word on the detail of the tragedy but the news website claims the small boat, carrying some 34 people including 31 who drowned, was hit by a container ship. Boris Johnson has spoken to the French President Emmanuel Macron this evening and have agreed to “step up efforts” to stop people smugglers. French President Emmanuel Macron on Wednesday called for an urgent meeting of European Union ministers involved in immigration issues following the drowning of 31 people as they tried to reach Britain from French shores. “France will not allow the English Channel to turn into a graveyard,” Macron said in a statement. But Boris Johnson suggested the French government had not always approached the problem of the crossings “in a way we think the situation deserves”. The UK’s home secretary Priti Patel said the deaths of a reported 31 people after a boat capsized in the Channel were the “starkest possible reminder” of the dangers of the crossing. Shadow home secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds said action was needed to disrupt the flow of people before they reached the Channel coast. “It really now has to act as the most tragic of wake-up calls to redouble our efforts to make sure that people are not out on the water in these terrible makeshift boats risking their lives,” he told the BBC. People seeking to cross the Channel must be moved from Calais to the middle of France - even if by force, the city’s MP has said. Pierre-Henri Dumont told Sky News that people will continue to try to cross the English Channel as long as they are based in Calais. Responding to the tragedy this evening where at least 31 died while trying to reach sanctuary in the UK, Beth Gardiner-Smith, CEO of Safe Passage International, has called on the Home Secretary Priti Patel to immediately resign. Meanwhile, the campaign group Stand Up To Racism has organised an emergency solidarity protest outside Downing Street for Saturday afternoon. In the Facebook event for the demonstration, called ‘Don’t Let Them Drown - Refugees Welcome’, the group says it is government policy that is to blame for tonight’s tragedy. It has been reported that the boat that capsized in the Channel tonight was hit by a large ship, according to La Voix Du Nord, a regional news site in northern France. There has been no official word on the detail of the tragedy but the news website claims the small boat, carrying some 34 people including 31 who drowned, was hit by a container ship. At least 31 people including five women and a young girl have died trying to cross the Channel to the UK in an inflatable dinghy, officials say, in what is the deadliest incident since the current crisis began. Two survivors are in intensive care while police have arrested four people suspected of being linked to the drownings. The International Organisation for Migration said it was the biggest single loss of life in the Channel since it began collecting data in 2014. Boris Johnson, who held a Cobra meeting on Wednesday to discuss the incident, said he was “appalled” by the tragedy. He then suggested the French government had not always approached the problem of the crossings “in a way we think the situation deserves”. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, told an impromptu news conference in Calais that the boat that sank had been “very frail”, and compared it to “a pool you blow up in your garden”. He said 34 people were believed to have been on before it sank. Authorities found 31 bodies and the two survivors while one person was missing. When Boris Johnson addressed restive backbenchers last week with his party gripped by a sleaze crisis, the topic of stopping small boats crossing the Channel was raised by more colleagues than any other, according to one MP present. While overall asylum applications are down on a year ago, the sharp increase in the number of arrivals by this dangerous and very visible route was described by the home secretary last week as “unacceptable”. Priti Patel has come under intense pressure from a No 10 heavily influenced by newspaper front pages to reduce the numbers of people making the crossing – leading to increasingly frenzied briefings about wave machines, offshore processing centres and even sending boats out to turn refugees back. Allies of Johnson say he has been personally exercised about the issue for months, with aides charged with finding solutions. It carries a particular resonance because of the constant refrain of the Brexiters that one benefit of leaving the EU would be to “take back control” – including of the UK’s borders. In practice that had the narrow meaning of ending the free movement of people, which had led to an influx of millions of workers from Poland and other European states. But Conservative strategists know well that beneath some voters’ desire to “take back control” will have been a suspicion of immigration more generally. And vivid front page pictures of crowded dinghies smack of anything but control. Boris Johnson has spoken to the French President Emmanuel Macron this evening and have agreed to “step up efforts” to stop people smugglers. A Downing Street spokesperson said: The Prime Minister spoke with French President Emmanuel Macron this evening following the distressing loss of life in the Channel. They agreed on the urgency of stepping up joint efforts to prevent these deadly crossings and to do everything possible to stop the gangs responsible for putting people’s lives at risk. They underlined the importance of close working with neighbours in Belgium and the Netherlands as well as partners across the continent if we are to tackle the problem effectively before people reach the French coast. Both leaders were clear that today’s tragic loss of life was a stark reminder that it is vital to keep all options on the table to stop these lethal crossings and break the business model of the criminal gangs behind them. Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner is the latest to highlight the importance of referring to those who died in the Channel today with “dignity”. She tweeted: “Language matters. “The poor souls who died in the Channel deserve the dignity of being described as who they were. “Human beings. Men, women, children. Mothers, fathers, daughters, sons. They loved and were loved. In other words they were just like us. An unconscionable tragedy.” French President Emmanuel Macron on Wednesday called for an urgent meeting of European Union ministers involved in immigration issues following the drowning of 31 people as they tried to reach Britain from French shores. “France will not allow the English Channel to turn into a graveyard,” Macron said in a statement. He also called for the immediate reinforcement of European Union border agency Frontex, Reuters reported. People seeking to cross the Channel must be moved from Calais to the middle of France - even if by force, the city’s MP has said. Pierre-Henri Dumont told Sky News that people will continue to try to cross the English Channel as long as they are based in Calais. Currently, most boats set off from the northern French coast near Calais and Dunkirk, the Press Association reported. More than 25,700 people made the journey in small boats this year, according to data compiled by PA. Mr Dumont said that would-be refugees must be moved away from the Channel and into health centres in the middle of France. “My message to the French authorities, which I said to them a few minutes ago, is that we need to understand that if the migrant is in Calais - or around the Channel - they will try to cross the Channel”, he said. “We need to move them, even if by force, to health centres in the middle of France.” The UK has offered to send police and border officials to France to help them prevent people from crossing the Channel. However, Mr Dumont said that France cannot accept the UK’s offer due to “the question of sovereignty”. “I heard Priti Patel’s comments yesterday claiming that she offered France British troops - that is not possible because of the question of sovereignty,” he said. “But if the soldiers and patrols are in Calais with the migrants they will still find a way to cross, because you cannot monitor 200km of shore at the same time.” In case you missed it earlier, here is the full transcript of Boris Johnson’s statement from Downing Street this evening: I just want to say that I’m shocked and appalled and deeply saddened by the loss of life that we have seen in the Channel. I think that the details are still coming in, but more than 20 people have lost their lives, as you know. My thoughts and sympathies are, first of all, with the victims and their families. It’s an appalling thing that they have suffered. But I also want to say that this disaster underscores how dangerous it is to cross the Channel in this way. And it also shows how vital it is that we now step up our efforts to break the business model of the gangsters who are sending people to sea in this way. That’s why it’s so important that we accelerate, if we possibly can, all the measures contained in our Borders and Nationalities Bill, so that we distinguish between people who come here legally, and people who come here illegally, but we also use every power that we can, we leave no stone unturned, to demolish the business proposition of the human traffickers and the gangsters. And, of course, we have to work with our French friends, with our European partners, and I say to our partners across the Channel, now is the time for us all to step up, to work together, to do everything we can to break these gangs who are literally getting away with murder. What this shows is that the gangs who are sending people to sea in these dangerous craft will literally stop at nothing. But what, I’m afraid, it also shows is that the operation that’s being conducted by our friends on the beaches, supported as you know with £54 million from the UK to help patrol the beaches, all the technical support that we’ve been giving, they haven’t been enough. Our offer is to increase our support, but also to work together with our partners on the beaches concerned, on the launching grounds for these boats. And that’s something I hope that will be acceptable now, in view of what has happened, because there is no doubt at all that the gangs concerned, unless they are shown that their business model won’t work, that they can’t simply get people over the Channel from France to the UK, they will continue to deceive people, to put people’s lives at risk and, as I say, to get away with murder. We’ve had difficulties persuading some of our partners, particularly the French, to do things in a way that we think the situation deserves, but I understand the difficulties that all countries, that all countries face, but what we want now is to do more together. And that’s the offer that we’re making. As tragic as the scenes from the Channel tonight have been, devastatingly it is just one of many incidents where people have lost their lives while desperately seeking refuge and fleeing conflict or persecution. On 3 October 2013, a few miles off the Italian island of Lampedusa, a fishing boat carrying 440 asylum seekers from Eritrea and Somalia, was about to sink. In an attempt to contact nearby boats, a man had set on fire a piece of blanket. He didn’t know that the boat was littered with gasoline due to a fuel leak after the engine had broken. To avoid the flames, many people threw themselves into the water. And many of them didn’t know how to swim. The vessel eventually capsized; over 368 people died. The pictures of hundreds of coffins, laying in rows, identified by numbers, in Lampedusa, went all around the world. It was the most dramatic shipwreck up to that time. Unfortunately, more will follow. One year later, on 15 September 2014, more than 250 migrants died when a boat sank a half a mile off the Libyan coast. Hundreds of bodies remained trapped underwater. On 18 April 2015, over 1,100 asylum seekers from Eritrea, Senegal, Mauritania, Nigeria, Ivory Coast, Sierra Leone, Mali, the Gambia and Somalia, had been trying to reach Europe from north Africa onboard a fishing boat with a capacity of about 30 passengers. The vessel sank in the night after colliding with a Portuguese freighter that had approached to offer assistance. Only 28 people survived. Over one thousand people died. The vast majority of corpses were in the hull, wedged 400m deep on the seafloor. The vessel was recovered by Italian authorities in 2016 and the recovery itself became a public spectacle, as an entire section of the Italian navy was engaged in the operation and work dragged on for months at a cost of €9.5m. Only six of these corpses have been identified so far. In May 2016, in the space of seven days, more than 700 people drowned in the Mediterranean. The casualties happened in three separate incidents after more than 13,000 people had set sail from Libya for Italy. In July 2019, about 150 migrants seeking to reach Europe drowned in a shipwreck off the coast of Al Khoms in western Libya. About 140 migrants survived the shipwreck and were rescued by local fishermen and the Libyan Coast Guard. Last year, at least 140 people died off the coast of Senegal in the deadliest shipwreck recorded in 2020. The deaths, which followed other 4 shipwrecks in the central Mediterranean the week before, and another in the Channel, came amid a huge rise in the number of migrants and refugees using the dangerous Atlantic route from Africa to the Canary Islands. The most tragic shipwreck in the central mediterranean this year occurred last April, when at least 130 asylum seekers died after their rubber boat capsized in stormy seas off the coast of Libya. An estimated 1,300 people have died or gone missing while attempting to cross the central Mediterranean so far this year. Since 2014, 22,825 people have gone missing or died on this route. Lord Dubs, who in 2016 tabled what became known as the Dubs amendment, has described the evening’s events as “appalling ... but not unforseen”. He tweeted: “An appalling tragedy in the #Channel today, but not an unforseen one. “The UK government needs to increase cooperation with our French neighbours. “And refugee children stranded in the EU, with family in the UK, should be reunited with their loved ones here, safely and swiftly.” Jean-Marc Puissesseau, head of the ports of Calais and Boulogne, told The Associated Press that he spoke to one of the rescuers who brought some of the bodies to the Calais port. “Traffickers are assassins,” he said. “We were waiting for something like this to happen.” While deaths are occasionally reported on the crossing, such a large number of people losing their lives in one boat is rare. People fleeing conflict in Afghanistan, Iraq, Eritrea and Sudan have been among those gathered along towns in northern France seeking to cross to Britain. A fisherman, Nicolas Margolle, told Reuters he had seen two small dinghies earlier on Wednesday, one with people on board and another empty. He said another fisherman had called rescue services after seeing an empty dinghy and 15 people floating motionless nearby, either unconscious or dead. Before Wednesday’s disaster, 14 people had drowned this year trying to make it to Britain, a local maritime prefecture official said. In 2020, a total of seven people died and two disappeared, while in 2019 four died. Meanwhile, the campaign group Stand Up To Racism has organised an emergency solidarity protest outside Downing Street for Saturday afternoon. In the Facebook event for the demonstration, called ‘Don’t Let Them Drown - Refugees Welcome’, the group says it is government policy that is to blame for tonight’s tragedy, adding: Our thoughts are with those who have lost their lives, and their loved ones. The British government’s racist hostile environment, and its latest attack on refugees and migrants in the Nationality and Borders Bill, has and will continue to lead to the horror and tragedy of loss of life in the Channel. We say don’t let them drown, end the racist hostile environment, scrap the borders bill, and we say loud and clear, refugees are welcome here! The protest is scheduled for 2pm. Responding to the tragedy this evening where at least 31 died while trying to reach sanctuary in the UK, Beth Gardiner-Smith, CEO of Safe Passage International, has called on the Home Secretary Priti Patel to immediately resign. She said she is “shocked and saddened” by the developing situation in the Channel today and said: We are calling for the Home Secretary to resign in the wake of this tragedy, and the Prime Minister to take control now to prevent any further loss of life. The tragic truth is that these deaths could – and should - have been prevented. No one should have to risk their life to reach safety. Every day, men, women and children are having to make extraordinary efforts to reach safety, sanctuary and loved ones here in the UK because there is no other way. To prevent a repeat of this tragedy, refugees urgently need safe routes to reach their loved ones, find refuge and have the chance to rebuild their lives. She went on the criticise the government for “playing politics” with people’s lives and said it must scrap the “unworkable” Nationality and Borders Bill - which has been trumpeted by the Home Secretary tonight. Ms Gardiner-Smith added: More and more people are risking the freezing, frightening journey across the Channel in small, unstable boats since the Government closed safe routes to the UK last year. Choosing to play politics with people’s lives, the Government has failed to prevent people risking the crossing and this is the result. The Government must act now to save lives by opening safe routes to the UK, and scrap their unworkable plans in the Nationality and Borders Bill which will only make the situation worse. For clarity, the death toll has been revised down to 31 so far, with two people rescued after the dinghy carrying what was thought to be 33 people capsized. There appears to have been an error by the translator in the television feed from that press conference in Calais. That previous post has been amended to reflect the revised figure. Keep following here for more updates as and when they come. The French interior minister Gérald Darmanin is giving a press conference live from Calais at the moment. Speaking to reporters, he confirmed 31 people have drowned today in the Channel between Calais and Dunkirk. Two people have been saved. He said this number included five women and one little girl. One person is still unaccounted for and he is unable to say what nationalities are involved. He said: It is an appalling situation for France, for Europe and for humanity to see these people perish at sea because of people smugglers. Like his British political counterparts, that seems to be entirely where the finger of blame for this tragedy is being pointed - the smugglers who organise these highly dangerous journeys. He said that since the start of 2021, around 1,500 arrests have been made including four today in relation to this incident. Three ships are involved in tonight’s rescue operation, as well as three helicopters, one of which is British, he added. He paid tribute to the rescue services who, he said, have saved 7,800 lives since the beginning of the year. The UK’s home secretary Priti Patel said the deaths of a reported 31 people after a boat capsized in the Channel were the “starkest possible reminder” of the dangers of the crossing. She tweeted: “My thoughts are with the families of all of those who have tragically lost their lives in French waters today. “It serves as the starkest possible reminder of the dangers of these Channel crossings organised by ruthless criminal gangs. “It is why this government’s New Plan for Immigration will overhaul our broken asylum system and address many of the long-standing pull factors encouraging migrants to make the perilous journey from France to the United Kingdom.” La Voix du Nord , a French daily newspaper, is reporting the death toll has risen to 33. Boris Johnson suggested the French government had not always approached the problem of the crossings “in a way we think the situation deserves”. Asked by broadcasters in Downing Street what was going to change after Wednesday’s tragedy, he said: We’ve had difficulties persuading some of our partners, particularly the French, to do things in a way that we think the situation deserves. I understand the difficulties that all countries face, but what we want now is to do more together – and that’s the offer we are making. Asked whether he had confidence in the job home secretary Priti Patel is doing, Johnson replied: “Yes, of course.” Boris Johnson admitted efforts so far to stem the flow of migrants crossing the Channel in small boats “haven’t been enough”. He told broadcasters in Downing Street: “What this shows is that the gangs who are sending people to sea in these dangerous crafts will literally stop at nothing. “But what I’m afraid it also shows is that the operation that is being conducted by our friends on the beaches, supported as you know with £54m from the UK to help patrol the beaches, the technical support we’ve been giving, they haven’t been enough. “Our offer is to increase our support but also to work together with our partners on the beaches concerned, on the launching grounds for these boats. “That’s something I hope will be acceptable now in view of what has happened. “Because there is no doubt at all that the gangs concerned, unless they are shown that their business model won’t work, that they can’t simply get people over the Channel from France to the UK, they will continue to deceive people, to put people’s lives at risk and, as I say, to get away with murder.” Damian Collins, the Conservative MP for Folkestone and Hythe, said it was an “avoidable tragedy”. Migrant crossings will continue despite the dangers, the head of Calais port has warned. Jean-Marc Puissesseau told BBC News: “Even if the sea is not looking so rough, in the middle (of the Channel) there are always many waves. It is dangerous. “That can happen again because they try everything to get to your country. “That’s why I am very upset. I don’t know what to do.” Speaking to reporters at Downing Street, Boris Johnson said: I just want to say that I’m shocked and appalled and deeply saddened by the loss of life at sea in the Channel. I think the details are still coming in but more than 20 people have lost their lives. My thoughts and sympathies are first of all with the victims and their families. It’s an appalling thing that they have suffered. But I also want to say that this disaster underscores how dangerous it is to cross the Channel in this way. Prime minister Boris Johnson said he was “shocked, appalled and deeply saddened” after at least 30 people died when their boat sank in the Channel. Dover MP Natalie Elphicke said: “This is an absolute tragedy. It underlines why saving lives at sea starts by stopping the boats entering the water in the first place. “As winter is approaching the seas will get rougher, the water colder, the risk of even more lives tragically being lost greater. “That’s why stopping these dangerous crossings is the humanitarian and right thing to do.” A number of people are also believed to have reached Britain in small boats on Wednesday, with people seen being brought ashore in Dover by immigration officials. Reuters are also reporting the figure as 31 dead so far. The death toll in the Calais migrant drownings has risen to 31 from 27, a local official told Reuters on Wednesday. Two people are also reported missing, Franck Dhersin, deputy head of regional transport and mayor of Teteghem, told Reuters. The BBC’s Simon Jones has tweeted that 31 are now feared to have drowned. Shadow home secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds said action was needed to disrupt the flow of people before they reached the Channel coast. “It really now has to act as the most tragic of wake-up calls to redouble our efforts to make sure that people are not out on the water in these terrible makeshift boats risking their lives,” he told the BBC. “It is unrealistic to think that the entirety of that coastline can be patrolled. We need to be looking at practical law enforcement action away from the coast as well. “We need that wider joint law enforcement work with the French authorities to be disrupting further away from the coast. In addition to that we do need to look at safe and legal routes.” London mayor Sadiq Khan called on the British government and French authorities to work together to provide safe routes. He tweeted: Pierre Roques, coordinator of the Auberge des Migrants NGO in Calais, said the Channel risked becoming as deadly for refugees as the Mediterranean which has seen a much heavier toll over the last years of migrants crossing, AFP reports. “People are dying in the Channel, which is becoming a cemetery. And as England is right opposite, people will continue to cross.” According to the French authorities, 31,500 people attempted to leave for Britain since the start of the year and 7,800 people have been rescued at sea, figures which doubled since August. Seven people have been confirmed dead or are still missing feared drowned after various incidents this year. The MP for Calais Pierre Henri Dumont told Sky News that he believes 29 bodies have been found. British Red Cross chief executive Mike Adamson said: “Reports of more lives lost today in theChannel are truly heartbreaking and come far too soon after other recent deaths on this route. “Our thoughts are with their loved ones, who may not even know yet what has happened.” He told PA: “Nobody puts their life at risk unless they are absolutely desperate and feel they have no other options. “Everyone deserves to live in safety and it should be unacceptable to us that people have no choice but to make dangerous crossings in their search for this. “There are no simple answers, but we urge the government to rethink its plans for making the UK’s asylum system harder to access. “This should start with ambitious plans for new safe routes and a commitment to resettle 10,000 people a year.” Enver Solomon, chief executive of the Refugee Council, said: “It’s heartbreaking to hear that the lives of more ordinary people have been lost on a harrowing journey to Britain in search of safety. “How many tragedies like this must we see before the government fundamentally changes its approach by committing to an ambitious expansion of safe routes for those men, women and children in desperate need of protection? “Every day, people are forced to flee their home through no fault of their own. Now is the time to end the cruel and ineffective tactic of seeking to punish or push away those who try and find safety in our country.” Jean-Marc Puissesseau, head of the ports of Calais and Boulogne, told BBC News he understood there were 50 people on the boat: “What I heard is that there are 30 people dead until now five or six which have been found.” Prime minister Boris Johnson will chair a meeting of the Cobra emergency committee in response to the deaths in the Channel, Downing Street said. Reuters reports that Calais mayor Natacha Bouchart told BFM television the death toll now stood at 27, minutes after another mayor put the tally at 24. The local coast guard said they could not yet confirm the number of deaths, adding that rescue services had found around 20 people in the water of whom only two were conscious. They estimated that there had been about 30 people on the dinghy before it capsized. Unconfirmed reports said that an inflatable dinghy had capsized near Calais. A rescue operation is still under way with both French and British authorities involved looking for survivors. The French interior ministry said in a statement that French patrol vessels found bodies and people unconscious in the water after a fisher sounded the alarm about the accident, AFP reports. Police then said in a statement that “over 20” people had died. Three helicopters and three boats have been deployed to take part in the search, local authorities said. The interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, who is heading to the scene, wrote on Twitter that “many people” had died in the incident, adding that “the criminal nature of the smugglers who organise these crossings cannot be condemned enough”. Care4Calais, a charity working in northern France, helping refugees, tweeted: More than 20 people are understood to have died after their boat sank in the Channel, French media has reported. BBC News reported that “at least 24 people” have died. The figure came from a local mayor speaking in France. The French prime minister, Jean Castex, tweeted: “The shipwreck in the Channel is a tragedy, my thoughts are with the many missing and injured, victims of criminal smugglers who exploit their distress and misery.”Liverpool city council is “emerging from a difficult, somewhat toxic period”, according to the first report from government-appointed commissioners sent in following the former mayor’s arrest and allegations of corruption. The report, published after the commissioners’ first three months, also warned that the desire for quick change has led to a “frenetic rather than purposeful and targeted approach”. The four commissioners were appointed after an emergency inspection found a “serious breakdown of governance” and multiple failures to provide best value to taxpayers in the city. The inspection was triggered by the arrest of ex mayor Joe Anderson, the council’s former head of regeneration, Nick Kavanagh, and several others as part of a police investigation into allegations of fraud, bribery, corruption and misconduct in public office. They deny all wrong doing. The report expresses concerns over “financial resilience”, signalling the “significant revenue savings” the council needs to make over the next three years. It highlighted a £33m shortfall needed for the 2022/2023 budget. It also notes that the commissioners have “been troubled by the standards of core competencies such as report writing, forward planning for decision making and customer service”. Michael Gove praised the “hard work, ambition, and determination” of the new mayor, Joanne Anderson, her cabinet and the corporate leadership team. The secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities also said Liverpool city council faces “a significant challenge ahead of them to provide the services” its residents deserve. “It is vital for Liverpool’s transformation that a clear line is drawn between the council of the past and the council of the future”, he said in a statement to the Commons. He said it “was not surprising”, given the circumstances, that the council’s approach to regeneration and property management “lacks rigour and commercial awareness”, adding that there was a “significant backlog of planning applications” which are constraining development in the city. The critical priorities for the council cabinet over the next six months must be “making tough decisions, especially on budget and service delivery matters, and, above all, owning the intervention”, according to the report. “This must be achieved through intensive support, development and challenge”, it continued. In a joint response, Anderson and chief executive Tony Reeves, said that “many changes” had already taken place, but they acknowledged there is “still a lot to do”. “This is a complex journey and the council needs to find the right balance between implementing improvements and building capacity, whilst managing a very difficult budget,” the statement read. The pair promised that the “well-publicised issues within the Highways and Regeneration teams” were “being tackled head on”, with new team leaders and a new highways business plan. Clear processes for staff to raise concerns were now in place, according to the statement, to tackle a previous “culture of bullying and intimidation”. The council has also appointed independent professionals to sit on committees overseeing audit, standards and ethics. Richard Kemp, the leader of the Liberal Democrats on the council, said the report was disappointing. It “tells us little that is new; fails to recognise the huge improvements that have been and makes contradictory recommendations for the way forward”, he said. Kemp expressed concern over “mission creep”, the lack of experience serving as councillors among the commissioners and the cost to the council of their appointment, which he said could amount to £2m over four years. The next commissioners’ report is due to be published in April 2022.Casting women in TV and film roles previously given to men, such as in Doctor Who or the James Bond franchise, risks leading young males into crime because the only cultural role models left for them are criminals, a Conservative MP has argued. Leading a Westminster Hall debate about international men’s day, Nick Fletcher said discussions about women’s safety, such as after the murder of Sarah Everard, risked achieving nothing because of a focus on the idea of toxic masculinity. Citing statistics showing poor male outcomes in areas such as school attainment, employment, suicide and rough sleeping, the Don Valley MP said men and boys needed better role models, including male teachers. In culture, Fletcher argued, “there seems to be a call from a tiny yet very vocal minority that every male character or good role model must have a female replacement. One only needs to consider the discussions about who will next play James Bond to see that. And it is not just James Bond: in recent years we have seen Doctor Who, the Ghostbusters, Luke Skywalker and The Equalizer all replaced by women, and men are left with the Krays and Tommy Shelby [a character in the BBC drama Peaky Blinders].” He continued: “Is it any wonder that so many young men are committing crimes? Such programmes make crime look cool.” Fletcher said parliament “operates like a pendulum, swinging from left to right as it continually struggles to correct wrongs and injustices”, and it had gone too far when it came to men. He added: “Some may say that men have had their turn, and it is women’s turn now.” Describing the “awful events over the past year in which the victims have been women”, Fletcher said there had been too much focus on the idea of toxic masculinity. “Yet again we have to ask ourselves: ‘Who does this help?’ I have an answer: no one. How will this situation make boys and young men see themselves? Poorly, that is how.” He said he was “not really a fan” of days like international men’s day, which took place last Friday, but added: “In recent years there has been a creeping narrative that males have it easy; that their life is a breeze and there is nothing to complain about.” In a subsequent tweeted statement, Fletcher said his “rather nuanced point” had been misconstrued. He said his argument “in no way linked Dr Who [sic] being a female to crime being committed by men”. Another Conservative from the 2019 intake, Blackpool South’s Scott Benton, said during the debate that men’s issues had been “swept under the carpet for far too long as society focuses on the false narrative of male privilege”. Benton said: “The very mention of men’s issues will have hypocritical virtue signallers seething as they try to condemn white men as oppressors.”Black Friday and Cyber Monday aren’t only on shoppers’ and retailers’ radars – scammers take any opportunity they can to exploit our eye for a bargain, and last year used the busy shopping days to defraud consumers in the UK of £2.5m. According to the banking trade body UK Finance, theatre tickets and e-scooters are targeted by criminals – but it adds “whichever gift you might be seeking a deal on, it’s likely fraudsters are looking to exploit it”. You can reduce your chance of falling victim to a scam by taking the following steps when you shop. If it appears too good to be true, it probably is If a retailer is offering at item at a much lower cost than everyone else, stop and think before you open your wallet – and if you have never heard of the seller before, or have followed a link from an unsolicited email or a social media post, step back. Some of these “too good to be true” prices will be for counterfeit goods; some will be for items that don’t even exist. Lloyds Bank says purchase scams involving goods that don’t arrive cost victims an average of £190 each, and the top 10 items involved include popular Black Friday buys such as phones, games consoles and trainers. Check the URL Criminals sometimes used cloned websites to trap victims, so if you follow a link to a retailer, you should scrutinise the URL to check that it is genuine – somewhere there will be a giveaway that it is wrong. If you are typing in the URL yourself, make sure you check your spelling before you hand over payment details – if you’re unlucky, then a typo could land you on one of these rogue sites. Away from the address bar, check spelling and grammar – poor English and lots of spelling mistakes should be cause for concern. Don’t pay by bank transfer Paying money straight from your account into someone else’s comes with no protection, so do not be persuaded to do so. Credit and debit cards offer ways of getting your money back if something goes wrong (on credit card payments, the item needs to cost more than £100 for section 75 protection to kick in), and PayPal has its own scheme to reimburse buyers who don’t get what they paid for. Research the retailer When you use comparison tools such as PriceRunner or Google Shopping you may find a good deal at a little-known retailer. Before you hand over your cash, make sure you do a bit of due diligence. Check the website for company names and addresses, which you can verify on the Companies House website. If there is no address on the website, it could be a fake. Search for the retailer on a review site such as Trustpilot. People are quick to post if they have had bad experiences, and a number of one-star reviews and tales of non-delivery should be a strong warning sign. Be extra careful on online marketplaces Genuine websites can be used by fraudsters, too. Data from NatWest shows its customers have reported scams that started with adverts on Facebook Marketplace, Instagram, eBay and Gumtree. If you are tempted by anything you see advertised on these sites, look at the seller’s history: are they new to the platform or do they have a good track record? Do they have good reviews from past buyers? Use the on-platform messaging services and don’t be persuaded to pay by bank transfer. Be wary of texts from delivery firms The danger doesn’t stop once you’ve paid for your goods – until they arrive you may be susceptible to scammers preying on the boom in online shopping. Texts and emails purporting to be from delivery firms and asking for payment or personal details before they attempt redelivery have been a growth industry this year. Think twice before you click on the link and give any information. Visit the retailer’s website and use the order tracker to see where your parcel is, and if you think there is a chance that the text or email might be genuine, go directly to the courier’s website without clicking on the link.Shoppers face the biggest price rises in more than 30 years this Christmas after fears of widespread shortages sent people rushing to the shops this month. According to a survey of retailers by the CBI, the threat of empty shelves caused a high street sales boost in November, despite sharply escalating prices. The CBI said its monthly retail sales balance, which asks retailers to say if annual sales growth is rising or falling, rose to a three-month high of +39 in November from +30 in October. CBI economist Ben Jones said: “Christmas seems to have come early for retailers, with clothing and department stores in particular seeing a big upward swing in sales volumes in November.” Most businesses were also increasing prices compared with the early summer, he said. The balance of firms passing on rising production costs moved up from +16 in May to +77, the highest level recorded by the sales barometer since 1991. Buoyant sales and higher prices are likely to increase pressure on the Bank of England for an interest rate rise when officials meet next month. They are expected to increase the base rate from 0.1% to 0.25% on concerns that workers will demand higher wages to compensate for higher prices. Earlier this month, the Office for National Statistics reported consumer prices index inflation had risen 4.2% over the year to October and the BoE said it was heading to 5% next year. Jones said that while the survey of retailers indicated stock levels were adequate for the first time in seven months, previous reports of shortages of some goods appeared to have caused shoppers to panic and make their festive purchases earlier this year, though retailers predicted the sales boom would continue into December. “Overall, retailers are becoming more optimistic, with both employment growth and investment intentions picking up strongly. Cost pressures remain a very real concern, however,” Jones said. The surge in sales comes amid forecasts that the discount day Black Friday will spur shoppers to spend almost £9.2bn this weekend – 15% more than in 2020 when much of the UK’s high street was in lockdown. Highlighting the uncertainty surrounding the behaviour of shoppers, a study by the Institute for Fiscal Studies earlier in November suggested that a Christmas spending spree was unlikely to materialise despite consumers having around £150bn of savings on deposit to splash on toys, food and festive parties. Savings built up during the pandemic would remain in household bank accounts until the economic outlook was more upbeat, it said. Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, cautioned that the high levels of consumer demand charted by the CBI were flattered by comparison with unusually low spending last year. “Looking ahead, higher CPI inflation, coupled with the withdrawal of government support [the £20 uplift in universal benefit] at the end of the third quarter, will weigh on real disposable incomes,” he said.Ian Curteis, who has died aged 86, was a television dramatist of some distinction who initiated the charge of leftwing bias against the BBC, long before it was fashionable to do so, when his documentary drama The Falklands Play, which the corporation had commissioned in 1983, was postponed, then rescheduled, and finally deferred indefinitely. A heavily cut version of the piece was eventually broadcast in 2002, with Patricia Hodge as a sympathetically portrayed Margaret Thatcher and James Fox as Lord Carrington, the foreign secretary. But the damage, as far as Curteis and many others were concerned, had already been done. Broadly speaking, the play showed Thatcher doing right by the nation at some personal cost to herself and thus, thought Curteis, did not chime with what he took to be the BBC’s political position. But the director general Alasdair Milne’s point was that the portrayal of the events surrounding the Falklands war was too sensitive for broadcast with the 1983 general election looming. And by the time the play was rescheduled, there was another election around the corner. In 1986, Anglia Television expressed interest in producing the play, but the BBC refused to release the copyright; Michael Grade, the director of programmes, rubbed salt in the wound by announcing that the production had been halted because of the poor quality of the script. At this point, Curteis allowed himself to be seen as a victim of political censorship – an accusation strongly rejected by the BBC – and gave a speech at the 1987 Edinburgh festival television conference widely reported as a repeat of his “well-known attack on leftwing drama”. The rightwing label stuck. Curteis became a fixture in media debates and was regularly canvassed on his Christian beliefs and dislike of “strong” language on television. His cause was not helped when, in 1988, the BBC broadcast – provocatively, he thought – Charles Wood’s Tumbledown, directed by Richard Eyre, in which Colin Firth played a Scots Guards officer in the Falklands paralysed by a sniper’s shot to his head. This superb film did not, inconveniently for Curteis, promote a leftwing view of the conflict; instead, it highlighted the indifference of the government and the public towards the plight of wounded soldiers returning home. Curteis, the son of a bank manager, was educated at Slough grammar school. He was injured during national service, and spent three years working in a factory in Slough while studying for university entrance. After a year at Queen Mary College, London, working, too, as a part-time stagehand in Joan Littlewood’s leftwing Theatre Workshop at Stratford East in 1956, he left to become an actor. He worked in the theatre around Britain, acting and directing, before joining the BBC as a trainee drama director in 1962. He directed episodes of Z Cars and Pity About the Abbey (1965), a satirical play about developers and town planners by John Betjeman and Stewart Farrar, which suggested that Westminster Abbey was about to be demolished to make way for a bypass. Other forays into film-making were not successful; the veteran BBC producer Irene Shubik said that Curteis was “a hopeless director … he literally didn’t know how to cope with the studio”. So in 1968 Curteis turned full-time writer and wrote a trilogy of teleplays for the BBC, under the generic title Long Voyage Out of War (1971). He also wrote biographical dramas about Beethoven and Alexander Fleming and became a regular writer on series such as the BBC’s Doomwatch, ITV’s Crown Court and the BBC’s The Onedin Line. But he established his reputation with Philby, Burgess and Maclean (1977), which starred Anthony Bate and Derek Jacobi and gained two Bafta nominations. Hess (1978) recreated the landing of Hitler’s deputy in Scotland in 1941 in an unlikely attempt to negotiate peace. Atom Spies (1979) told how the German physicist Klaus Fuchs passed atomic research secrets to Russia in the 1940s. A play about Suez (1979) was postponed for being “too expensive and controversial” while Churchill and the Generals (1979), which starred Timothy West as Churchill, Eric Porter as Sir Alan Brooke and Arthur Hill as Roosevelt, was a successful blockbuster for the BBC and was nominated for a Bafta. There followed two of his biggest and most successful projects. Lost Empires (1986) for ITV was an adaptation in seven hour-long episodes of JB Priestley’s novel with a young Firth experiencing the world of variety backstage in his uncle’s travelling show as the first world war loomed; Laurence Olivier, in an award-winning performance, played the comedian Harry Burrard, an older version of his clapped-out Archie Rice in John Osborne’s The Entertainer. The Nightmare Years (1989), for the American HBO channel, was another big miniseries, this time based on an American journalist’s account of working in Germany in the 1930s and experiencing the onset of war with his German wife; Anthony Page directed two of the eight segments, which starred Sam Waterston, as the journalist William Shirer, and Marthe Keller. A big drama that planned, Curteis said, to rehabilitate Oswald Mosley’s reputation “to some degree” was abandoned, and the Falklands Play controversy flared up again when, in 1995, his project of a documentary drama about the Yalta conference, slated for the 50th anniversary of the event, was also cancelled. The BBC said they could not raise the required co-production funding and Curteis reiterated his view that the BBC was “in unofficial opposition to the government”. In turn, the BBC pointed out that they had wanted Curteis to write the play (and reportedly paid him £55,000 to do so) but that numerous other dramas had lately been dropped due to a large budget deficit. In the same year, he also wrote a successful BBC miniseries adaptation of his second wife Joanna Trollope’s novel The Choir, starring David Warner, Fox, Richenda Carey and John Standing, which lifted the lid on the politics and scandals in a cathedral choir school. Curteis seemed to be lying low for a few years, then suddenly re-emerged as a theatre dramatist with The Bargain (2007), a speculative recreation of a real-life 1988 meeting between the publisher Robert Maxwell (Michael Pennington) and Mother Teresa of Calcutta (Anna Calder-Marshall). In a sinuous conversation piece, directed by James Roose-Evans, each side was keen to strike a deal: Maxwell cash to solve a housing problem for the poor of India, in exchange for an endorsement of a religious publishing project designed as a money-laundering wheeze. Things became more complicated when each uncovered the other’s haunting secrets. The play, though static, was fairly well reviewed on tour but never reached the West End. Curteis was married three times, first to Joan Macdonald in 1964 and then to Trollope in 1985 (both marriages ending in divorce), and finally to Lady Deirdre Hare, widow of the 7th Lord Grantley, in 2001, with whom he continued the restoration of the Grantley family home, Markenfield Hall, in Ripon, north Yorkshire. She survives him, along with two sons from his first marriage, two stepdaughters from his second and two stepsons from his third. • Ian Bayley Curteis, dramatist, born 1 May 1935; died 24 November 2021Another two UK energy suppliers have gone bust after the collapse of Bulb Energy earlier this week, bringing the number of households affected by a supplier failure since August closer to the 4m mark. The energy regulator confirmed that Orbit Energy, which supplied 65,000 households, had shut down alongside Entice Energy, which had 5,400 customers. That brings the total number of suppliers that have failed to 24 in fewer than 12 weeks, as record energy market prices have taken their toll amid a global gas supply crunch. Orbit blamed its collapse on the government’s energy price cap, which was designed to protect about 15 million customers on standard variable tariffs from unfair energy bills. In a statement on its website, Orbit said it was “a well-run energy supplier” that had “always taken a prudent approach” to buying energy from the wholesale energy markets, so it could offer the “best price possible”. “Sadly, the UK government and our regulator Ofgem expect us to sell energy at a price far lower than the cost to buy – which makes operating unsustainable,” it said. Ofgem will choose a new energy supplier to take on Orbit and Entice customers in the coming days. The energy regulator told customers that under its “safety net” procedure their energy supply would continue as normal and any account credit would be protected. The latest collapses follow that of Bulb Energy, which on Monday became the largest UK energy supplier to go bust. On Thursday, Bulb was handed to a special administrator that will continue to supply its 1.7 million customers over the winter. Ofgem can typically find a new company to take on the customers left behind within days. But the size of Bulb’s customer base means it is likely to face a complex and months-long process to determine the fate of its customers. The Treasury has set aside up to £1.7bn to pay for Bulb’s costs until the special administration process comes to an end. Orbit and Entice were warned by Ofgem earlier this month that they could lose their supplier licences if they failed to pay back the money collected from their customer energy bills, which was earmarked to support small-scale renewable energy schemes such as rooftop solar installations. Orbit owed £451,296 taken from its customer energy bills to support the government’s feed-in tariff scheme, while Entice owed the regulator £28,353 to help support small-scale renewables.The government cuts, cuts, cuts, and underfunds schools and special education needs provision, and then the authorities are surprised when home education numbers rise (Councils in England report 34% rise in elective home education, 24 November)? Your headline might better have read: “34% increase in dedicated parents mopping up government failings”. Clare Quarman Windsor, Berkshire • It was impossible to watch the prime minister’s speech (The politics sketch, 22 November) without being reminded of David Brent’s motivational speech to a similar audience of stony-faced business people in The Office. Andrew Hope Oxford • Repatriation of the looted Greek sculptures (Parthenon marbles should never have been removed, Boris Johnson wrote, 23 November) would surely prompt the headline: “Johnson has lost his marbles”. David Feintuck Lewes, East Sussex • John Beck asks for suggestions of a broadcaster that holds power to account (Letters, 24 November). Channel 4 News does just that, repeatedly. Rod Warrington Upton-by-Chester, Cheshire • Like many readers (Letters, 24 November), I have some elderly foodstuffs in my cupboard, including a tin of duck cassoulet, bought in Paris in the 1990s. I plan to eat it before I die. Probably just before. Liz Fuller London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.It is welcome news that the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence has suggested that a “menu of treatment options” be offered to patients with mild depression before medication is considered (NHS to give therapy for depression before medication under new guidelines, 23 November). I hope that this is offered to older people, as it is not happening at the moment. For the size of the older population, you would expect about 20% of referrals to the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) programme to be aged 65 and above, but before the pandemic it was around 7%, and this fell in many areas during the pandemic when IAPT moved towards digital delivery of its interventions, as this age group is more likely to suffer digital exclusion. There is increasing evidence that older people do just as well as younger age groups when offered psychological-based approaches and that with support they can also use IT. The problem appears to be that depression is not recognised in the older population in the way that it is in younger people. This might be related to ageism and an assumption that it is normal to be depressed as you grow older. Health professionals may not be referring older people to services and older people themselves not seeking help because of this. We need to do more to understand and address the issues underlying this lack of help for older people. Dr Chris Allen Consultant clinical psychologist, Berkshire NHS foundation trust • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As an independent and unpaid adviser on two of the Science Museum’s energy exhibitions, I was disappointed to see your report about the campaign letter against it (Dozens of academics shun Science Museum over fossil fuel ties, 19 November), which risks delaying the rollout of clean energy. The well-meaning signatories state that they are severing links with the museum until each sponsor from the energy industry “demonstrates a credible plan to phasing out fossil fuels in line with the Paris 1.5C target”. The museum’s Our Future Planet exhibition has two major sponsors, Shell and UK Research and Innovation, the government funding body that has provided support for many of the signatories on the letter. Shell has set a target of cutting all sources of its emissions of greenhouse gases to net zero by 2050, like many countries that have pledged to keep in reach the 1.5°C target. The company undoubtedly needs to do much more, but its plan so far has persuaded ethical investors, such as the Church of England pensions board, to remain engaged. Cries of “greenwash” every time the company invests in the pursuit of, or information about, net zero are unlikely to accelerate its transition away from fossil fuels. Adani Green Energy is the main sponsor of the museum’s forthcoming exhibition Energy Revolution, which will highlight the opportunities and challenges of replacing fossil fuels with clean energy. It is the largest renewables company in India, with 20 gigawatts of capacity in operation and development, equivalent to about 40% of the UK’s total renewables capacity. Yes, it is owned by a conglomerate that includes a mining company that is making damaging investments in coal. However, this British campaign against India’s leading renewables company could make it harder to attract overseas investment in India’s ambitious plan to reach 500 gigawatts of clean energy capacity by 2030. Bob Ward Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Boris Johnson describes himself as appalled at Wednesday’s Channel tragedy (Tragedy at sea claims dozens of lives in deadliest day of Channel crisis, 25 November), and is elsewhere reported as accusing France of letting human traffickers “get away with murder”, but it’s the asylum policy of his and previous governments that has created the conditions in which trafficking can flourish and tragedies such as this can occur. There are no options other than “irregular” ones by which asylum seekers can now enter this country. The Home Office requires physical arrival in the United Kingdom before an asylum application can be lodged. Its current nationality and borders bill, by criminalising all means of entry other than official ones that are impossible to access, is clearly intended to bring an end to finding asylum in this country. It won’t, however, bring an end to the displaced making their desperate attempts to reach our shores. The government’s outrage at Channel trafficking is entirely cynical. Its vaunted policy of pushback hardly suggests that the safety and welfare of asylum seekers are of any concern to the Home Office. On the contrary, pushback – reverse-trafficking in other words – will result in the Channel becoming even more like the Mediterranean. Rod Edmond Deal, Kent • Aditya Chakrabortty is right to remind us that Folkestone, with its celebratory artwork in Folkestone Museum, welcomed refugees in the first world war (Alone, afraid and facing exile: one boy’s ordeal indicts Britain’s asylum system, 25 November). The generous tradition continued in the second world war, with newspapers in Folkestone library revealing that, on 20 May 1939, Czech refugees, feeling “well-cared for”, gratefully thanked the welcoming committee – led from the top by the mayor and vicar in Hythe – for arranging an amazing support package. This included daily advice, weekly free entertainment at the cinema, English language lessons, toiletries, teas, musical evenings, cheap laundry facilities, papers and books, as well as board and lodging at a guest house. Your report (‘Performative cruelty’: UK treatment of refugees worst ever, says charity, 22 November) describes Folkestone locals continuing to quietly support young arrivals and helping them to adjust to life in the UK. This is a welcome contrast to the performative cruelty meted out during the Covid-19 pandemic by the state in Folkestone’s Napier barracks, a sad indictment of the current government’s hostility. This traumatises refugees, who should go on, like my Czech refugee grandfather, to contribute to Britain’s society and economy. Rosamund Mykura London • Throughout the 19th century, British governments operated an open-door policy under which no immigrants were refused entry. Only in 1905 was the Aliens Act introduced. Even this made provision for immigrants seeking admission in order to avoid punishment or persecution on religious or political grounds. In such cases, “leave to land shall not be refused on the ground merely of want of means, or the probability of his becoming a charge on the rates”. In other words, asylum should be given to such refugees, and paid for from public funds. It is hard to see what progress we have made in over a hundred years. Austen Lynch Garstang, Lancashire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Google’s Irish subsidiary has agreed to pay €218m (£183m) in back taxes to the Irish government, according to company filings. The US tech company, which had been accused of avoiding hundreds of millions in tax across Europe through loopholes known as the “double Irish, Dutch sandwich”, said it had “agreed to the resolution of certain tax matters relating to prior years”. Google Ireland said it would pay corporation tax of €622m for 2020, including the €218m backdated settlement and interest charges. The previous year Google Ireland paid taxes of €263m. In line with a 2015 law, the company, which is part of the parent company Alphabet, promised last year that it would ditch the loopholes strategy, which allowed it to effectively shuffle revenues made across Europe offshore to places like Bermuda, where the tax rate was zero. A Bloomberg investigation showed the scheme allowed Google to cut its overseas tax rate to just 2.4%. Google did not explain the reason for the back tax payment in its accounts and did not respond to request for comment. In the filing it said only: “Subsequent to year-end, the company agreed to the resolution of certain tax matters relating to prior years. This tax liability and associated interest are recognised in the current financial year.” Paul Monaghan, the chief executive of the Fair Tax Foundation, said: “There really is a disgraceful lack of transparency around Alphabet’s tax conduct, especially at the level of the Irish subsidiaries. Stakeholders have a right to know what this Irish corporation tax settlement relates to. “Investors in particular should be concerned given Alphabet’s US filings show that it has billions more in dispute with tax authorities around the globe in circumstances where, by its own definition, it has less than 50% chance of winning.” Ireland, which has provided low-tax European headquarters for many of the world’s largest multinationals, initially declined to sign up to an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development agreement for a global minimum corporate tax rate of 15% by 2023, but dropped its resistance to the plan after a change to the text. The agreement, which has been joined by most of 140 countries taking part in negotiations, is designed to end decades of countries undercutting their neighbours by offering companies lower taxes. The accounts show Google Ireland Limited made a pre-tax profit of €2.85bn in 2020, up from €1.94bn in 2019. Turnover rose by €2.7bn to €48.4bn.Writing in Le Monde this week Julian Barnes, the novelist and chronicler of British-French relations, said both sides found it “easy to slip into the role of accuser or affronted victim”, often trading on decades- or even centuries-old stereotypes of one another. After 27 people died in the Channel, those stereotypes are in full view, and however much each side says it will rise above the blame game, or in Emmanuel Macron’s phrase “instrumentalise” the crisis, it has been almost impossible to resist sniping. The possibility that the simmering, adjacent dispute about post-Brexit fishing licences will finally explode with a blockade of Calais this weekend only adds to the sense that this is a relationship on the edge of nervous breakdown. The politics are raw. Emmanuel Macron, fighting to ensure a place in the presidential runoff in April, simply cannot afford to let the refugee crisis run away from him. Boris Johnson also has much at stake. Nigel Farage, his mysterious donors readying their cheques, is once again stirring and threatening the Conservative party’s right flank. Johnson’s backbenchers are struggling to square how Brexit regained control of the UK’s border when 25,700 people reached the UK in a slow but steady stream of inflatable boats. The British prime minister is positively neuralgic about the Channel, according to French sources, repeatedly returning to the subject of migrants and refugees in his private conversations with Macron. Johnson is 80% driven by short-term domestic politics, French diplomats say. The home secretary, Priti Patel, is in deep trouble, accused of chasing headlines rather than a real-world solution. She promised in 2020 to solve the crisis by the end of that year but has self-evidently failed. Politically, the easiest route for both sides is to point an accusatory finger across the Channel or adopt the role of victim. Many officials – military and diplomatic – are in reality eager to keep the relationship functioning and are trying desperately behind the scenes to do so. They are, for instance, still looking for openings to cooperate on defence, including areas such as Mali, knowing defence has been the solid glue in the Franco-British relationship. But alongside the rhetoric of David Frost, the Brexit minister, or Clément Beaune, Macron’s election attack dog, the glue is not sticking. The French, faced with accusations that they have been dilatory about the Channel crossings, point out it takes only a moment to look at the death toll in the Mediterranean over the past six years to know that if solutions the size of a tabloid headline could quell the urge to cross the Channel, then it would have been found. More than 20,000 people are estimated to have died in the Mediterranean, and more than 1,300 this year alone. But Britain is hitting back, saying France is not supposed to be a failed state like Libya, and should do more to close down the people smugglers. London has in the past threatened to cut financial support for France’s border policing if Paris fails to stem the flow of people. The French, in turn, complain that the UK, bereft of identity cards, oversees a labour market into which people can readily blend invisibly. Faced by this labour market, French opposition politicians, but not yet the government itself, are questioning the Le Touquet agreement, the bilateral treaty that allows British Border Force officers to carry out passport checks in France, and vice versa. The French National Consultative Commission on Human Rights recently said its terms “make France the police arm of British migration policy”. Before Brexit, it is claimed, this was justifiable, since the UK was subject to the EU Dublin convention, which obliges asylum seekers to apply to the first country in Europe where they have stayed. With Brexit, that obligation dies. France also grates at moral lectures from Britain; 83,000 asylum applications were lodged in France over the past year, compared with only 31,000 in the UK. In 2020, the UK registered 5.78 asylum seekers and refugees per 10,000 inhabitants, compared with 16.93 for France, 19.52 for Germany and 60.57 for Greece. But to unilaterally tear up the Le Touquet agreement – in effect waving migrants and refugees through to the UK – would be to drop a bomb into the relationship. Macron is also aware he needs the rest of Europe on his side. Jean-Yves Le Drian, the French foreign secretary, recently complained that the remarkable aspect of the map of global Britain was that it erased Europe. But there are limits to the European preparedness to fall behind the French tendency to equate the European national interest with the national interest of France. Germany, for instance, is busy preparing a bilateral agreement with the UK. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, will soon visit Spain, an astute choice for her first visit to an EU state. As each side manoeuvres, neither dare go beyond the brink.According to the Department for Education, more than 40,000 young people “will be able to work and study abroad” this academic year through the Turing scheme, which has replaced the Erasmus programme . A total of 412 applications were received from education and training providers from across the UK and 363 projects were approved to receive grant funding totalling just over £96m, with 48% of placements for individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds. We would like to hear about students’ experiences of the new foreign study scheme. Where do you plan to study? Have you experienced any difficulties organising your placement, such as with Covid restrictions, or have there been problems securing funding? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Manchester United have all the components required to challenge for trophies – they just need to step things up on and off the pitch. It cannot be forgotten that they finished second in the Premier League last season, but in the search to go one better they have moved away from what made them successful. I think there has been a lack of identity and structure throughout the club which has seeped into the squad. This season under Ole Gunnar Solskjær the players did not know whether they were a pressing team or a defensive side that counterattack. I like Solskjær and he was great for the culture of the club and getting an association with the fans, which had been missing since Sir Alex Ferguson stepped down, but the top managers are tacticians and there the Norwegian fell short. It ended in a sorry affair at Watford, culminating in the negative comments from the players. I think sacking him was right because it was not working out and in the end there could only be one outcome. The summer recruitment hindered the team. It remains to be seen whether they have recruited the right type of players, and it seems a real mismatch. Cristiano Ronaldo has obviously changed the dynamic of the squad but it is not all on him; he arrived late and at short notice and it would have taken a strong personality at United to turn down the return of a club legend still performing at such a high level. Ronaldo has not let the team down – he keeps scoring and proving he is still one of the best around. The problem is that his signing changed the tactical plans after the season had started and tweaks were not made to accommodate his shortcomings. If the staff had known he was coming, they could have brought in a midfielder or really pinned down the identity of the player philosophy, in particular the defender of the team from the front. Solskjær also suffered bad luck with Raphaël Varane’s injuries, because he could be a key player in the heart of the United defence. The sooner they get him back the better, to help take the pressure off Harry Maguire. The backline needs freshening up so that Luke Shaw and Aaron Wan-Bissaka, who are out of form, do not need to play every week. In the modern game full-backs are winning matches for teams, as Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester City are proving. Equally, the backline could be helped by the forwards, who are not doing their work when it comes to pressing and tracking back – because defending starts at the front. Many United fans will want the team to be more positive. Under Solskjær, more often than not, they would operate with two holding midfielders. He will have had his reasons, but the formation could be adjusted to utilise just one and allow Donny van de Beek to come in and bring a more dynamic threat in the middle of the pitch. Paul Pogba was flying at the start of the season – I watched him and thought he was brilliant. He played off the left and came into central midfield where he was causing a lot of problems. Then all of the sudden he was moved from that position. I feel for him, because he works hard and tracks back, and that can go unnoticed. Can he play in central midfield without the protection? No, but we’ve known that for a long time. It’s not all on Pogba, who has missed the past three games and won’t be back for weeks because of injury; there are others at United doing a lot less. When it comes to the forwards having to work harder, that’s not an opinion, it’s a fact. Their running stats going back are nowhere near those going forward. Those players can do it but they need to take responsibility and be accountable. Liverpool and Manchester City work so much harder out of possession to win back the ball, keep opponents in their own half and protect their backline. United have all the talent but they need direction and authority to make sure that happens. They require a new manager with a strong personality who will tell them that, if they don’t put the effort in, they are off. The right permanent manager has to come in as soon as possible. They can have an interim but if that person starts putting ideas in place that are not for the long term they will have to start again in the summer, putting the team further behind the opposition. The best solution would have been to get going immediately, allowing a new manager the January window, a full summer and a pre-season with their own ideas to revitalise the club. But United have seemingly concluded that coach is not available, which is why they are in advanced talks with Ralf Rangnick over taking the job temporarily. Now they must look at who will be available in the summer and what direction they want to go in, which has been the issue all along. Sadly for United, the best tactical managers are in jobs at rival clubs, making it quite hard to appoint someone who can compete with Pep Guardiola, Thomas Tuchel and Jürgen Klopp. At the very least, starting now, the players need to provide a considerable shift in intensity and desire. They have top-quality players, but those players have plenty more to give.The home secretary, Priti Patel, has said she will ask the BBC and other media to reflect on their language after the term “migrant” was used to describe people who drowned in the Channel. In the House of Commons, Brendan O’Hara, the SNP MP for Argyll and Bute, said he was “absolutely appalled” to hear a presenter on the BBC’s 10 o’clock news refer to the Channel victims as migrants, which he argued was dehumanising, and he invited the home secretary to join him in asking the media to reflect on their choice of language. In response, Patel said: “Even during the Afghan operations and Operation Pitting [the Kabul evacuation] I heard a lot of language that quite frankly seemed to be inappropriate around people who were fleeing. So yes, I will.” But her condemnation was met with accusations of hypocrisy after years of controversial rhetoric from Conservative politicians including former prime ministers. The home secretary has most recently adopted the term “economic migrants”, a label favoured by the likes of the hard-right campaigner Nigel Farage but seen by charities as an attempt to undermine the motives of those who risk their lives to cross from France. She has claimed that 70% of people who come to the UK via small boats are “single men who are effectively economic migrants” and “not genuine asylum seekers”. The Refugee Council pointed out that in fact the opposite is true: nearly two-thirds of the arrivals are deemed to be genuine refugees. Analysis using Home Office data and requests under freedom of information laws shows 61% are likely to be allowed to stay after claiming asylum. In January four charities – Freedom from Torture, Hope Not Hate, Detention Action and the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants – wrote to Patel urging her to temper her “misleading and inflammatory” rhetoric, which they argued was escalating far-right hatred towards asylum seekers. In 2015 David Cameron as prime minister was heavily criticised for speaking of a “swarm of people coming across the Mediterranean”. He later defended his use of the term “swarm” and said he was determined to keep out people living in the Calais camps as they attempted to reach Britain, likening some of them to burglars. “They are economic migrants and they want to enter Britain illegally and the British people and I want to make sure our borders are secure and you can’t break into Britain without permission,” he said. As Cameron’s home secretary, Theresa May – as she attempted to prevent an exodus of Tory voters to Farage’s Ukip – coined the phrase “hostile environment” for her flagship immigration policy that set the backdrop to the pre-EU referendum years. Then came Boris Johnson as prime minister, a politician who has likened Muslim dress to letterboxes, referred to Commonwealth citizens as “piccaninnies” and drew inferences about the Barack Obama’s “part-Kenyan” ancestry. Under his leadership the Tory parliamentary party’s Common Sense Group emerged, a 25-strong unit of libertarian Conservative MPs who campaign on a wide range of issues and recently branded people arriving in the UK as “invading migrants”.A UK Border Force perimeter at Dover Marina prevented closer contact with the few dozen men and women waiting late on Thursday morning on a red doubledecker bus marked “private” – yet exhaustion was clearly etched on each one’s face. It was unclear if the latest arrivals, who were on boats picked up by a Border Force cutter and a lifeboat in the Channel at 5am had embarked from France knowing 27 people had drowned making the same crossing on Wednesday. Small boat crossings typically take about 10 hours or more, so their departure may have come too late for them to have learned of the biggest loss of life in the Channel since records of such crossings began in 2014, though word typically spreads swiftly via WhatsApp. A 30-minute drive around the coast from Dover, at least seven inflatable boats believed to have been used this week were being loaded on to the back of a lorry at the Dungeness RNLI station. A photographer present when they had started to arrive along the shingled shore in front of a power station and the house of the late film-maker Derek Jarman told of watching as a chaotic couple of hours of human misery unfolded. “We saw men, women, children, a disabled girl who looked around 10 or 12. Everyone was just so traumatised and cold that families were getting separated from each other,” he said. “There was a woman who appeared to have two teenage sons and was suffering from such bad hypothermia that she was blacking out. There was a little daughter who must have been two or younger and had no shoes. It was so chaotic that she was left sitting on the stones on her own at one point. I gave her my coat because there was little in the way of any sort of blankets or other emergency supplies for them.” All the while, a group of about six men and women who were believed to be far-right activists milled around filming on their phones, he added. A barrel-chested man strutted through those sitting on the ground, photographing their faces. But among the broader local community and visitors to this area of windswept natural beauty, a sense of pity was clear as news of the loss of life filtered through. Casting a line out into the choppy waters of the Channel, the fisher Ian Fraser told how he had seen other groups coming ashore in the past. “It’s one of the closest crossing points so it’s obviously going to happen. You do hear people sometimes saying nasty things about them, but I think you have to realise anyone crossing must be desperate,” he said. “I feel sorry for the RNLI guys. They’re volunteers and are dealing with and seeing things that they shouldn’t have to.” Like others, he was doubtful about whether the tragedy would change anything, a sentiment echoed by guests dining on local seafood at the nearby Britannia Inn pub and restaurant. “There does seem to be a huge amount of money involved. You read of people paying thousands of pounds, so there’s obviously an economy behind the smuggling and that needs to be targeted,” said Martyn Styles, a retired teacher visiting from Deal. “We also seem to be paying a lot to the French authorities and yet it continues,” he added. Across the table, his wife, Diana, and their friend Jenny Catt said their horror was mixed with surprise it had taken so long for a tragedy to happen on such a scale. The three told of being out with their sailing club in Deal when a dinghy carrying people had come through. Inland, the retiree Ray Biggs reflected a harder, hostile attitude as he waited for his wife to emerge from the butchers on the high street in New Romney, shrugging his shoulders at the question of whether the deaths would generate sympathy. “We’ve got enough people here on benefits without more coming over if you ask me. I’ve seen them myself … about 20 landing and then just sitting there and waiting for the police,” he said. By contrast, the twentysomethings Bradley Johnson and Marc Walmsley appeared in a minority in hoping that the tragedy might yield positive change, whether in minds or actions. Stopping to speak after visiting the local skate park, both admitted not having heard about the loss of life in the Channel, and grimaced at the mention of a child. “Look, I work in a local pub here and it actually rarely comes up,” said Walmsley. “People just want to get on with their lives, and I think they know that the people on the boats do as well.”It was only last Monday that Priti Patel was forced to answer an urgent question on people crossing the Channel in small boats. Her response was typically belligerent and unapologetic. Nothing to do with her, everything to do with people-smuggling gangs, economic migrants trying to enter the country illegally. And, of course, the French. Never forget the French. Everything can usually be traced back to the French. Just three days later, the home secretary was back in the Commons to give a statement on the 27 men, women and children who had drowned after their rubber boat had capsized the previous day. This time, she tried to be a bit more measured. A bit more human, though sympathy doesn’t come easily to her. The deaths were a shock, though not a surprise, she said. This had been a tragedy waiting to happen. Though not one she had taken many steps to actively prevent. Because yet again, the fault lay fairly and squarely with the smuggling gangs and economic migrants trying to game the system. And, of course, the French. Never forget the French. Everything can usually be traced back to the French. Priti Vacant’s statement raised a few eyebrows. Because it had been her who had insisted she was going to get to grips with the broken system two years ago. Since when the problem had only got worse, with increasing numbers of people making the dangerous crossing from northern France year on year. So much for a credible immigration policy. Not to mention her proposed nationality and borders bill, which would enable anyone caught rescuing such people liable to prosecution, the Home Office’s leaked plans to push small boats back to France using nets and wave machines and plans to create detention centres in Albania and Ascension Island. Hardly a love-bombing welcome to people fleeing war, persecution and environmental disasters. Labour’s shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, tried to choose his words carefully. After expressing his own sorrow at the drownings and apportioning a fair amount of blame to the people smugglers, he did wonder if maybe the government couldn’t have done rather more to prevent a tragedy that all humanitarian aid agencies had been predicting for over a year. What had happened to plans for safe routes? Why had we only taken 480 refugees under the Dubs scheme? Why had we cut overseas aid? And was the home secretary aware the nationality and borders bill contravened international conventions on refugees? Patel chose to ignore most of this. Other than to have another quick go at the French. They were getting a bit better at dealing with refugees, she said, condescendingly, but they badly needed our help. She had offered to set up joint patrols of British and French police on mainland Europe but so far she had been rebuffed. Everyone knew the French weren’t up to the job on their own but it would be jumping the gun for her to assume command of the French border gendarmes. Useful though it might be. No one had the heart to tell the home secretary that France took many more refugees than the UK. Not least Iain Duncan Smith and David Davis, who were also keen to pile on to the French. “The home secretary has strained every sinew to prevent this,” Davis said. One hates to think of how many more might have died if Priti Vacant hadn’t had their best interests uppermost in her mind. Other Tories also felt that enough was enough. Edward Leigh reckoned enough was enough and that if we really wanted to get results we’d have offshore processing centres and take pushback action in the Channel. And if a few more died in the short term, it would be worth it in the end as people would eventually learn their lessons and stop attempting the crossing. Julian Lewis said that decent refugees should learn to wait their turn to be resettled and if they attempted to queue-barge they deserved whatever they got. If they wanted to live in Britain they would have to learn to behave like the British. Even if they died waiting. John Hayes couldn’t understand why people still wanted to come here. After all, we had made it clear we didn’t really want any more foreigners by voting for Brexit. Taking back control of our borders didn’t mean letting any persecuted minority into the country. David Symonds said he was sick of the bleeding heart SNP liberals as the Scots took almost no refugees while his constituency of Hillingdon took about 10% of those entering the country. Several opposition MPs tried to redress the balance. Jeremy Corbyn pointed out that people were coming because they were desperate. No one would get into an overcrowded rubber boat to attempt a crossing in the freezing cold just for the hell of it. Chi Onwurah and Rachael Maskell made the case for more safe routes with people being able to begin their asylum applications from overseas, while Diana Johnson thought the Home Office had made such a mess of trying to cope with the crisis that the Cabinet Office should assume responsibility for immigration. Priti Vacant merely shrugged. She reserved the right to deal with immigrants – she still thinks most asylum seekers are on the make – as she liked. And if that included pushing boats back and making the UK as uninviting as possible, then so be it. She did also agree that the BBC’s language in calling the dead migrants had been wrong. In her view, scroungers would have been a far more appropriate word. A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyVishal Furia’s long-awaited Hindi remake of his Marathi-language horror Lapachhapi from 2017 stays true to the original’s spirit, marrying the psychological uncertainties of pregnancy with the eerie atmosphere of rural isolation. Buried in the middle of a vast sugarcane field where one can get lost among the towering reeds is a simple house that doubles as a temporary hideaway from debt collectors for young city couple Hemant (Saurabh Goyal) and eight-month pregnant Sakshi (Nushrratt Bharuccha) The place actually belongs to their chauffeur and his wife, whose initial hospitality goes along with gendered prejudices. They insist, for example, that Sakshi should eat only after her husband has finished his meal. As strange visions and noises soon abound, the refuge becomes a site of horror, plunging Sakshi into the midst of ghostly manifestations, traumatic familial history, and even shamanic rituals. Much of the film’s excitement comes from the evocative sugarcane field, where every rustling noise carries a sense of secret and danger. Still, like the original, Chhorii is overly dependent on a spooky score and sound effects as well as a constant stream of expository dialogue and sequences; this both messes up the pacing and underestimates viewers’ ability to piece together the central mystery. Since much of the plot revolves around Sakshi’s deteriorating psychological state, Bharuccha’s one-note performance is also a disappointment. Furthermore, Chhorii is aiming to comment on important feminist issues via the medium of horror storytelling, but Furia has basically repeated Lapachhapi’s failings: Chhorii reiterates the same dubious and simplistic talking points – minus the original’s great performances. • Chhorii is released on 26 November on Amazon Prime Video.GPs in England have voted in favour of taking limited forms of industrial action to protest against the government’s drive to force them to see patients face to face. The results led the profession’s new leader to warn ministers that “demoralised, broken and exhausted” family doctors may refuse to undertake some normal duties to show their anger. Four in five (80%) of the GPs who voted in an indicative ballot organised by the British Medical Association backed the withholding of information about how they hold appointments, to thwart the government’s plan to “name and shame” surgeries that see too few patients in person. Even more (84%) indicated their willingness to refuse to comply with the issuing of Covid-19 exemption certificates, which those who remain unvaccinated on medical grounds may need, for example, to work in a care home, where vaccination for staff is mandatory. “The results of the indicative ballot show that the profession has had enough. Relationships are broken and trust has been lost,” said Dr Farah Jameel, the new chair of the BMA’s GP committee (GPC). “Ultimately we don’t want to have to take action – we want to see action,” she added, in a plea to the health secretary, Sajid Javid, to do more to reduce GPs’ huge workloads. Each of the 5,144 GP practices in England where a partner is a BMA member had a vote. However, only 1,798 took part – a 35% response rate – which may indicate a reluctance to take industrial action. A smaller majority (58%) said they would support their GP practice withdrawing from their local primary care network’s directed enhanced service, which could mean GPs scaling back visits to care homes, for example. “Every day we move from being applauded to being vilified, these sentiments stoked by biased media coverage, divisive policies and divisive politics,” said Jameel, a GP in north London. She said she hoped her election last week would lead to “a reset” of the GPC’s currently fraught relationship with Javid. However, it is understood that there is as yet no plan for her to meet Javid or any other health minister to discuss how to resolve the impasse over GP access. Hopes of a resolution were raised last week when Javid postponed until next year plans to force GPs who make at least £150,000 a year from the NHS to disclose their earnings. The Department of Health and Social Care has been approached for a response.Maj Gen Ahmed Nasser al-Raisi’s ascent through the ranks of the interior ministry in Abu Dhabi is associated with the United Arab Emirates’ transformation into a hi-tech surveillance state. His personal achievements include a diploma in police management from the University of Cambridge, a doctorate in policing, security and community safety from London Metropolitan University and a medal of honour from Italy. Now, in a big soft-power win for the UAE and its attempt to legitimise its policing methods internationally, he has been elected the president of the global policing organisation Interpol – to the dismay of human rights defenders. Often photographed smiling, Raisi is the longstanding inspector general for the interior ministry, responsible for the supervision of detention centres and policing. Multiple former detainees accuse him of using this position to green-light abuses, including torture. “Raisi’s rise to the Interpol presidency legitimises the role and conduct of security forces in the UAE,” said Matthew Hedges, a British academic and expert on the Emirates who was detained there for seven months on espionage charges. Hedges, who was eventually pardoned, says Raisi was responsible for his arrest and also oversaw the torture he says he suffered in detention. “This translates to a green light for states to continue acting in a way that abuses accountability and human rights, legitimises the dilution of rule of law and emboldens authoritative and abusive systems of detention,” Hedges said. “This is really a warning to the international community that cross-border abuses can and will occur.” The Gulf state has previously said Hedges was not subjected to any physical or psychological mistreatment during his detention. On Thursday its interior ministry heralded Raisi’s win as “recognition of the vital role of the UAE all over the world”. “The UAE,” it said, “is now at the helm of this international organisation working in the fields of security and policing and will do its best to make the world a safer place.” In an unusually public campaign for the role, Raisi boasted of technological transformations that overhauled policing and surveillance in the UAE. These included the introduction of iris and facial scanning technology, and the creation of the interior ministry’s first “general directorate of happiness”. His domestic policing changes underpin Abu Dhabi and Dubai’s status as two of the world’s most surveilled cities. One system, called Falcon Eye, deploys thousands of cameras to monitor not just traffic violations but also “behavioural issues like public hygiene and incidents like people gathering in areas where they are not allowed to”, according to a report by the state news agency WAM. The rise in surveillance has been accompanied by a crackdown on domestic criticism and dissent. Human Rights Watch has said: “The government’s pervasive domestic surveillance has led to extensive self-censorship by UAE residents and UAE-based institutions; and stonewalling, censorship, and possible surveillance of the news media by the government.” Abdullah Alaoudh, from the Washington DC organisation Democracy for the Arab World Now, said the UAE had been applying a two-pronged approach epitomised by Raisi’s Interpol win: “Cracking down hard on every voice of dissent, while investing in public relations like lobbying, soft power, sports and entertainment.” Christopher M Davidson, the author of a book on statecraft in the Middle East, described Raisi as an example of “high-performing technocratic members of UAE political society” who had found success under Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan. “The key to the regime of Mohammed bin Zayed has been to get things done, to stamp out corruption. Despite all criticisms levelled at the UAE and Abu Dhabi today, it is a far less corrupt place than it was 15 years ago. These were the people entrusted to clean up ministries,” said Davidson. Stamping out corruption has, at times, included arresting the wealthy and critics. Khadem al-Qubaisi, a former adviser to the royal family and a businessman who said he was “scapegoated” by the Abu Dhabi authorities for embezzling millions, is detained in Al Wathba prison. The prison, overseen by Raisi, also holds the human rights defender Ahmed Mansoor. Riyaadh Ebrahim, who spent more than a year in the prison, said he witnessed torture there. “There is wrongful imprisonment, no application of the rule of law. People are being persecuted for crimes they did not commit,” Ebrahim said. He said he was “totally appalled” by Raisi’s victory in the Interpol election race. Davidson said the UAE was using its wealth and resources to buy reputational shortcuts on the international stage. “Policing in the UAE still has its problems, but this is a way of saying to the world that [they] are credible and respectable,” he said. “Obtaining the presidency of Interpol symbolises moving in the right direction.” Jalel Harchaoui from the Geneva-based organisation the Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime said Raisi’s election highlighted the struggle between liberal and illiberal nations within international institutions such as Interpol, and was a victory for anti-democratic countries. “On the surface, Abu Dhabi – thanks to excellent soft-power outreach – markets itself as a modern state, which happens to be a dependable friend to all the major western democracies,” he said. “In reality however, the Emiratis, whose governance style has been partly inspired by China’s strict form of authoritarianism, always campaign against liberalism and its key principles.” A spokesperson for the UAE embassy in London did not respond to a request for comment.Chief conductor of the Oslo Philharmonic and music director of the Orchestre de Paris at the age of just 25, Finnish-born Klaus Mäkelä has been making waves in Europe of late, though we haven’t heard him in London. His much-anticipated debut with the London Philharmonic was the first of three appearances with the orchestra this season. Strauss, Rachmaninov and Prokofiev are among the composers he conducts next year. To begin with, however, he opted for French music, flanking Saint-Saëns’ first Cello Concerto with works by Messiaen and Debussy. His approach in this repertory blends excitement with refinement and a painstaking attention to detail in ways that can be startling. The violent central section of Les Offrandes Oubliées, Messiaen’s early (1930) meditation on the crucifixion, was all the more unsettling for being done with such fierce, terrifying precision, its force offsetting the contemplative introversion of the outer sections, their dynamic gradations and tugging harmonies all wonderfully controlled. The same qualities were very much apparent in the Debussy. Every shift in colour and detail in La Mer registered with perfect clarity while being integrated into the organic progression of the whole: Jeux de Vagues glittered restlessly; the final dialogue between wind and sea was tense, shot through with a sense of impending menace. Prélude à L’Après-midi d’un Faune, meanwhile, was sensuous rather than sensual, beautifully understated, the textures all ravishingly teased out. The LPO are on terrific form at the moment, and their playing here was immaculate. Understatement and clarity, meanwhile, also characterised the Saint-Saëns concerto, dating from 1872, and a work which aspires to the formal perfections of the 18th-century classicism the composer so deeply admired. Truls Mørk was the soloist, patrician, supremely elegant and avoiding self-conscious showiness, perhaps fractionally too much so in the finale, where a little more extrovert bravura might not have come amiss. Mäkelä, meanwhile, kept the orchestral textures wonderfully delicate and transparent so that every note of Saint-Saëns’ counterpoint was crystal clear and simply exquisite.A 24-hour tube strike on Friday, the first of two days and eight nights of scheduled strike action, threatens to bring disruption to London in the run up to Christmas. The five lines due to be affected are the Victoria, Central, Northern, Jubilee, and Piccadilly lines as RMT workers are set to strike from 04.30 on Friday. The dispute is over night shifts drivers are required to work as the night tube service is reintroduced for the first time since the start of the pandemic. Transport for London (TfL) said the strike would result in “little or no service in places” with the Waterloo and City line, which uses Central line drivers, also likely to be hit. The RMT said the work rosters being imposed on tube drivers threatened work-life balance. TfL said the changes have been agreed by other unions and would result in drivers working about four night shift weekends a year. The strike will also affect the restart of the night tube as Victoria and Central line. Drivers have been told not to work from 8.30pm Saturday until 4.30am Sunday. RMT general secretary Mick Lynch said the strike was about “the ripping apart of popular and family friendly agreements that helped make the original night tube such a success”. “Instead the company want to cut costs and lump all drivers into a pool where they can be kicked from pillar to post at the behest of the management.” Despite talks at Acas and direct talks, it was clear London Underground bosses “have no interest whatsoever in the well being of their staff or the service to passengers”, he added. “This strike action, and it’s serious consequences in the run up to Christmas, was avoidable if the tube management hadn’t axed dedicated night tube staff and perfectly workable arrangements in order to cut staffing numbers and costs.” The union said it remained available for further talks even at this late stage. Nick Dent, director of London Underground customer operations, said the RMT’s planned strike action “is needless and it will threaten London’s recovery from the pandemic, despite no job losses and more flexibility and job certainty for drivers”. He added the transport authority was “willing to work with the RMT and review the changes after night tube services have returned. This review can only be successful if the RMT agrees to meet us for talks and withdraws its proposed action so we can all see how these changes will work in practice.” TfL warned the action was likely to mean much busier services on the lines not affected by the strike (Bakerloo, Circle, District, Hammersmith &amp; City and Metropolitan) as customers seek alternative routes. Thameslink services and buses through central London are also expected to be busier than normal. Planned strike action 04:30 26 November – 04:29 27 November Central, Jubilee, Northern, Piccadilly and Victoria. 20:30 27 November – 04:29 28 November Central and Victoria. 20:30 3 December – 04:29 4 December Central and Victoria. 20:30 4 December – 04:29 5 December Central and Victoria. 20:30 10 December – 04:29 11 December Central and Victoria. 20:30 11 December – 04:29 12 December Central and Victoria. 20:30 17 December – 04:29 18 December Central and Victoria. 04:30 18 December – 04:29 19 December Central, Jubilee, Northern, Piccadilly and Victoria.The London fire brigade (LFB) commissioner warned ministers about fire risks to high-rise buildings months before the Grenfell Tower disaster, and said residents were being placed at “significant risk” of fires spreading between flats. Dany Cotton wrote to the then housing minister, Gavin Barwell, reporting that the LFB was finding problems at the rate of one building a month and warned there could be more, the public inquiry into the disaster heard on Thursday. Breaches of compartmentation were a significant issue in the 14 June 2017 disaster, which claimed 72 lives. They have also emerged as a common fault in scores of other high-rise apartment blocks caught up in the post-Grenfell building safety crisis. In April 2017 Cotton told Barwell and Brandon Lewis, then the policing and fire minister, of “mounting evidence of issues of concern within residential buildings and, in particular, blocks of flats [about compartmentation and the impact on policies telling people to stay put].” She said residents were being placed at “significant risk of fire spread” and requested a meeting “to make London a safer place to live”. Barwell is expected to give evidence to the inquiry in its next phase. Cotton retired early in 2019 after the LFB was strongly criticised by the inquiry chairman, Sir Martin Moore-Bick, for its handling of the fire. He said the LFB was guilty of an “institutional failure” to inform firefighters about the risks of cladding fires before the disaster. On the night of the fire there was a “failure of command”. Giving evidence to the inquiry for a second time on Thursday, Cotton said she had not taken any action to train her firefighters so they could be ready to abandon stay-put policies on high-rise buildings if fire was spreading rapidly between flats. The inquiry has already found that the LFB’s failure to switch from Grenfell’s stay-put policy to ordering an evacuation more quickly cost lives. Cotton said she had been exceptionally busy, not least responding to terror attacks in London in early 2017. The inquiry also saw 2016 internal LFB reports warning that the problem of compartmentation failures could mean that policies of telling residents to stay put in the event of a fire had “scant factual basis”. Cotton, who was made commissioner in January 2017, told Richard Millett QC, counsel to the inquiry: “It’s become clear that the fire safety department at the London fire brigade was not as well-connected to the rest of the organisation as it could or should have been.” Millett asked: “Why did the LFB not send a clear message to crews telling them of the LFB’s growing concern, at the latest by 2016, that the stay-put evacuation strategy may be undermined or inappropriate in any number of buildings in front of them, and that they may be required to evacuate residents?” “I don’t know the answer to that,” replied Cotton. Cotton caused anger among the Grenfell bereaved when in evidence to the inquiry in 2018 she said fire was as foreseeable as “a space shuttle landing on the Shard”. Asked again about whether she still believed the disaster was unforeseeable, she said: “My view is that we had a lot of organisational knowledge. But I still think that even now the knowledge held by the London and UK fire service would not have anticipated such a catastrophic failure of a building with so many breaches.” However, she said: “There was information that we could have shared that could have been translated into training for members of LFB that may well have assisted them.” The inquiry continues.Confirmation that Germany will soon be governed by a three-party coalition led by the social democrat Olaf Scholz is an event to take seriously, and not just in Germany. That is especially true because once the coalition parties – social democrats, greens and liberals – have each voted their formal approval, Mr Scholz will take over from Angela Merkel, who has governed resourcefully for 16 years while providing great stability on the international stage. Mrs Merkel’s departure means her centre-right CDU-CSU alliance faces a period of eclipse and reinvention. The new administration, dubbed the traffic-light coalition because of the parties’ colours, will, however, provide continuity with the recent past, especially in foreign, European and defence policy. More problematically, the new finance minister, Christian Lindner of the liberal Free Democratic party, is now positioned to uphold Germany’s familiar fiscal orthodoxy and debt aversion in the face of future spending pressures from the other coalition parties, as well as on the EU budgetary stage. To an extent, such tensions are implicit in any three-way coalition. These should neither be exaggerated nor downplayed. Yet the new government and the EU will not easily survive any hasty German return to traditional austerity and debt avoidance, so the commitments in the coalition deal may prove more aspirational than achievable. The investment pledges on infrastructure and climate crisis measures will also challenge the culture of budgetary restraint. Ultimately, the test of the Scholz government will be how it deals with these tensions. Yet the coalition’s wider agenda, set out in the 178-page document hammered out since September’s general election, should not be dismissed as a steady-as-we-go programme. With the Green party heading a new ministry for economy and climate protection, targets will require 80% of electricity from renewables by 2030, the phasing out of coal “ideally” by the same deadline, and a sped-up abandonment of gas by 2040. Equally striking, especially seen from Britain, is the coalition’s pledge of a paradigm shift in migration and integration policy to make Germany “a modern country of immigration”. Promised measures include speeding up the visa process, easier passport entitlement and support for refugee quotas. Other important liberalisations include easing the process of gender change, lifting the ban on the sale of cannabis for recreational use and reducing the voting age from 18 to 16. Old party loyalties are breaking down across Europe, not just Germany, so this coalition should be watched as a possible shape of things to come. As ever, though, the best laid plans are vulnerable to immediate events. Germany’s Covid rates have hit record levels this month, and contentious lockdowns and compulsory vaccinations are on the agenda in some states. Mr Scholz and his government may not long enjoy the luxury of a honeymoon period.Boris Johnson’s government must develop a new approach to asylum as a matter of urgency. The deaths of 27 people who were attempting to reach England in a small boat on Wednesday have prompted an outpouring of distress. No one wants the Channel to become a graveyard, and the stricken faces of the people interviewed by journalists in northern France over recent days have brought home their sheer desperation to millions of Britons. But unless Mr Johnson and his most senior colleagues and advisers take the lead in setting out a different direction, there is no reason to think that this tragedy will mark any kind of turning point. At the moment, the government appears trapped in a snare of its own making – along with the section of the public that it took with it when ministers decided to talk and act tough on asylum seekers. This is what led to the shameful situation in which the main response to this week’s tragedy is to blame the French. The government push for morally and legally dubious legislation designed to create an even more hostile environment is justified by claims that the number of people seeking asylum is overwhelming. It is the case that with 23,000 small-boat arrivals so far, this year’s total will exceed the 8,400 who came in 2020. Overall, the 37,562 claims for asylum lodged in the year to September are an increase. But in the early 2000s, that figure was more than 80,000. And several of the UK’s European neighbours are currently managing similar numbers: there have been around 80,000 applications so far this year in Germany, 70,000 in France, and 60,000 arrivals by boat in Italy. Intercontinental migration and refugees fleeing war and persecution are major global issues that require a joined-up international approach, as the Refugee Council’s Enver Solomon said this week. What makes this all the more important is that global heating is predicted to increase migration, as parts of the world become hotter and harder to live in. The people risking their lives to reach England’s south coast come from some of the world’s most troubled countries: Eritrea, Iraq, Libya, Syria, Afghanistan, Yemen. They make the journey that they do for a reason: because they have relatives or friends in Britain, or historic links, or speak English (one of those who reached Kent by boat this week is reported to be an Afghan soldier who worked with British forces). Once they reach the UK, nearly two-thirds of those arriving by small boat are allowed to stay. This is the context that the public needs to understand, and that experts are now doing their best to explain. There is no doubt that, as the Kent Conservative MP Damian Collins said on Thursday, some voters find the boats unsettling. A government mindful of its responsibilities would seek to allay concerns about localised resource pressures (such as housing) and work with partners to find solutions, both to the immediate challenge of people camped in miserable conditions on borders and the wider geopolitical causes. This would include a cessation of arms sale to Saudi Arabia, to protect Yemen, and the restoration of the portion of the UK’s global aid budget that was inexcusably cut. Unfortunately, Mr Johnson and his home secretary, Priti Patel, reveal no desire to drop the xenophobic rhetoric. Rather than distance themselves from Nigel Farage and the Tory MP Sir Edward Leigh for cruel remarks about the RNLI operating a “taxi service”, they prefer to pander to the basest instincts. Condemnations of traffickers appear more and more mindless the longer they are unaccompanied by meaningful action, such as an honest discussion about the safe and legal routes to the UK that would reduce demand for dangerous crossings. Ms Patel’s demand for British “boots on the ground” in France seems designed to inflame. Once again, the Home Office is at the heart of an ugly spectacle.Private outsourcing companies that win government contracts should be subject to freedom of information rules, according to the outgoing information commissioner, who warned the existing transparency law is no longer fit for the modern age. Elizabeth Denham, whose organisation is in charge of investigating breaches of data laws, said the public and the media were being left in the dark by private firms taking advantage of the loophole and refusing to supply information. “The scope of the act doesn’t adequately cover private sector businesses that are delivering public sector services” she told the House of Commons on Thursday, echoing an idea that was Labour party policy under the former leader, Jeremy Corbyn. “Up to 30% of public services are delivered under private sector contracts but those bodies are not subject to the law.” Denham also said ministers should ensure any new government institutions were also subject to freedom of information laws, which allow any member of the public to request documents from organisations. “I am concerned when new public bodies are created that are not subject to the same transparency requirements.” Denham, who steps down next week, also said ministers must do more to ensure they are retaining records of official government business, even if it is through services such as WhatsApp and Twitter. Her organisation is currently investigating the use of private communications for government business by individuals at the Department of Health and Social Care, which was responsible for awarding large contracts to supply protective equipment and test facilities at the height of the pandemic. In one case brought by the Good Law Project, the former health minister Lord Bethell was initially said to have been unable to access his personal phone for it to be examined for information. However, Bethell now says that he still has the personal phone in question and has handed over all the information requested by the court, although acknowledges that some WhatsApp messages were not backed up. “It’s so important that ministers and senior officials walk the walk when it comes to transparency, in whether they are creating permanent records, whether they staff the freedom of information team, whether they resource it properly,” she said. “Ministers and those at the top of public bodies have a huge influence on whether or not their staff embrace the spirit of transparency in their work.” Highlighting the role that freedom of information requests played in exposing the Windrush scandal, Denham told the public administration and constitutional affairs select committee that the legislation should be updated to encourage transparency: “I really think it’s time for parliament to think about whether freedom of information needs to be fit for purpose for a digital age.” She expressed disappointment that the Cabinet Office had refused to let her conduct an audit of its central clearing house for freedom of information requests, which has been accused of blocking demands for information from journalists and campaigners. She said the biggest challenge for her successor would be securing enough funding from the government to allow it to carry out its work in the face of funding cuts: “We had £5.5m in our budget for freedom of information work in 2010, we now have £3.75m”. • This article was amended on 26 November 2021. An earlier reference to Lord Bethell having “mislaid” his personal device has been removed and replaced by a more comprehensive account of the case, including Bethell’s statement that he still has the phone in question and has handed over all information requested by the court.As the England and Wales Cricket Board once again postponed publication of its plan to improve diversity in the sport, the game took a backward step when Mehmooda Duke stood down from her role as chair of Leicestershire. Duke was the only female chair of a first-class county and one of just three female board members from black or minority ethnic backgrounds. In total there are 28 women who sit on the boards of first-class counties. Duke departed with a statement describing how cricket had been “torn apart” in recent months by allegations of racism. Neither Duke nor Leicestershire elaborated on the reasons for the move, beyond saying in a statement that she “is sorry to leave the game at this stage”. The vice-chairman, Jonathan Duckworth, will become interim chairman until a long-term replacement is identified. “Cricket has been torn apart by recent events and I am deeply saddened by the hurt felt by individuals within our game,” Duke said. “With fresh leadership at national level and with a determination to learn from the recent past and move forward, I hope that racism and discrimination will be expunged from the dressing rooms, the fields and the game as a whole, allowing us to celebrate the diversity which makes cricket and sport in this country so great.” Duke is the founder and CEO of Moosa-Duke Solicitors and was made an MBE in the 2019 New Year’s Honours List for services to the legal profession and female entrepreneurship. She had previously announced that she would leave the post at the end of her term in March 2022 in order to become the county’s high sheriff, but has unexpectedly brought the move forward. “I wish all of my colleagues on the board and across the network, the players, staff and the community teams, all the very best for the future,” she said. “I thank the members, supporters and sponsors for their unwavering loyalty to the club and especially during some difficult times.” Meanwhile, the ECB admitted its ambitious but hurriedly prepared response to racism and discrimination in cricket was “not quite there” as it continues to negotiate with stakeholders over the wording of a few key sections. Initially promised on Wednesday before being pushed back to Thursday, it now hopes to release a version that all involved have been happy to commit to before the weekend. As exclusively revealed in the Guardian, agreeing a deadline for and the wording of a target to reach a minimum of 30% women across county boards and leadership teams has so far proved an insurmountable stumbling block, but the ECB is confident that agreement is close. The Australian broadcaster Fox Sports has confirmed that Michael Vaughan remains part of its commentary team for the Ashes, despite the former England captain being dropped by the BBC after being accused by Azeem Rafiq of racially abusing him at Yorkshire. BT Sport, which has exclusive rights to show the series in the UK, had planned to use Fox commentary in its broadcasts but said on Wednesday that as a result of Vaughan’s involvement it is “reviewing and discussing our commentary plans”. Rafiq had accused Vaughan of telling a group of Asian cricketers in 2009 that there were “too many of you lot, we need to do something about it”. Though two other players, Adil Rashid and Rana Naved-ul-Hasan, have corroborated Rafiq’s version of events, Vaughan has “completely and categorically” denied using the words. “Michael Vaughan is part of the Fox Cricket commentary team for the summer of cricket, including the Ashes tour,” a Fox Sports spokesman said. “There is no place for any form of racism in sport, and we are closely monitoring the situation. At this stage, we have no other comment.” After the announcement of the BBC’s decision, Vaughan said: “Very disappointed not to be commentating for TMS on the Ashes and will miss working with great colleagues and friends, but looking forward to being behind the mic for Fox Cricket in Australia.” Meanwhile, the former Middlesex and Durham bowler Simon Hughes has left his post as the editor at large of the Cricketer magazine following criticism of his comments made in a recent podcast regarding Rafiq’s allegations of racism at Yorkshire involving Gary Ballance.Britain and France have traded diplomatic barbs after the deaths of 27 people who drowned trying to cross the Channel, with Priti Patel, the home secretary, saying it was up to the French to take action to prevent further such tragedies. As the countries tussled over whether more UK police should be sent to France to try to stop crossings in small boats, Patel’s French counterpart, Gérald Darmanin, blamed the illegal labour market in the UK for attracting people. Making a statement to MPs after the 17 men, seven women and three adolescents died on Wednesday, Patel said that while there was no rapid solution to the issue of people seeking to make the crossing, she had reiterated an offer to send more police to France. Answering a question in the Commons, Patel also backed the view of Robert Jenrick, the Tory MP and former communities secretary, who asked: “Would she agree with me that in the short term we will see more tragedies like this unless we can agree a strategy with the French, and it is within the gift of the president of France to bring this to an end now?” The home secretary replied: “My honourable friend is absolutely right, hence the discussion that took place between the prime minister and President Macron last night.” It is understood that Boris Johnson, when speaking to Emmanuel Macron after the tragedy on Wednesday, also offered to have more UK officers in northern France, but that the French president was wary about the idea. The French MP Pierre-Henri Dumont, who represents Calais, said the idea to deploy more UK police was a “crazy” proposal that he said “will not change anything”. Speaking separately, Darmanin said those on small boats were “often attracted” by the UK’s labour market. “Clearly, immigration is badly managed in Britain,” he told RTL radio. “English employers use this labour to make the things that the English manufacture and consume. We say reform your labour market. Tell English employers that we need them to be as patriotic as the Conservative government.” Patel and Darmanin spoke on Thursday, and Patel was expected to travel to France on Sunday. UK officials and law enforcement staff were also reportedly heading to France on Thursday evening for talks. In the Commons, the shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, said one part of the solution had to be more safe and legal asylum routes to the UK, calling for the government to bring back the Dubs scheme for resettling lone child refugees in the UK. Patel replied: “I have actually put an offer on the table, not for the first time, to the French government today, on a returns agreement, but in particular looking at family reunions and children. This is, again, an offer that I have made repeatedly to my counterpart in France.” It was not immediately clear what scheme Patel was referring to, with Labour saying the party did not know. The Home Office was contacted for clarification. Answering a later question, Patel said the UK had proposed “a very, very significant technology offer” including automatic number plate recognition on the roads approaching northern French beaches, as well as more UK police, though not officers with the power to make arrests. “We’ve also offered to put more officers – unwarranted because they will not take warranted officers – but these are the things I will be working through very specifically now because the status quo cannot persist,” Patel said. “I think there’s a full understanding of this on the French side.” She added: “As we mourn those who have died in the most horrendous circumstances, I hope that the whole house can come together to send a clear message that crossing the Channel in this lethal way, in a small boat, is not the way to come to our country.”Good morning. A former Australian Democrats leader has joined Climate 200 to help independent candidates taking on Liberal MPs. Twenty-seven people are confirmed drowned after trying to cross the Channel. And Midnight Oil has announced its Resist Tour early next year will be its last. As Scott Morrison comes to the end of a ragged parliamentary week, the organisation bankrolling independents challenging Liberal incumbents in their urban heartland has amassed an election war chest of more than $4m in less than four months, and bolstered its advisory body. A former leader of the Australian Democrats, Meg Lees, has joined the advisory council of Climate 200, as has the former Liberal party leader John Hewson, and the Labor veteran Barry Jones. Moderate metropolitan Liberals facing challenges from independents supported by Climate 200 have stepped up their visibility during the major policy debates of the last few months – climate change, religious discrimination, and the long-delayed federal integrity commission. On Thursday former ABC reporter Zoe Daniel announced she would run as an independent in the Melbourne seat of Goldstein against Liberal MP Tim Wilson. She’s backed by Voices of Goldstein, one of a number of campaigns under the “Voice Of” movement. At least one pregnant woman and three children were among the 27 people, mostly Kurds from Iraq or Iran, who drowned trying to cross the Channel in an inflatable boat, French authorities have said. The United Kingdom’s home secretary, Priti Patel, is facing three legal challenges over her controversial plans to push back refugees on small boats in the Channel who are trying to reach the UK. Several charities including Care4Calais and Channel Rescue are involved in two linked challenges arguing that Patel’s plans are unlawful under human rights and maritime laws. Freedom from Torture is involved in a third challenge. The Guardian has revealed that government lawyers have warned Patel she is likely to lose any legal challenge against her pushbacks policy. But Patel said it was up to France to stop refugees crossing the Channel in small boats. A Brisbane construction company had $8 in assets, and had not commenced trading, when it was awarded a government contract – ultimately worth $1.6bn – to run Australia’s offshore processing on Nauru. The contract was awarded after the government ordered a “financial strength assessment” that was ultimately done on a different company. With just over 100 asylum seekers and refugees still held on the island after eight years, it now costs more than $4.3m each year – more than $350,000 a month – for each person held. Australia Disabled Australians are being left behind in three major states after governments failed to make minimum accessibility standards mandatory for new houses, disability advocates say. Aboriginal elders, health organisations and frontline workers in the Northern Territory’s Covid outbreak have condemned false information about public health measures on social media, with the NT chief minister blaming the misinformation on “tinfoil hat wearing tossers, sitting in their parents’ basements in Florida”. New South Wales’ laws criminalising the use of secretly recorded vision of animal cruelty and abuse are posing “too great a burden on speech”, animal rights activists have told the high court. On Friday, Midnight Oil announced the group’s concert touring days will come to a close early next year. The tour’s promoter said Midnight Oil would use it final tour to call for governments to urgently take action to reduce carbon pollution. Scott Morrison has said gay teachers should not be fired from religious schools for their sexuality, adding to his longstanding but still unfulfilled commitment to protect gay students from expulsion. The world Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva was warmly welcomed by European leaders on his tour of the continent as part of a global effort to restore his reputation – and that of his country – after a torrid few years for both. Lula is now the leading candidate to unseat Brazil’s incumbent president, the rightwing populist Jair Bolsonaro. Google’s Irish subsidiary has agreed to pay €218m (£183m) in back taxes to the Irish government, according to company filings on Thursday. The United States tech giant, which had been accused of avoiding hundreds of millions in tax across Europe through loopholes, said it had “agreed to the resolution of certain tax matters relating to prior years”. Apple has told Thai activists they are targets of “state-sponsored attackers”. At least 17 people including protest leaders have received alerts about devices possibly being compromised. HIV drug resistance is on the rise, according to a new report, which found that the number of people with the virus being treated with antiretrovirals had risen to 27.5 million – an annual increase of 2 million. Recommended reads The former frontman of Silverchair, Daniel Johns, was 15 when he became globally famous, and much of the hit new Spotify podcast Who is Daniel Johns? is about the trauma resulting from such intense and early fame. As Brigid Delaney writes, “anxiety is a common thread that runs through the five episodes of the podcast. But I wonder how it would be possible to be famous, and not anxious?” In Chelsea Watego’s new book, Another Day in the Colony, Watego’s essays draw from other great Black thinkers to argue for a future based not in inclusion and hope, but self-determination. “Some people may think that calls to retire hope for nihilism are irresponsible,” she writes. “But what is irresponsible is to require us to maintain the status quo of keeping Black bodies connected to life support machines they’ve been deemed never capable of getting off.” Despite Thatcher and Reagan’s best efforts, there is and has always been such a thing as society. The question is not whether it exists, Jill Lepore says, but what shape it must take in a post-pandemic world. “This year, while the world begins to remake itself, and as each of us, like so many hermit crabs crawling along the blinding sand, try to get our bearings, it may be that the future of society can be found in its past.” It’s the “mystery that must be solved”. Seven-and-a-half years after the Malaysia Airlines flight disappeared with 239 people on board, head of news Mike Ticher recommends this story as he remembers covering the tragedy when the news broke. Listen As military tensions heat up between Taiwan and China, defence minister Peter Dutton says it would be “inconceivable” that Australia would not join military action if the US defended Taiwan. Labor has accused the Coalition of warmongering ahead of an upcoming election. Gabrielle Jackson talks to Lenore Taylor and Daniel Hurst about the threat of war, and the trouble with politicising foreign policy. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Australian Open director Craig Tiley expects up to 95% of players will be vaccinated against Covid-19 in time for the January tournament but is unsure whether Novak Djokovic will be among them despite the world No 1’s hunt for a record 21st grand slam title. Australia has been given an effective green light to stage the 2027 men’s Rugby World Cup after being listed by the governing body as the “preferred candidate” to host the global tournament. Media roundup Masks, QR codes and vaccination certificates will no longer be required in retail and restaurants from mid-December, the Sydney Morning Herald reports, while school closures will be a thing of the past from next week. Australia is facing a shortage of live music this summer, with the ABC reporting the industry’s peak body says concerts and festivals won’t be back in “a major way” until the end of next year. And if you’ve read this far … Australia’s barbecue culture is changing, and getting higher-tech, too. Here experts share their thoughts on ceramic grills, firepits and Bluetooth thermometers. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.