Hundreds of thousands of dental patients in England are to be offered weekend and evening appointments under NHS plans to tackle the backlog exacerbated by the pandemic. More than 350,000 extra dental appointments are to be made available in February and March, NHS England said, with a new £50m funding pot aimed at fuelling a dentistry “treatment blitz”. However, senior dentistry sources said the cash was a “drop in the ocean”, with tens of millions of NHS appointments cancelled as a result of Covid-19 and the resulting backlog set to take years to clear. Some also expressed doubts about whether there would be enough staff to offer the additional appointments, since hundreds of dentists have quit the profession in the last year amid warnings that NHS dentistry is increasingly “hanging by a thread”. Millions of patients have struggled to access dental care since 2019. Some have spent weeks or months in pain as a result, and others believed they had no option but to conduct “DIY dentistry” while waiting for treatment, or felt coerced into “going private”. Under the new plans to tackle the backlog, NHS England said dentists involved in the scheme would “be paid more than a third on top of their normal sessional fee” for delivering care outside their core hours. Dentists said this could involve providing appointments as late as 10pm on weeknights, and slots being offered on Saturdays and Sundays, with children and people with learning disabilities, autism or severe mental health problems being prioritised. The chief dental officer for England, Sara Hurley, said: “Dental services are a vital part of the NHS, providing oral healthcare to all age groups, and that’s why we have taken this unprecedented action to boost NHS dental services. “The NHS is now getting key services like dentistry back to pre-pandemic levels – injecting an extra £50m into routine services will help provide checkups and treatment for hundreds and thousands of people.” The minister for primary care, Maria Caulfield, said the new funding would “urgently give more people access to vital dental care when they need it”. However, Shawn Charlwood, chair of the British Dental Association’s general dental practice committee, said the extra cash “must be just the start if we are to rebuild a service millions depend on”. He added: “After a decade of cuts, a cash-starved service risks being offered money that can’t be spent. Hard-pressed practices are working against the clock and many will struggle to find capacity ahead of April for this investment to make a difference.”For years company bosses have feared “doing a Ratner” when it comes to speaking their minds and have chosen empty platitudes instead. Now a group of Britain’s biggest business names have come together to urge their boardroom peers to abandon dull corporate-speak in the national interest. Senior figures including Juergen Maier, the former chief executive of Siemens UK, and Sir Charlie Mayfield, the former chairman of John Lewis, have launched an organisation to encourage business leaders to speak out about the UK’s biggest economic challenges. Aimed at mentoring the next generation of business leaders so that their voices are heard, the group has developed an app-based platform called vocL to bring together executives who believe companies should engage more in society. Maier, known for outspoken Brexit interventions on the BBC’s Question Time, said business leaders had to stop being scared of speaking in public and recognise that failure to talk openly about politics and economics harms public debate and leaves the field open to their critics. “It’s the fear of making a mistake, and saying something that is very brand impactful. We’ve seen them before: Ratner was probably one of the worst case studies. So you go in with that fear,” he said. “But I cannot see a way in which we can solve the challenges we’ve got without a much, much stronger relationship between business and society and public sector. And I think business has to take responsibility and leadership for some of those issues.” The jeweller Gerald Ratner has gone down in British business folklore for describing one of his company’s products as “crap” in a speech in 1991, turning him into a textbook example of why company chiefs should choose their words carefully. Maier said the British economy faced challenges in the recovery from Covid-19 and in tackling global heating that meant firms needed to speak more openly with their customers and the public. vocL is aimed at connecting the most senior figures in British business with aspiring company leaders. Planned to have 150 mentees enrolled this year, the group of City grandees also includes Sir Michael Rake, the former chairman of BT, Paul Drechsler, the former president of the CBI, and James Timpson, the chief executive of the Timpson shoe repair chain. Mayfield said: “Businesses play a key role in society. I hope the dialogues we stimulate will contribute to that by encouraging freer and more diverse exchanges.” • This article was amended on 25 January 2022 to specify that Gerald Ratner’s comment applied to one item rather than all of his company’s products.Dementia patients who see the same GP every time have lower rates of health complications, fewer emergency hospital visits and a better overall quality of life, according to a new study. More than 900,000 people live with dementia in the UK. The figure is about 57 million globally, and this is on course to nearly triple to 153 million by 2050. The University of Exeter research – published in the British Journal of General Practice – analysed records for more than 9,000 people aged 65 and over in England living with dementia in 2016. It found that people with dementia who were consistently seen by the same GP over the course of one year were given fewer medicines and were less likely to be given medicines that can cause problems like falls, incontinence and drowsiness. Those seeing the same GP over time were 35% less likely to develop delirium, a state of confusion commonly experienced in dementia. Those who consistently saw the same GP were also 58% less likely to experience incontinence, and 10% less likely to have an emergency hospitalisation, compared with those who had the most variation in GPs treating them. Delirium and incontinence are not only very distressing for patients, but additional hospital admissions can also be costly for the NHS, the researchers said. “In the absence of a cure, long-term care is particularly important,” said the study’s lead author, Dr João Delgado of the University of Exeter. “Treating people with dementia can be complex, because it often occurs together with other common diseases. “Our research shows that seeing the same GP consistently over time is associated with improved safe prescribing and improved health outcomes. This could have important healthcare impacts, including reduced treatment costs and care needs.” Sir Denis Pereira Gray, study co-author and a GP researcher at Exeter’s St Leonard’s Practice, said the findings showed that having a named GP was associated with important benefits for patients. “Whilst national policymakers have for years discouraged continuity, general practices can still provide good GP continuity through their internal practice organisation, for example by using personal lists,” he added. Dr Richard Oakley, associate director of research at Alzheimer’s Society, said: “It’s clear from this study that consistently seeing the same GP has real benefits for people living with dementia – better management and treatment of conditions, and lower risk of complications like delirium and incontinence, leading to improved quality of life. “The pandemic has put GP services under immense pressure, so while we might not be able to get consistent GP care for everyone with dementia tomorrow, policymakers should absolutely be working with the NHS to build this into their plans as we emerge from the pandemic.” The study concluded that higher continuity of GP care for patients with dementia was “associated with safer prescribing” and “lower rates of major adverse events”. “Continuity of care is highly valued by patients and GPs, and there is strong research evidence that it is associated with better outcomes for patients and more effective use of NHS services,” said Prof Martin Marshall, chair of the Royal College of GPs. “This research confirms these findings and shows it can be particularly beneficial for patients suffering from dementia.” Marshall said although GPs wanted to provide the best care to all their patients, including continuity for those who want and value it, “escalating GP workload and workforce shortages” meant that it had become increasingly difficult to deliver. He added: “Ultimately, what is needed in order to allow GPs to deliver continuity of care to those patients who value it is more GPs and more members of the practice team so that we can spend more time with patients. The government must urgently deliver on its manifesto pledge of 6,000 more GPs and thousands more members of the practice team so that GPs are able to give patients with dementia, and all their patients, the care they need and deserve.”Indigenous women raped by paramilitaries during Guatemala’s brutal civil war have triumphed in court, when their aggressors were sentenced to 30 years each in prison. In a verdict hailed as a vindication for survivors who have spent years fighting for justice, a tribunal convicted five former paramilitary patrolmen of crimes against humanity for the rape of five Maya Achi women in the early 1980s. “We are very happy, very satisfied with the outcome,” said Brisna Caxaj, a sociologist and gender programme coordinator for Impunity Watch Guatemala, who accompanied the women during the trial. “The tribunal recognised the use of sexual violence during the armed conflict because it was systematic, and it also established how the army used the [paramilitaries] to commit those crimes,” Caxaj told the Guardian. The verdict is also slightly bittersweet. A group of 36 Maya Achi survivors initiated the legal proceedings that eventually led to Monday’s verdict, but three of the women died in the intervening period, including one just last week. Pedrina López, one of the five women whose cases were directly included in the trial, was only 12 years old when she was raped in Rabinal, 80km north of Guatemala City. She testified during the trial and took the stand again Monday morning to call for justice. “What happened never leaves us,” López told the courtroom on Monday morning prior to the verdict. “My body has been left with everything that happened.” López also called for paramilitaries to return the remains of her parents, who were taken away and forcibly disappeared. Other Maya Achi survivors of sexual violence witnessed massacres of relatives, including children. Guatemala’s 1960-1996 civil war left an estimated 200,000 people dead and 45,000 people disappeared. Many of the worst atrocities occurred in the early 1980s. The 36-year armed conflict was between leftist guerrilla groups and the military, but the military’s counterinsurgency campaign, which included paramilitaries, was also deployed against indigenous civilians. More than 80% of victims of atrocities were indigenous Maya civilians, according to a United Nations-backed truth commission, which also documented more than 600 massacres carried out by the military and paramilitaries. State actors committed acts of genocide in some regions of the country, including the Achi region, the truth commission concluded. A domestic court concurred in 2018, and high-ranking former military officials are facing trial for genocide. “Sexual violence was part of the war,” the three-judge tribunal affirmed in its verdict on Monday, noting sexual violence was generalised and systemic against Achi women, who were also subjected to domestic slavery. Nearly six years ago, two former military officers were convicted of crimes against humanity for the systemic rape and enslavement of 11 Maya Q’eqchi’ women in the 1980s in eastern Guatemala. That landmark case helped Achi survivors advance their own. In 2019, however, a judge originally on the Achi women’s case acquitted three paramilitary patrolmen and provisionally acquitted another three, releasing them all from custody. The men are also indigenous and some are from the same villages as the female survivors. The army recruited, often forcibly, local men into paramilitary “civil defence patrols” during the civil war. “The women were challenged by relatives of the accused, and they faced taunts and insults when the men got out,” said Lucia Xiloj, one of three indigenous female lawyers who represents the Achi women joint plaintiffs. “They have faced so many difficulties,” she told the Guardian, noting the women faced stigma in court as well as back home. The conviction is a victory for the women, and their communities will see they were heard and believed, said Xiloj. “The tribunal highlighted in its arguments the importance of the testimonies of the women,” she said. “It vindicates all those years of struggle during their search for justice.”More than 1,000 prisoners and correctional officers have been infected with Covid in New South Wales over the past month, sparking major concerns from some justice advocates. Cases have surged despite efforts to slow the spread through jails, including visitor limitations, isolation for new inmates, rapid testing and the siloing of positive prisoners. Almost 150 prisoners tested positive over the past week alone – up from 11 in the week to Christmas, and just one case the week prior. In the five weeks to 17 January, 847 custodial staff also returned positive Covid tests. Before 12 December, just 75 had tested positive. Despite the sharp rise in infections in both workers and inmates, Kevin Corcoran, the Commissioner of Corrective Services NSW, has not used his power to release any at-risk inmates. At the beginning of the pandemic, the NSW government passed a law to make it legal to conditionally release low-risk and vulnerable prisoners to protect them from the virus. Brett Collins, an advocate for the group Justice Action, said the loved ones of prisoners were “disgusted” the powers had not been exercised. “Parliament has made a commitment to ensure the safety of these vulnerable people and for the commissioner not to use that ability is disgraceful,” he said. “It shows a lack of respect for the health and safety of those people with whom he has been entrusted. We have no doubt that more people will die and violence will ensue in prisons.” So far, one prisoner has died with Covid in NSW – an unvaccinated man in his 60s who died in October. Collins was also concerned about the potential for increased recidivism due to the longer-term impacts of changes to prison scheduling of programs and prolonged periods of isolation. “There will be damage done to the mental health of these people who are isolated and crime rates in the community will inevitably rise,” he said. A spokesman for CSNSW said the emergency release power would only be used if it was “absolutely necessary” to ensure the safety and effectiveness of jails. “There are no immediate plans to release anyone using this emergency measure, but if it does become necessary it will be done on a case-by-case basis and community safety will always be our number one priority,” the spokesman said. “CSNSW holds the safety of all staff and inmates in the highest regard as we continue to follow the expert advice from our healthcare provider.” All prisoners have had access to vaccination since March last year, according to the Corrections health provider, Justice Health and Forensic Mental Health Network. By 17 January, 71% of Indigenous inmates in youth justice centres had received two doses of the vaccine, with three-quarters of the young non-Indigenous population fully vaccinated. Almost 90% of Indigenous and non-Indigenous adults in correctional centres have received at least one dose. Just over 80% of the adult prison population had been fully vaccinated. There were 184 active cases among prisoners on 17 January. Tara Moriarty, the opposition corrections spokesperson, said the government should have learned more from the Delta spike last year and better prepared jails. “Instead, we are again seeing a dangerously high number of cases, putting correctional officers and inmates at risk,” she said. “Correctional facilities are supposed to be the most restricted, secure facilities in NSW. It is unacceptable that the NSW government has again failed to manage this.” Steps have been taken to reduce the spread around jails, including moving all positive inmates from both public and privately operated facilities to the Silverwater jail. A Justice Health spokesperson said this was so they can be “kept separate from the rest of the prison population” and moved to hospital if required. Every new prisoner is placed in quarantine for two weeks before joining the wider prison population. Other measures to slow the spread include the provision of PPE, rapid testing of new entrants and testing of symptomatic inmates.Texas, Indiana, Washington state and the District of Columbia sued Alphabet’s Google on Monday over what they called deceptive location tracking practices that invade users’ privacy. “Google falsely led consumers to believe that changing their account and device settings would allow customers to protect their privacy and control what personal data the company could access,” the office of the Washington DC attorney general, Karl Racine, said in a statement. “The truth is that contrary to Google’s representations it continues to systematically surveil customers and profit from customer data. Google’s bold misrepresentations are a clear violation of consumers’ privacy,” the statement said. “Location data is key to Google’s advertising business. Consequently, it has a financial incentive to dissuade users from withholding access to that data,” the office of the Washington state attorney general, Bob Ferguson, said in a statement. The lawsuit cites a 2018 article by the Associated Press that revealed Google was continuing to track users’ locations even when users turned off the “location history” setting. The company claimed that turning that setting off would stop any location tracking when in reality there was a separate setting, called “Web &amp; App Activity”, that continued to log location and other personal data. A spokesperson for Google, Jose Castaneda, said the “attorneys general are bringing a case based on inaccurate claims and outdated assertions about our settings. We have always built privacy features into our products and provided robust controls for location data. We will vigorously defend ourselves and set the record straight.” In May 2020, the state of Arizona filed a similar lawsuit against Google over its collection of location data of users. That suit is pending. Google is facing several lawsuits and investigations. In December 2020, the attorneys general of multiple US states sued Google, alleging the company misled publishers and advertisers about the price and process of advertising auctions. The lawsuit alleges that Google maintained control over the advertising sales market – a market that it dominates – by inflating the price of advertisements for brands and suppressing competition from other advertising exchanges. In a separate lawsuit, the US justice department in October 2020 alleged the tech company abused its position to maintain an illegal monopoly over search and search advertising. “Two decades ago, Google became the darling of Silicon Valley as a scrappy startup with an innovative way to search the emerging internet. That Google is long gone,” that suit alleged.Joe Biden was caught on a hot mic appearing to insult the Fox News journalist Peter Doocy, seemingly calling him a “stupid son of a bitch” after Doocy posed a question about US inflation. “Do you think inflation is a political liability in the midterms?” the reporter asked the president as journalists were leaving the room at the end of an event at the White House on Monday. Biden responded: “No, it’s a great asset – more inflation. What a stupid son of a bitch.” The mic was right in front of Biden, but it appeared as if he were making the remark to himself or that he might have thought the mic had been turned off. The remark came at the end of a White House Competition Council meeting where officials provided an update on efforts to combat inflation, which recently hit 7%. Biden, who was also fielding questions about the growing crisis in Ukraine, had said he only wanted to address questions on the topic of the council, which Doocy appeared to be covering in his inquiry. The White House has said this month that inflation will only be a temporary problem, but some Democrats have worried about the potential for longer-term political consequences. The clip of Biden’s remark quickly went viral on social media, with some pointing out that Biden days earlier had muttered, “What a stupid question,” in response to another Fox News reporter’s question about Russia. Doocy went live on Fox News soon after and joked about the insult, saying: “Nobody has factchecked him yet.” Last year, Biden apologized to a CNN reporter after snapping at one of her questions. As vice-president, Biden got caught on a hot mic telling Barack Obama, “This is a big fucking deal!” after he signed healthcare legislation. Despite Monday’s gaffe, Biden’s first year in office has marked a return to civility after a tumultuous four years under Donald Trump, who labelled the media the “enemy of the American people”. Biden has described journalists as “indispensable” to democracy, although press access to him has been limited. The president held fewer than 10 formal news conferences during his first year, far less than Trump or Obama. His press conference last week, however, was longer than any given by either predecessor.Campaigners are calling for the Tour Down Under to follow the example of Tennis Australia and abandon its sponsorship deal with Santos as the oil company’s boss says those looking for a faster transition to renewable energy are “dreaming”. Santos CEO Kevin Gallagher has defended the oil and gas company in the face of increasing pressure over its efforts to open up new gas fields, telling the Sydney Morning Herald there is currently “no alternative” to fossil fuels. “Unless you can replace us tomorrow with some new green fuel that we don’t know what it is today, then the focus should be on developing energy that’s affordable and cleaning it up by reducing emissions until alternatives are viable and affordable,” Gallagher said. He said fossil fuel companies were the only organisations with experience managing “mega-projects spending trillions of dollars globally every single year” and any transition to a zero carbon economy was not possible without them. “If someone thinks some new set of project builders is just going to arrive from somewhere else with trillions of dollars to start building some new energy infrastructure globally ... they are dreaming,” he said. Gallagher’s comments come as sporting events like the Tour Down Under festival of cycling, which began on Monday and is sponsored by Santos, face increasing pressure to divest from fossil fuel sponsorships owing to their contribution to climate change. Belinda Noble, founder of Comms Declare which monitors the work public relations firms do for fossil fuel companies, said Santos’ sponsorship of sports at all levels was a way to gain “clout and political influence”. “They’re not doing this for altruistic reasons – it’s hard-headed business to create social licence for their polluting products,” Noble said. “Sports allows them deep engagement with the communities they operate in. The Tour Down Under is a good example, as there are so many prongs of their marketing campaign. “It’s deep in the community with events and local activation. It really helps them peddle the myths that gas is required to make Australia work.” As the Tour Down Under and Festival of Cycling are owned by the South Australian Tourism Commission and managed by Events South Australia, Noble said the close association of the state government meant comments like those from Gallagher raised a significant “reputational risk”. “Gallagher’s job is to promote gas. He’s very good at that. But whatever he thinks is irrelevant,” Noble said. “As South Australia has recently shown, we can run on 100% renewables now,” she said. Renewable energy met all of South Australia’s demand for power for almost a full week between 23 December and 29 December last year. Santos’ sponsorship of the Tour Down Under has faced sustained opposition over the past two years, including a petition that has so far attracted 5,000 signatures. Professional cyclists including Grace Brown, Cyrus Monk, Jack Marshall, Kirsty Deacon and Stuart Alexander have also signed a statement calling for an end to the deal. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Fossil Free SA’s Paul Boundy said the ongoing arrangement was “ironic” given the Tour Down Under route ran through areas bushfire affected areas in 2020 and the event 2019 had some routes shortened due to extreme heat. “Sports were once sponsored by cigarettes and we got rid of cigarettes,” Boundy said. “Sports can function at a professional level without greenwashing the most damaging companies.” Boundy said his group wanted the South Australian Tourism Commission to follow the example of Tennis Australia and end the relationship with Santos in favour of an alternative sponsor when the contract comes up for renewal in 2023. “Fossil fuels aren’t the only option,” Boundy said. Extinction Rebellion in South Australia has separately announced plans to protest the sponsorship by blocking the Tour Down Under route during the race. Few details are known about the terms of the arrangement with Santos but a sponsorship agreement giving the oil company naming rights was signed in 2019, extending a decade-long partnership. Events South Australia executive director Hitaf Rasheed defended the arrangement, saying the Tour Down Under brought “activity, enjoyment and much-needed economy activity to South Australia” and was a major driver of tourism. “Similar to major events around the world, this much-loved sporting event relies on the investment of sponsors to be able to put the event on, but also to ensure it maintains its world-class offering,” Rasheed said. “We truly value the support of sponsors, including Santos as naming rights sponsor, and our other premier, major, corporate and supporting sponsors.” Santos is seeking to develop new gas projects in the Beetaloo Basin, Barossa, and Narrabri. Last year the International Energy Agency said limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop in 2021.Jeopardy! contestant Amy Schneider has broken yet another record this week. Schneider, an engineering manager from Oakland, California, scored her 39th win on Monday night’s episode, giving her the second longest winning streak of any contestant. Since November, she has won about $1.3m, making her the first woman and fourth person to win more than $1m on the show. She has also become the first transgender person to qualify for Jeopardy’s Tournament of Champions, an annual event with the game’s top players. “It still feels unreal,” Schneider said in a statement to Variety. “Knowing that I had this chance, I was definitely thinking about it. Then Ken said it, and I thought, ‘Alright, I just accomplished this huge thing’ and it was pretty great.” The 42-year-old has managed to answer 95% of questions correctly, according to Jeopardy!. Schneider surpassed Matt Amodio’s victory streak and now has the second highest number of consecutive victories of any contestant, behind Ken Jennings, whose 74-game streak is the longest in the show’s history. Schneider, who is originally from Dayton, Ohio, has chronicled her experience on the show on social media, detailing the techniques she uses to tackle questions and recall facts as well as which questions stumped her. “While I still don’t necessarily understand why I tended to improve as the game went on, it had happened enough for me to start to have some faith in it,” she said of the most recent episode. Schneider’s victory streak and social media posts have endeared her to Jeopardy! fans and made her a beacon for LGBTQ+ visibility. Schneider has said she had dreamed of being a contestant on the show since age five, and told Good Morning America on Monday that representing the trans community on the show has been the most rewarding part of her experience. “I think that the best part for me has been being on TV as my true self, expressing myself and representing the entire community of trans people,” she said. “Just being a smart, confident woman and doing something super normal like being on Jeopardy!”That’s all for today, thanks for following along. Some key links and developments: The US has placed 8,500 troops on heightened alert to deploy to Europe as Nato reinforced its eastern borders with warships and fighter jets, amid growing fears of a possible “lightning” attack by Russia to seize the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. Conservative groups across the US, often linked to deep-pocketed rightwing donors, are carrying out a campaign to ban books from school libraries, often focused on works that address race, LGBTQ+ issues or marginalized communities. Covid cases are rising rapidly among US nursing home residents and staff and causing shortages in admissions, exacerbating bed shortages at hospitals in turn. US authorities are confident most states will soon reach and pass a peak in coronavirus Omicron variant cases, even as hospitals struggle to cope with the current surge, Fauci said. Opening arguments began in the federal trial of Tou Thao, J Alexander Kueng and Thomas Lane, three officers present for the murder of George Floyd. US stock markets were hit by another wave of wild trading as investors worried that the Federal Reserve would wind down its support for the economy faster than expected and fears of a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine intensified. CNN obtained an intelligence bulletin from the Department of Homeland Security that warns that Russia would consider conducting a cyberattack on the US homeland if Moscow perceived that a US or Nato response would be a threat to a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. US Capitol police officer Eugene Goodman, who was awarded a Congressional Gold Medal for his acts during the insurrection, has given his first interview since the January 6 riot, saying the attacks “could have easily been a bloodbath”. Goodman spoke on a podcast called 3 Brothers No Sense hosted by a fellow Capitol officer, Business Insider reported. On the episode, Goodman expressed concerns that one of his fellow officers who has been more outspoken than him has since faced harassment: “He’s said he’s out with his daughter, and he’s had random people run up and throw drinks in his face, and stuff like that. That’s mostly why I haven’t been doing any interviews, anything like that, ‘cause I just don’t want any part of the negativity.” Conservative groups across the US, often linked to deep-pocketed rightwing donors, are carrying out a campaign to ban books from school libraries, often focused on works that address race, LGBTQ issues or marginalized communities, my colleague Adam Gabbatt reports: Literature has already been removed from schools in Texas, Pennsylvania, Utah, Virginia and Wyoming. Librarians and teachers warn the trend is on the increase, as groups backed by wealthy Republican donors use centrally drawn up tactics and messaging to harangue school districts into removing certain texts. In October, the Texas state representative Matt Krause sent a list of 850 books to school districts, asking that they report how many copies they have of each title and how much had been spent on those books. The Texas Tribune reported that the books included two by Ta-Nehisi Coates; LGBT Families by Leanne K Currie-McGhee; and ‘Pink is a Girl Color’ … and Other Silly Things People Say, a children’s book by Stacy and Erik Drageset. Krause’s list sparked panic in schools, and by December a district in San Antonio said it was reviewing 414 titles in its libraries. In Biden’s call with European leaders today, the group “reiterated their continued concern about the Russian military build-up on Ukraine’s borders and expressed their support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”, the White House says in a readout of the call just released: The leaders underscored their shared desire for a diplomatic resolution to the current tensions and reviewed recent engagements with Russia in multiple formats. The leaders also discussed their joint efforts to deter further Russian aggression against Ukraine, including preparations to impose massive consequences and severe economic costs on Russia for such actions as well as to reinforce security on Nato’s eastern flank. Participants on the call included the European Commission president, the European Council president and heads of state from France, Germany, Italy, Poland and the UK. Biden was caught on a hot mic appearing to insult Fox News journalist Peter Doocy, calling him a “stupid son of a bitch”. “Do you think inflation is a political liability in the midterms?” the reporter asked as journalists were leaving the room at the end of a news conference. Biden responded: “It’s a great asset – more inflation. What a stupid son of a bitch.” The mic was right in front of Biden, so it’s unclear why he made the remark, but it appeared as if he was making the remark to himself or that he may have thought the mic had been turned off. The remark came at the end of a White House Competition Council meeting, in which officials provided an update on efforts to combat inflation. Biden, who was also fielding questions about the growing crisis in Ukraine, had said he only wanted to address questions on the topic of the council, which Doocy appeared to be covering in his inquiry. The White House has said this month that inflation would only be a temporary problem, but some Democrats have worried about the potential for longer-term political consequences. The clip of Biden’s remark quickly went viral on social media, with some pointing out that Biden days earlier had muttered, “What a stupid question,” in response to another Fox News reporter’s question about Russia. Doocy went live on Fox News soon after and joked about the insult, saying, “Nobody has fact checked him yet.” Last year, Biden apologized to a CNN reporter after snapping at one of her questions. As vice president, Biden famously got caught on a hot mic telling Obama, “This is a big fucking deal!” after he signed healthcare legislation. Biden has finished his call with European leaders on the crisis in Ukraine, which the White House says lasted more than an hour. “I had a very, very, very good meeting, total unanimity with all the European leaders. We’ll talk about it later,” the president told CNN’s chief White House correspondent. The US has placed 8,500 troops on heightened alert to deploy to Europe as Nato reinforced its eastern borders with warships and fighter jets. There are growing fears of a possible “lightning” attack by Russia to seize the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. More details: Hi all - Sam Levin in Los Angeles here, taking over our live coverage for the rest of the day. A prosecutor has alleged that lawyer Michael Avenatti stole nearly $300,000 in book proceeds from former client Stormy Daniels, the adult film actor and producer. The prosecutor outlined the case for jurors in court on Monday at the start of his third criminal trial in two years. My colleague Gloria Oladipo has more details: Prosecutors say Avenatti, 50, who has pleaded not guilty, embezzled book contract proceeds intended for Daniels, who came to worldwide attention when she claimed to have had an affair with Donald Trump before he became president and was then paid to keep quiet about it. “This is a case about a lawyer who stole from his client. A lawyer who lied to cover up the scheme,” assistant attorney Andrew Rohrbach said, noting that Avenatti forged Daniels’s signature in a letter to an agent as part of the crime. “The defendant stole almost $300,000 from the person he was supposed to be looking out for.” Avenatti became a media fixture when he represented Daniels in cases against Trump, and himself became an outspoken critic of the then president, even stirring speculation that he might enter politics. 8,500 US troops are on “heightened alert” to deploy to Eastern Europe amid rising tensions of Russia possibly invading Ukraine, according to the Department of Defense. Vice-president Kamala Harris is in Wisconsin to talk infrastructure. Opening statements began today in the federal civil rights trials of the three other police officers involved in the killing of George Floyd. A Georgia district attorney will be allowed to seat a special grand jury this spring in the investigation into Donald Trump’s efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election, CNN is reporting. The special grand jury will allow Fulton county district attorney Fani Willis to seat a panel with the power to issue subpoenas to compel witnesses to testify and to gather additional evidence. Trump was infamously recorded on a phone call with Brad Raffensperger, the Georgia secretary of state, nearly two months after election day, pressuring him to overturn the states election results based on unfounded claims of voter fraud. Willis has said that Raffensperger, whom she described as an “essential witness”, has indicated he would only take part in an interview once presented with a subpoena. The secretary of defense has put 8,500 US troops on “heightened alert” to deploy to Eastern Europe in support of the eastern flank as the possibility of Russia invading Ukraine continues to rise, said John Kirby, press secretary for the Pentagon. However, while the Biden administration could deploy US troops to the eastern flank, Kirby made a point in saying there are currently no plans for US troops to go to Ukraine directly if Russia invades. Vice president Kamala Harris has arrived in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to talk about infrastructure investment. Upon arrival, Harris did not respond to reporters’ shouted questions about the tense situation in Ukraine. The VP is talking now about bipartisan infrastructure investment in replacing lead-based water pipes, that can end up poisoning the public, taking an especially hard toll on children and seniors. Harris said the issues involved intersect between public health, education, environmental justice and labor rights and that “eliminating lead exposure” must be one of the highest priorities for the US. “This is an issue that we, as a nation, should commit to ending...getting rid of lead in our pipes and in our paint,” she said, citing children in particular, exposed to lead in water supplies at school or the paint on bedroom walls at home in public housing. She said half of children in the US are at risk of lead exposure, which can cause “irreparable damage” to their health as their brains develop. Harris said it was “long overdue to get this done”, but the Biden-Harris administration aims to remove and replace all lead pipes in the nation in the next decade, spending $15bn and “creating good union jobs”. The vice president has now ended her address. Opening statements began on Monday, in the federal civil rights trial of the three lesser-known police officers involved in the killing of George Floyd. Now-ex officers Tou Thao, J Alexander Kueng and Thomas Lane are on trial in court in St Paul, the state capital of Minnesota - after white former Minneapolis officer Derek Chauvin was convicted of murdering Floyd, a 46-year-old Black man, and admitted violating his civil rights in May 2020, sparking the largest racial reckoning in America’s recent history. Federal prosecutor Samantha Trepel, from the US Department of Justice’s civil rights division, said Thao, 35, Lane, 38, and Kueng, 27, had broken their oath with a callous indifference to Floyd. She recounted that video had captured how Kueng at times seemed more preoccupied with some gravel lodged in the tire of the nearby police car than the man pinned beneath him repeatedly saying: “I can’t breathe.” The three have pleaded not guilty in both their civil rights case and their state case, which is due later this year and in which they are accused of aiding and abetting murder. In the current trial they are accused of depriving George Floyd of his right “to be free from a police officer’s deliberate indifference to his serious medical needs”, according to the charges. Thao and Kueng are also accused of willfully failing to “intervene to stop Defendant Chauvin’s use of unreasonable force” when Floyd was unresponsive on the ground. “Today is another milestone in the long, slow journey to justice for George Floyd,” Ben Crump, the civil rights lawyer who represented his relatives, said in a statement: “This trial will be another painful experience for the Floyd family, who must once more relive his grueling death in excruciating detail.” A wide radius of security fences, tight police patrolling and road closures are in operation outside the federal courthouse amid concerns of mass protest. Floyd’s murder ignited huge demonstrations across America and in many other countries, as the US Black Lives Matter movement revived and spread, although some of the protests against police brutality and entrenched racism more widely were often harshly curtailed by the police. Joe Biden is considering sending several thousand US troops to Eastern Europe amid the rising possibility of Russia invading Ukraine. Biden is set to have a video call with a number of European leaders about the Russian situation this afternoon. The Department of Homeland Security warned that any action taken against Russia could result in a cyberattack on US homeland. The supreme court is set to hear a pair of cases on race-based affirmative action in college admissions. Former Alaska governor Sarah Palin’s defamation trial against the New York Times was postponed after she contracted Covid-19. She is unvaccinated. When questioned about whether sending more troops to Eastern Europe could escalate tensions, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said, “We have a sacred obligation to support the security of our eastern flank countries.” “I think it’s important to remember who the aggressor is here,” she said. “It’s not the United States, it’s not these eastern flank countries. It’s Russia, who has tens of thousands of troops on the border of Ukraine. They have the power to deescalate. We would certainly welcome that.” White House press secretary Jen Psaki reiterated the state department guidance for American citizens in Ukraine to consider departing now. “(The president) said last week that military action by Russia could come at any time,” Psaki said. “That remains his point of view.” White House press secretary Jen Psaki begins today’s press briefing with questions about the possible Russian invasion of Ukraine. The briefing took place ahead of a video call Joe Biden planned to hold with European leaders about the rising tensions in Eastern Europe. Psaki said she expected that “they will discuss diplomacy, deterrence and defense efforts” during the call, as well as any possible pending sanctions. Psaki hemmed a bit on the reports that Biden was considering deploying thousands of US troops to Eastern European countries, saying that “we’ve never ruled out providing additional support.” “We have been consulting with allies and deployments and refining plans for all scenarios,” Psaki said. “We have always said we would reinforce our allies on the eastern flank and those conversations and discussions have certainly been a part of what our national security officials have been discussing with their counterparts now for several weeks.” The supreme court agreed on Monday to hear a pair of cases on race-based affirmative action in college admissions. The cases will give the majority conservative court an opportunity to overturn precedent that protects the use of affirmative action. Both cases have been brought forth by Students for Fair Admission, a nonprofit led by anti-affirmative-action activist Edward Blum, who has spent much of the last decade trying to end affirmative action in higher education. Harvard and the University of North Carolina are the defendants. Blum was behind Fisher v University of Texas, the last case on affirmative action that the supreme court considered, in 2016. In that case, Blum argued that race-based admission policies discriminated against Abigail Fisher, a white applicant. The court in a 4-3 ruling upheld affirmative action, with then-justice Anthony Kennedy the only conservative who ruled in favor of the policy. The cases will be the first opportunity for the three Donald Trump appointees to review a case on affirmative action. Students for Fair Admission alleges that race-based admission – which has boosted the admission rate of applicants from historically marginalized backgrounds, particularly Black and Hispanic students – has led to discrimination against Asian Americans. Lawyers from Harvard and the University of North Carolina, along with the US justice department, urged the court not to take on the cases, saying that the schools’ policies are in line with affirmative action protections upheld by previous supreme court cases. Two lower courts upheld Harvard’s use of affirmative action, with one federal court judge saying Harvard’s use of race was meaningful, but not “impermissibly extensive”. “Harvard’s race-conscious admission program ensures that Harvard can retain the benefits of diversity it has already achieved,” said US circuit judge Sandra Lynch in an appeals court ruling. The court will likely hear arguments for the case in its fall session, with a possible ruling in summer 2023. Twenty-seven lawmakers, ranging from far-right to progressive, have signed a letter to House speaker Nancy Pelosi and House minority leader Kevin McCarthy calling for legislation that would ban members of Congress from owning or trading stock. “Congress passed the STOCK Act in 2012 in an attempt to prevent members of Congress from using congressional knowledge to their advantage in stock trading,” the letter reads. “However, one recent investigation found that the STOCK act had been violated hundreds of times just since 2020. It’s clear the current rules are not working.” The letter boasts the support of “Americans across the political spectrum”, and indeed the House members signing onto the letter do come from all sides - from Pramila Jayapal, chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, to longtime conspiracy theorist and Donald Trump supporter Matt Gaetz. Former Alaska governor Sarah Palin’s positive Covid-19 tests have forced a postponement of her defamation trial against the New York Times. The Associated Press reports that US District judge Jed Rakoff said the trial, which was set to begin today, can begin instead on 3 February if Palin has adequately recovered by then. “She is, of course, unvaccinated,” the judge said of the 2008 Republican vice-presidential pick and conservative political star. Palin has urged people not to get vaccinated, telling an audience in Arizona last month that “it will be over my dead body that I’ll have to get a shot.” More on the Ukraine situation: Joe Biden will hold a video call this afternoon with European leaders about the possible Russian invasion of Ukraine. The call will be with: Boris Johnson, prime minister of the United Kingdom Emmanuel Macron, president of France Olaf Scholz, chancellor of Germany Andrzej Duda, president of Poland Mario Draghi, president of Italy Ursala von der Leyen, president of the European Commission Charles Michel, president of the European Council Jens Stoltenberg, secretary general of Nato Glenn Youngkin, the Republican governor of Virginia, is facing a new legal challenge over his executive order allowing parents to opt out of school mask mandates, the Associated Press is reporting. The mandate, one of the first that Youngkin issued when he was sworn in as governor on 15 January, went into effect today, bringing about confusion throughout the commonwealth. Some districts have interpreted the order as being at odds with a state law that deals with Covid-19 mitigation in schools and have kept pre-existing mask mandates in place. “Listen to a principal today. And I know that there are some school systems that are doing things that are inconsistent with respecting the rights of parents. ... Let’s respect it right now and let this legal process play out,” Youngkin said in an interview with Richmond radio station WRVA Monday morning. A legal challenge to Youngkin’s order was filed last week by a group of parents, with another filed today by seven school boards, including Fairfax, the state’s most populous jurisdiction. In a message to parents, Scott Brabrand, superintendent of Fairfax county public schools, said he hoped the lawsuit will allow for a swift resolution of the conflict between the governor and local boards that believe a mask mandate is a necessary public health measure. “It is imperative that decisions about education and school safety are made locally in order to champion the best interests of our students and community,” Brabrand said. Supporters of the executive order say the state law is not in conflict with Youngkin’s executive order because the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention only recommends mask-wearing and does not mandate it, Meanwhile, Democrats commended the school boards who challenged Youngkin. “Youngkin is quickly on his way to becoming the most divisive and authoritarian governor in our commonwealth’s long history,” Mamie Locke, Virginia state senator, said at a news conference. CNN has obtained an intelligence bulletin from the Department of Homeland Security that warns that Russia would consider conducting a cyberattack on the US homeland if Moscow perceived that a US or Nato response would be a threat to a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. “Russia maintains a range of offensive cyber tools that it could employ against US networks—from low-level denials-of-service to destructive attacks targeting critical infrastructure,” states the 23 January memo. Russian hackers have penetrated some of Washington’s signature institutions in the past, from homeland security, the commerce and treasury departments, nuclear laboratories and the Pentagon, as well as leading Fortune 500 companies. Sarah Palin has tested positive for the coronavirus – on the first morning of her defamation trial against the New York Times. Jed Rakoff, the US federal judge presiding over the case in Manhattan, announced the test result on Monday. “She is of course unvaccinated,” the judge said, referring to the former Alaska governor, 2008 Republican vice-presidential pick and conservative political star. Two years into a pandemic that has killed more than 866,000 people in America, resistance to vaccinations and other public health measures is common on the political right. Palin’s positive test was an at-home test, Rakoff said, adding that she would be retested before it was determined whether jury selection should be delayed or the trial adjourned until February. Full story: The supreme court has agreed to hear a pair of cases challenging race-based affirmative action policies for admission at Harvard University and the University of North Carolina. An update on the Ukraine situation: it appears the Biden administration is moving forward with deploying troops to Eastern Europe, CNN reports. The supreme court will not hear House minority leader Kevin McCarthy’s case seeking to invalidate proxy voting for the House of Representatives. Some background on the lawsuit: House members from both parties have cited the pandemic as a reason to keep voting by proxy - but members have also used voting by proxy for plenty of other reasons, like meeting with Joe Biden, meeting with Donald Trump or taking care of sick family members, Politico reports. McCarthy believes that voting by proxy has been “expanded to something that we always feared” - and has promised that should he ever become speaker of the House, he will do away with it. However, even some of the Republicans that he initially got to sign onto the lawsuit have taken their name off of it. A defamation trial pitting Sarah Palin against the New York Times opens today, over a 2017 editorial which the former Alaska governor and Republican vice-presidential pick says falsely linked her to a mass shooting in Tucson, Arizona. On the right, many hope Palin’s case will lead to a revision of the high standard for proving libel of US public figures – an aim cherished by Donald Trump among others. Freedom of the press is enshrined in the first amendment to the US constitution, ratified in 1791. The supreme court adopted the “actual malice” standard, which makes it difficult for public figures to win libel lawsuits, in 1964, in the landmark New York Times v Sullivan decision. Two justices on the current, conservative-dominated supreme court, Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch, have suggested revisiting that standard and Palin has signaled that she will challenge the Sullivan precedent on appeal if she loses at trial. Most observers expect her to lose, particularly because the paper so swiftly acknowledged its error. But the Times faces an embarrassing few days in court. Full story: Newt Gingrich, a former House speaker and candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, has stoked outrage by predicting members of the committee investigating the Capitol attack will be imprisoned if Republicans retake the chamber this year. One of two Republicans on the committee, Liz Cheney, said: “A former speaker of the House is threatening jail time for members of Congress who are investigating the violent attack on our Capitol and our constitution. This is what it looks like when the rule of law unravels.” Gingrich made his name with scorched-earth opposition to Bill Clinton in the 1990s and ran for the Republican nomination in 2012. He is now a prominent supporter of Donald Trump, rightwing gadfly and adviser to House Republican leaders. He made his prediction on Fox News, for which he is a contributor. Calling the members of the 6 January committee “wolves [who] are going to find out that they’re now sheep”, he said that if Republicans take Congress in November, “this is all going to come crashing down … they’re the ones who in fact, I think, face a real risk of jail for the kinds of laws they’re breaking”. The 6 January committee has recommended criminal charges for the former White House adviser Steve Bannon and Mark Meadows, Trump’s final chief of staff. Both refused to comply with subpoenas. Bannon has pleaded not guilty to contempt of Congress, a charge that carries a year in jail, with a trial set for the summer. The Department of Justice has not acted regarding Meadows. Gingrich said: “You have, both with Attorney General [Merrick] Garland and this select committee on 6 January, people who have run amok … they’re running over people’s civil liberties. “And what they need to understand is on 4 January next year, you’re going to have a Republican majority in the House and a Republican majority in the Senate. And all these people who have been so tough, and so mean, and so nasty are going to be delivered subpoenas for every document, every conversation, every tweet, every email.” Gingrich also said the committee was “basically a lynch mob”. Another member of the committee, the Democrat Zoe Lofgren, told CNN Gingrich’s comments were “just bizarre. I think Newt has really lost it. You know, it leaves me speechless.” Alluding to Trump’s attempt to overturn his defeat in part through the Capitol putsch, Lofgren added: “I mean, unless he is assuming that the government does get overthrown and there’s no system of justice.” Greetings, live blog readers. Happy Monday. With tensions mounting at the Ukraine border amid fears of a Russian invasion, Joe Biden is considering deploying several thousand US troops, in addition to warships and aircraft, as Nato reinforces its eastern borders with land, sea and air forces. Administration officials told the New York Times of a Pentagon presentation at Camp David this weekend that included sending 1,000 to 5,000 troops to Eastern European countries. Biden is expected to make a decision early this week. Antony Blinken, Biden’s secretary of state, has already warned that the US and its allies will deliver a “swift, severe and united response” if Russia invades Ukraine. The US and the UK have withdrawn diplomats’ families from Ukraine embassies ahead of a possible invasion. This comes after the UK Foreign Office claimed it had exposed evidence of a plot to install a pro-Moscow government in Ukraine.We are entering the business end of the Australian Political Open with the reigning champ “Slo-Mo” up against the league-loving lad whose identity he has appropriated, Albo. Scott Morrison is in trouble. Hampered by a clear lack of preparation, the master of the topspin has failed to deliver what was needed over summer with a series of ugly double-faults when all that was required was a basic service. Meanwhile, his botched match-up with the world No 1 highlights his poor ongoing record in international competitions, reinforced by his tendency to prioritise showmanship over hard work and blame others for his own unforced errors. After starting this title defence strongly following a boilover victory in 2019 that left his opponents choking on the champagne they had prematurely popped, the champ dropped the second set after failing to show up on court just as the 2020 summer action was heating up. While stabilising in the third set by adapting a safety-first mindset and actively embracing his opponents’ baseline approach, he squandered this advantage incurring multiple infringements for delays. Now deep in the deciding set, Slo-Mo is attempting to absolve himself by arguing that balls flying off the rim to wreak havoc in the crowd have actually touched the line. But as this week’s Guardian Essential Report shows, the Australian voter’s hawk eye is not buying it, rating his recent form poorly and stripping him of his net positive rating for the first time since the Hawaiian Open debacle. A critical factor weighing the final outcome of this showdown will be the crowd. And what is particularly striking here is the degree to which the public has a personal stake in this contest. Over the past two decades the Political Open has become more a spectator sport, an emotional ride too often devoid of personal consequence as the crowd passively watched from the sidelines. In these contests players can get away with trick shots for the lols; convincing pensioners they were going to be taxed to death (Open Final 2019) or people in the suburbs that asylum seekers were clogging up their roads (Open Finals 2001, 2004, 2007, 2010 and 2013). But this summer the action has had greater meaning as people live the consequence of the Slo-Mo playbook: from the availability of rapid antigen tests to Covid vaccine booster supplies to supporting industries in lockdown, the public is experiencing what happens firsthand when a titleholder loses command of their game. In another question this week more than half of respondents indicated they had been personally affected by a summer of mistakes; young people, in particular, have been feeling the effects of the mishits. What was promised as a summer of freedom has actually been a summer of queues and fear and illness and frustrated plans, but most of all a summer of confusion. When the punters don’t have access to clear information, or worse, when they can’t do what they are meant to because the authorities have not provided them with the means to do it, then the game changes. When families are forced to manage the pandemic for themselves and their leader is doing nothing but playing the predictable strokes and pretending it’s all going to plan, then politics ceases to be a game at all. And when we are all told it is our “personal responsibility” to resolve this disconnect, we can end up shifting our allegiances to the other side. That’s what is happening right now. More than one-third of those watching say they are now less likely to support Morrison and even allowing for those diehard Albo fans, this includes up to one in five Liberal voters who say they are less likely to stay in his corner. (Notably too, nearly a third of independent and small-party voters say his fracas would make him less likely to woo them back to the blue corner.) As any tennis player will tell you, once the momentum shifts it is really, really difficult to turn things around mid-rally. That’s where Morrison is in the final stage of this epic contest, bringing out the Hail Mary big shots, anything to land a winner that he can build on. We know he has a deep bag of tricks and he won’t leave a single one in the sack. Like a political Nick Kyrgios, he will bring the colour and bluster and curated photo-ops, but is he actually doing the work required to go the full distance? As for his opponent, the journeyman leftie has been conserving energy and making his opponent do all the running around. Maybe more Ash Barty, he was the only member of the last Cup-winning team to emerge with their dignity intact and is looking fitter as the match wears on. Provided he can hold his nerve and keep his radar honed, the onus is now on Albo to move up to the net. Game on! • Peter Lewis will discuss the findings of the week’s Guardian Essential Report at the special time of 2:30pm on Tuesday – free registration hereThe Australian Open has reversed its ban on “Where is Peng Shuai?” T-shirts following widespread backlash to the tournament’s claim they constituted “commercial or political” material, but banners will still be prohibited. Late last week spectators at Melbourne Park were asked to remove their shirts referencing the Chinese player, whose wellbeing has been the subject of international concern since she accused a senior Chinese official of sexual assault in early November. Tournament security confiscated a banner and asked fans to take off their shirts before Victoria Police were called over and an officer explained “I’m not saying you can’t have those views, but Tennis Australia sets the rules here”. In the two days since the situation was made public by Brisbane activist Drew Pavlou, high-profile figures have pushed back on Tennis Australia’s insistence that Peng’s safety is its “primary concern” despite its decision to classify the banner and T-shirts as “commercial or political” material. Tennis great Martina Navratilova on Monday condemned the stance as “pathetic” and accused Tennis Australia of “capitulating” to China. Australia’s defence minister Peter Dutton joined the chorus on Tuesday, saying Peng’s safety “is not a political issue”. “It’s a human rights issue,” Dutton told Sky News. “And it’s frankly about the treatment of a young woman who is claiming that she has been sexually assaulted.” The foreign minister, Marise Payne, also weighed in on the subject, saying freedom of speech should be defended and that she respected Peng’s “strength in making those disclosures”. But TA chief executive and tournament director, Craig Tiley, on Tuesday announced the ban for shirts would be reversed as long as those wearing them were well behaved. Banners would still be barred due to safety concerns. “Yes, as long as they are not coming as a mob to be disruptive but are peaceful,” he told AFP. “It’s all been a bit lost in translation from some people who are not here and don’t really know the full view. “The situation in the last couple of days is that some people came with a banner on two large poles and we can’t allow that. If you are coming to watch the tennis that’s fine, but we can’t allow anyone to cause a disruption at the end of the day.” A source from TA said decisions around what will or will not be allowed inside Melbourne Park would be made on a case-by-case basis. A flood of “Where is Peng Shuai?” T-shirts is likely to be seen on Saturday before the women’s final with fundraisers pledging to hand them out for free at Melbourne Park. A GoFundMe titled “hand out Peng Shuai shirts” has raised more than $15,000 since it was created in defiance of the ban three days ago. Peng has appeared only rarely on Chinese social media since early November when her post on Weibo, in which she accused the former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of sexual assault, was quickly deleted from China’s heavily censored internet. In late December, Peng retracted her allegations in an interview with Singapore media outlet Lianhe Zaobao, a Chinese-language publication under the state-controlled Singapore Press Holdings Limited.Sheldon Silver, one of the most powerful figures in New York state government for two decades before his conviction on corruption charges, has died in federal custody. He was 77. Silver, who served as the speaker of the New York state assembly, died on Monday, the federal Bureau of Prisons said, adding that the official cause of death would be determined by the medical examiner. Silver’s supporters had said he was in failing health from multiple medical conditions. The Manhattan Democrat, who told a judge he prayed he would not die in prison, was serving a more than six-year sentence for using his clout in state government to benefit real estate developers, who rewarded Silver by referring lucrative business to his law firm. Silver’s conviction ended a nearly four-decade career in the assembly. He first won a seat representing Manhattan’s Lower East Side in 1976, and became assembly speaker in 1994, a powerful position that made him one of Albany’s “three men in a room” negotiating annual budgets and major legislation with the governor and state senate leader. In all, Silver served as speaker during the tenure of five New York governors, from Mario Cuomo to Andrew Cuomo. He became known as an inscrutable and stubborn negotiator, blocking proposals so often he was sometimes called “Dr No”. He helped scuttle the former New York City Mayor Mike Bloomberg’s plan to locate a football stadium on Manhattan’s West Side. And he took the brunt of the blame for the collapse in 2008 of Bloomberg’s congestion-pricing plan for Manhattan, which would have charged electronic tolls for driving through the borough’s most highly trafficked neighborhoods. “He was a fighter for his constituents and his work to rebuild lower Manhattan after the terrible events of 9/11 will never be forgotten,“ said the current assembly speaker, Carl Heastie, in a statement. “For years he was the lone voice in the room pushing back against many regressive policies that would have harmed so many New Yorkers, and he presided over landmark laws to improve the lives of our most vulnerable residents.” Silver was the youngest of four children of Russian immigrants. His father ran a wholesale hardware store. As an adult, he and his wife had four children and lived in a lower Manhattan apartment blocks from his first home. An Orthodox Jew, Silver was known to observe Sabbath even during the marathon negotiation sessions that preceded annual budget deadlines and the end of legislative sessions. Over time, he became a symbol of Albany’s much-maligned opaque style of governance and, ultimately, a target of federal prosecutors. Prosecutors accused Silver of trading his influence for money. In one instance, they argued that Silver persuaded a physician to refer asbestos cancer patients to his law firm so it could seek multimillion-dollar settlements from personal injury lawsuits, a secret arrangement that allowed him to collect about $3m in referral fees. In return, prosecutors said he directed hundreds of thousands of dollars in state grants to a research center run by the doctor. His original 2015 conviction was tossed out by an appeals court after a US supreme court ruling that narrowed the definition of a corrupt act. He was convicted again at a second trial in 2018 tailored slightly to conform to the high court ruling. But an appeals court ultimately threw out the conviction related to the asbestos cancer patients. Prosecutors decided not to retry him on that charge. In the part of his conviction that stuck, a court found that he had supported legislation that benefited real estate developers who were referring tax business to a law firm that employed him. Silver begged for mercy ahead of his sentencing in a letter to the judge. “I pray I will not die in prison,” Silver wrote, saying he was “broken-hearted” that he damaged the trust people have in government. The Associated Press contributed reportingThe disclosure that Boris Johnson’s fiancee threw him a surprise party during lockdown, prompting a new wave of outrage, dominate the front pages. In the latest alleged breach of rules, No 10 admitted that Carrie Johnson held a party for the prime minister and up to 30 staff on 19 June 2020 despite Covid rules at the time banning indoor social gatherings. The Guardian’s front page leads with “Johnson faces fresh outrage over birthday party in No 10.” It says sources said an official inquiry had uncovered “appalling evidence of mismanagement” at the heart of Downing Street. No 10 said the PM attended for 10 minutes and denied reports from ITV that he held a party later on 19 June in his Downing Street residence. The Times has “Johnson held lockdown birthday party at No 10”. It reports that Carrie Johnson and interior designer Lulu Lytle, who was working on the couple’s Downing Street flat at the time, “are said to have presented the prime minister, who had turned 56, with a union jack cake while his wife led staff in a chorus of Happy Birthday”. The Sun’s take on the story is a play on Johnson’s own subversion of a famous proverb: “You can’t have your birthday cake … and eat it Boris”. “Amid fury at the latest Covid partygate revelation, Downing Street insisted the PM was only there for ten minutes,” it reports. The Mirror headlines with “PM’s No10 birthday bash in lockdown” and reports that “Just days earlier, the PM had urged us all to obey laws banning indoor gatherings.” It also quotes a “furious” Jo Goodman, whose father had died of Covid just weeks earlier. “It’s sickening,” she told the paper. “The PM should resign.” The Daily Mail goes its own way with “PM’s Mr Brexit: Kill Off Tax Hike”, reporting that “April’s National Insurance hike must be scrapped to help the economic recovery, Lord Frost declared last night”. The paper gives a more sceptical treatment to the birthday party reports, picturing a grinning Boris Johnson holding a cake and headlining it “New storm over Boris’s 10-minute birthday ‘party’ at No 10” while relegating the story to pages six and seven. The Telegraph references Johnson’s party in its banner, “Now PM accused of No 10 lockdown birthday party”, while also leaving the story for the inside pages. Instead it leads on Ukraine, with “Biden prepares troops to face Putin threat”. The i’s take is “Johnson’s problems grow with birthday party leak” and reports that the “drip-drip effect of revelations is damaging staff morale in No 10” and that “further allegations expected as Tory former minister tells i: ‘Cummings has gone feral’.” The Independent splashes a picture of Johnson across its front page with the headline “‘Birthday party for PM’ in first lockdown” but chooses to lead with “Islamophobia review ignored by ministers”. The Metro opts to lead on Ukraine, headlining its front page “Nato Jets Ready To Scramble” but pictures Boris and Carrie Johnson in its banner with the headline, “How Boris had his cake and ate it … at No 10 lockdown birthday bash”.Pictures capturing an apparently frosty moment as outgoing Australian of the Year Grace Tame met the prime minister, Scott Morrison, at the Lodge have gone viral on social media, sparking a flurry of tweets, and condemnation from some Liberal senators. The meeting took place on Tuesday morning as the 27-year-old advocate against sexual assault arrived at the 2022 Australian of the Year finalists morning tea in Canberra. In the pictures, Morrison and his wife, Jenny, are seen grinning broadly for media outside the Lodge while Tame and her fiancé, Max Heerey, appear stony-faced. Tame became Australian of the Year after her advocacy was instrumental in overturning a Tasmanian law preventing survivors from speaking publicly about their assault. After delivering an impassioned acceptance speech, she sparked a national conversation on the treatment of women and sexual assault in Australia. Tame later told the Betoota Advocate podcast that in the minutes after delivering her speech, Morrison leaned over to her and whispered “gee, I bet it felt good to get that out”. The revelation forced Morrison to defend himself, telling parliament he did not mean it to sound patronising. “That was a very brave statement, that is exactly what I meant when I said that to her on that occasion,” he said. Tame has also used her platform to criticise the government’s handling of rape allegations within Parliament House made by former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins and which are now the subject of criminal proceedings. In an address to the national press club in March, Tame was asked what she thought of the prime minister’s handling of the issue after Morrison said he spoke to his wife Jenny, who helped him understand the seriousness of the rape allegation. “Jenny and I spoke last night and she said to me, ‘You have to think about this as a father. What would you want to happen if it were our girls?’” Morrison had said. “Jenny has a way of clarifying things. Always has. And so, I’ve reflected on that overnight and listened to Brittany and what she had to say.” Tame said it shouldn’t take anyone to have children to have a conscience. “And actually, on top of that, having children doesn’t guarantee a conscience,” she said at the time. The images of Tuesday’s meeting quickly went viral. Several Liberal politicians denounced the outgoing Australian of the Year, with senator Hollie Hughes labelling her “immature” and senator James McGrath calling her behaviour “childish”. “The important issues raised by last year’s Australian of the Year must continue to be addressed by all of us,” he wrote on Facebook. “It is a pity her behaviour and attacks on our prime minister are so partisan, political and childish. If she didn’t like being Australian of the Year she should hand back the honour.”Covid restrictions in New South Wales will remain in place for another month to ensure children can return to school and elective surgery can resume, it was revealed on Tuesday, as the country recorded 76 more deaths from the virus. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, made the announcement as the state recorded 18,512 new Covid cases and 29 deaths. It means the indoor mask mandate, QR code check-ins, a ban on singing and dancing and the one-person per two square metre density limit in hospitality venues, including pubs, nightclubs and cafes, will continue until 28 February. When the restrictions were announced earlier this month, Perrottet said they would apply until 27 January. But he said given an expected rise in infections when students return to school later this week and the resumption of non-urgent elective surgery in mid-February, the extension was a “measured and proportionate approach”. “It comes down to priorities. I want there to be confidence in our parents, I want there to be confidence in our teachers that we can get kids back in the classroom for day one, term one,” Perrottet said. “If you’re to ask what’s more important, someone singing or dancing or someone getting their non-urgent elective surgery back, I know what the right approach is.” There are 2,943 people in hospital with the virus in NSW, an increase of 127 since Monday, though the number of people in intensive care units has dropped by 13 to 183. Of the 29 people who died, all but one were aged 65 and older. Two had received three vaccine doses, 21 had two doses and six were unvaccinated. Victoria recorded 14,836 new Covid cases, an increase on the 11,695 a day earlier, and 29 deaths. There are 1,057 Victorians in hospital with the virus, an increase of 59 since Monday, while intensive care admissions remain stable at 119. With thousands of people continuing to contract the virus daily, the Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, launched a campaign to encourage those with mild symptoms to manage their illness at home. He said since the start of 2022 more than 550,000 people have contracted the virus but just 0.71% have required hospitalisation. The deputy state controller of Victoria’s health system operations, Adam Horsburgh, said the campaign would also “relieve some of the pressure that our frontline doctors and nurses are facing”. “I hear firsthand many of the stories of people who have felt the need to attend an emergency department or call triple zero because they didn’t necessarily know how else to access the advice or support that they needed when they tested positive,” he said. Horsburgh said since a system-wide “code brown” was enacted at state hospitals last week, the number of admissions have either remained stable or improved slightly. However, there are still no plans to resume elective surgery in the state. “We’re very conscious of the impact that the deferral of elective surgery has on everyone on a waiting list but we do not believe at this point in time that the system is in a position to restart elective surgery,” he said. In Queensland, there were 9,546 new Covid infections and 11 deaths, though the state’s chief health officer, John Gerrard, is confident the state is approaching the peak of its Omicron wave. In South Australia there were 1,869 new cases – the state’s lowest figure for 2022 – and five deaths. The Australian Capital Territory recorded 904 infections and one death, while Western Australia recorded 15 cases. In Tasmania, there were 643 new cases and one person died from the virus. Tuesday marks two years since the first Covid case was detected in Australia. On January 25, 2020, a man who flew to Melbourne from Wuhan tested positive for the virus.In the wake of the Cop26 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, many of us are thinking about what we can do to reduce our environmental impact. As individuals, one of the most powerful changes we can make is reducing our transport emissions. That means less travel in fuel-consuming vehicles – such as the car we drive to work every day. The National Transport Commission estimates we could halve the amount of Co2 emissions created by new small cars if consumers bought vehicles with best-in-class emission. The best choice of new car is an electric vehicle (EV), which gets you from A to B without the Co2 emissions. But not all electric vehicles are created equal, and if you’re considering buying an environmentally friendly car, there’s more to consider than simply how it’s powered. What features should you look for in an electric car? To ensure your SUV is as green as can be, here are three important points that need to be on your checklist. Look at how it’s made and what it’s made from It’s not just what a car is emitting that you should consider. For a vehicle to be truly green, the commitment to sustainability has to start long before it gets on the road. Look for a car created using as many recycled materials as possible, to reduce any Co2 emissions created at the start of the production chain. Not every element of a car can be recycled, but some parts, such as those in interiors, can be. Similarly, consider the sort of power used while assembling vehicles. BMW uses 100% green electricity at its plants so that no unnecessary emissions are created during the production phase. There are other ethical considerations, too: such as where raw materials used for battery production come from. Lithium and cobalt are essential for powering EV batteries, and 70% of the world’s cobalt is produced in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), where human rights issues have long been documented in mining operations. Consider whether the raw materials used for battery production like lithium have been ethically sourced. Blacklisting the Congo, though, is not an ethical solution. “[Cobalt mining] cannot simply be shut down … ” says the Council on Foreign Relations, an independent think tank and publisher. “It is a lifeline for millions of Congolese who live in extreme poverty … Instead, companies committed to setting up responsible cobalt sourcing practices need to take responsibility for addressing the human rights violations that taint the DRC’s ASM [artisanal and small-scale mining] sector.” To ensure the elements that power your EV battery have been sourced sustainably, safely and humanely, look for a car company that is transparent about their origin and mining methods. BMW does not source cobalt from the Congo, but operates a cross-sector initiative that aims to improve mining conditions in the African nation so that it can transition to better practices. Consider where the battery goes Like those in laptops and smartphones, the batteries in electric vehicles eventually need to be replaced. This presents an environmental problem: what do you do with the old batteries? BMW has come up with an innovative way to improve the life cycle of a battery cell. Once its electric car batteries no longer meet the requirements for driving – but still have an energy content of 70 to 80% – they are sent to a factory in Hamburg. There, the batteries are given a second life as stationary energy storage devices. If there is too much electricity in a grid due to fluctuations in production or demand, the batteries store the surplus so it doesn’t go to waste. It’s a sustainable power solution that goes beyond just stopping the batteries from ending up in landfill. When the electricity used to charge electric vehicles comes from renewable sources, running them has almost no impact on the environment. It takes about 10 years to exhaust the energy content in those battery cells during their second-life use. After that, the batteries are recycled – meaning almost no waste is created from their production. In close collaboration with German recycling specialist Duesenfeld, BMW Group has developed a process that can achieve a recycling rate of up to 96% for the high-voltage batteries used in its electrified vehicles. This includes the graphite and electrolytes contained within the batteries. Think about how it will be recharged Electricity production contributes to greenhouse gas emissions. That’s why we install solar panels on our roofs, switch to green energy providers and try to cut our household electricity use. The same principles apply to electric cars. To cause the least strain on the planet, they should be able to be recharged sustainably. Renewable charging is possible in Australia, thanks to businesses such as Chargefox, Australia’s largest network of public electric vehicle chargers. All Chargefox’s ultra-rapid chargers are 100% powered by renewable energy. This makes a huge difference. When the electricity used to charge electric vehicles comes from renewable sources, running them has almost no impact on the environment. Discover how the BMW iX3 delivers sustainable mobility.Dylan Alcott wheels out of the tunnel and into Kia Arena, either talking to himself or bopping to an unheard beat. Cap backwards, signature Nike kicks, ready to roll. One match stands between him and the Australian Open final – his last before retirement – and he is serving first against Britain’s Andy Lapthorne. “Good serve, Dyl,” he says to himself after the opening point when Lapthorne overcooks his return. Alcott has no problem telling anyone exactly how he is feeling. That includes his opponents, and a couple of games later, right before he breaks Lapthorne’s serve, he booms down the court “Good job, Dyl”. The celebrations only grow louder the closer he edges towards the 6-3, 6-0 victory. His penultimate wheelchair tennis match, period. Not many people can get away with referring to themselves in the third person. Alcott somehow does, perhaps partly because of his self-deprecating humour, but also partly because of what he has come to represent. Few match the Australian’s drive to reshape perceptions around disability. Among the projects to which he dedicates his time and his name are the Dylan Alcott Foundation, Get Skilled Access and AbilityFest – Australia’s first accessible and fully inclusive music festival (he has also crowd surfed at Coachella, in his chair). On Tuesday night, became the first person with a visible disability to be named Australian of the Year. He thought he was “no chance … I think Patty Mills is going to win”. In many ways he already has. His resume reads 15 grand slam quad singles titles and a further eight in doubles. In 2021 he became the first man in history to achieve a golden slam of all four major singles titles as well as Paralympic gold. He has been Australian Open champion seven years running. By Thursday he could have an eighth title. On this occasion Alcott’s ball-striking was too strong for Lapthorne, who was courageous in defeat but also appeared to play through a shoulder problem. He embraced his opposition at the net, then whooped the crowd. “I got a bit emotional, he is a beautiful man,” Alcott said. “He said thanks for everything, thanks for making his dreams come true. We did this together. Andy started before I did. We are the same age. First grand slam on a centre court was with this man, Andy Lapthorne.” Alcott has brought Australia and much of the world with him on his journey. The countless interviews at international tennis and sporting events, including the Invictus Games, ensure people living with impairments get time in the spotlight. If he has to protest, he will. In 2020, during the first wave of the pandemic he accused the US Open of “disgusting discrimination” over its decision to drop the wheelchair event. When the tournament back-flipped and had it reinstated, he praised them wholeheartedly. On Sunday, after his hard-fought quarter-final win over 19-year-old Dutchman Niels Vink, who he also defeated in the Tokyo 2020 semi-finals and then the US Open final, Alcott stood on court and thanked his family. “I hated myself growing up,” he said, “and the reason I don’t [anymore] is them.” Alcott has spoken numerous times about how he was bullied during high school over his disability, something he had lived with since he was three weeks old when an operation to remove a tumour wrapped around his spinal cord was successful but left him a paraplegic. Since then he has been in charge of his own image. Which is to say he is himself, and comfortable with everything that entails. Ebullient larrikinism speckled with unpolished realness is the general vibe. When he announced his retirement in November he joked he didn’t think anybody would turn up to his press conference. The room was full. At Melbourne Park the aim is to go out on a high, a decision he made during a period of depression at a time which should have been joyous. “I can’t tell you how much I struggled after the golden slam,” he said on Tuesday. “I had actual depression. I hadn’t seen my family – it was the biggest moment of my life, and I’m in a hotel. “I was watching my good mate [Melbourne Demons captain] Max Gawn kick on and party after the premiership, and I was still in quarantine. I’m normally the positive guy but it was really hard … so I went, ‘I can do two things: I can dial it in this Australian Open, go out every weekend and half-ass it and lose, or – because I can see the finish line – I can go all in, 11 sessions a week, every day, no break’.” For the sake of his mental health he opted for the latter. “I’m really glad that I did,” he said. “And I look great, if I say so myself. That’s why I’m wearing no sleeves this year.” Does he feel as good as he looks? In Melbourne’s infamous heat, not always. “I was in the locker room with Gael Monfils,” he said after he beat Vink. “He won in straight [sets], we’re both, like, cooked. I was like, ‘We are old’, and he’s like 35. We were both like this [hands on hips], we were both laughing going, ‘Oh my god, I’m the oldest man in the world’.” At 31, Alcott does not quite meet the criteria for golden oldie status, but he has earned the right to claim it anyway. The semi-final had left him “washed up” and in need of a beer. No doubt he will be offered one at tonight’s ceremony in Canberra, then he will return to Melbourne to play Sam Schröder of the Netherlands for the trophy. “It would be unbelievable, but it wouldn’t be everything, right? I will live if I don’t win on Thursday,” he said. “I’ve got the best life in the world, regardless of whether I win … I’m just going to go out there and enjoy every little second of it, because I’ll never get that opportunity again.”Record fuel petrol prices and the highest cost of building new homes in two decades propelled consumer inflation at the end of 2021 to its fastest pace since mid-2014. Consumer price index figures released on Tuesday by the ABS showed the headline inflation rate for the December quarter was up 3.5% from a year earlier and 1.3% from the previous three months. Economists though focused on the underlying rate – or trimmed mean – which strips out the more volatile price movements. That climbed by an annual rate of 2.6%, or the most since the June quarter of 2014, while the quarterly increase was at a 1% clip. “The big surprise was the 1.0% rise in the trimmed mean, well exceeding the market expectation of 0.7%, highlighting the broad spread of this inflation surprise,” Justin Smirk, a senior Westpac economist said, adding the quarterly pace was the fastest in just over 13 years. “Core inflation is now above the mid-point of the RBA’s inflation target, not something the RBA was expecting in its forecast profile this early nor of this magnitude.” Michelle Marquardt, head of ABS’s prices statistics unit, said the 4.2% jump in new dwelling costs and the jump of 6.6% in automotive fuel prices were leading contributors to the higher CPI. “Shortages of building supplies and labour, combined with continued strong demand for new dwellings, contributed to price increases for newly built houses, townhouses and apartments,” Marquardt said. The rises in the second half of 2021 were the fastest since the period prior to September 2000 when the GST began. “Fuel prices rose again in the December quarter, resulting in a record level for the CPI’s automotive fuel series for the second consecutive quarter,” she said. The lifting of some Covid restrictions and global supply disruptions worsened the bowser pain, with Hobart drivers enduring the largest increases, at 12.4%, followed by Darwin at 9.8% and Perth 9.4%, the ABS said. The CPI rose in all state capitals, led by Hobart’s 2.2% for the quarter. Melbourne and Sydney, at 1.1% and 1.2% respectively, were close to the national average of 1.3%. Consumer prices typically serve as a proxy for inflation. The trimmed mean measure, while sitting firmly in the mid-range of the RBA’s target of 2%-3%, has risen from a low of 1.1% in March last year. The increase to 2.6% – above market expectations – will prompt more banks to follow Westpac’s lead last week and bring forward their predictions of when the central bank will start lifting the official cash rate. The CBA was one of those updating their forecasts, saying the central bank would “need to make a fundamental adjustment to their ‘low and gradual’ inflation narrative in their upcoming communication next week”. “We shift our central scenario for the first hike in the cash rate from November 2022 to August 2022 (the risk lies with an earlier hike in June),” Gareth Aird, CBA’s senior economist, said. Sean Langcake, a senior economist at BIS Oxford Economics, agreed the central bank was likely to adopt “a more hawkish tone” on inflation at its 1 February meeting. “A rate rise in 2022 is now more likely in light of these data,” he said. The RBA has said it would be patient before lifting rates above the current record low 0.1%, with the first move unlikely before 2023. Westpac expects a move this August. Uncertainty in global sharemarkets, stoked in part by rising risks of a Russian invasion of Ukraine, would be one reason for rates caution. Another is that the central bank will want to understand the economic effects of the rapid spread of Omicron that came too late to pick up much in the CPI data. Fresh figures out from NAB at the same time as today’s CPI release showed business confidence fell sharply in December as Omicron threatened to stall the economic rebound from last year’s east-coast lockdowns. Confidence last month sank below the level reached during Delta, “signalling the depth of concern among firms about the trajectory of the outbreak,” NAB said. Business conditions also fell three points to eight index points, in part because firms struggled to find staff. Profitability though was up one point to be 10 index points, and trading conditions were unchanged at 14 index points. “Conditions eased but remained just above the long-run average in December,” said NAB chief economist, Alan Oster. “Conditions improved in a number of states including Victoria and Tasmania, but there was a large fall in Queensland that may relate to some of the challenges with state borders.” NAB’s survey also picked up rising price pressures last month, with both reported labour and purchase cost growth near record levels. “With significant disruption to supply chains and labour markets, price pressures are to be expected and the key question will be how quickly (if at all) these pressures abate over coming months,” NAB said. Two other measures released on Tuesday offered a more upbeat take on the economy. The Commonwealth Bank of Australia’s weekly credit card spending tracker revealed a broad rebound had begun, at least in the figures to 21 January. Consumer spending is “holding up better than feared”, the report said, while adding the necessary caveat that it’s “still early days” in terms of living with Covid. Western Australia, which notably has put off its reopening date to the never-never, was leading all states in the spending rebound. The ANZ-Roy Morgan Australian Consumer Confidence Survey also showed the mood to be picking up. Consumer sentiment improved 2.2% last week to be just above the neutral 100 mark in the index. Again, WA helped to lead the improvement, along with Victoria and Queensland, while New South Wales slumped, as did South Australia. Measures such as whether it’s time to buy a major household item rose 6.3 percentage points, reversing some of the 15.8% fall during the first two weeks of 2022. Inflation expectations, meanwhile, edged up in the ANZ survey to match a recent high of 5%.US president Joe Biden has insisted there was “total” unity among western powers after crisis talks with European leaders on how to deter Russia from an attack against Ukraine, as Downing Street warned of “unprecedented sanctions” against Moscow should an invasion take place. . “I had a very, very, very good meeting – total unanimity with all the European leaders,” Biden told reporters shortly after finishing a one hour and 20 minute video conference on Monday with allied leaders from Europe and Nato. The US has put 8,500 troops on high alert to deploy to Europe as Nato reinforced its eastern borders amid growing tensions over Ukraine. In London, prime minister Boris Johnson’s office also said “the leaders agreed on the importance of international unity in the face of growing Russian hostility.” Downing Street said the group stressed that diplomatic discussions with Russia remain the first priority, but said the nation would be hit with “swift retributive responses” if a “further Russian incursion into Ukraine” takes place. “The leaders agreed that, should a further Russian incursion into Ukraine happen, allies must enact swift retributive responses including an unprecedented package of sanctions,” Downing Street said following the discussions lasting over an hour. Washington is trying to maintain transatlantic and Nato unity against Russia, which supplies about 40% of the European Union’s natural gas. The meeting came days after Biden revealed behind-the-scenes divisions among the Nato allies on how severe the response would be and as Germany faces criticism from Kyiv over its refusal to send defensive weapons to Ukraine. Under efforts to deter Russian “aggression”, Biden said the leaders discussed preparations to “impose severe economic costs” against Moscow while seeking to “reinforce security on the eastern flank”. German Chancellor Olaf Scholz said “it is up to Russia to undertake visible de-escalation,” while Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg warned of “severe costs” if there is “any further aggression” by Moscow against Ukraine. Also on the call were the leaders of France, Italy, Poland and the European Union. The French government has announced that Russian and Ukrainian officials would meet, along with French and German counterparts, in Paris on Wednesday to try to find a way out of the impasse. Despite insisting he has no intention of attacking, president Vladimir Putin has deployed more than 100,000 troops close to Ukraine, where Russia already seized Crimea in 2014 and backs a separatist army in the east. Moscow is demanding a guarantee that Ukraine, a former Soviet republic, never be allowed to join Nato, as well as other concessions by the United States in return for a decrease in tension. The United States and Nato have rejected the Russian demands and told Putin to withdraw from Ukraine’s borders, warning that a Russian attack will trigger damaging economic sanctions, as well as a beefed-up Nato presence in eastern Europe. On Monday the US placed 8,500 troops on heightened alert to deploy to Europe as Nato reinforced its eastern borders with warships and fighter jets, amid growing fears of a possible “lightning” attack by Russia to seize the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. Pentagon spokesperson John Kirby said the troops, all of them currently stationed in the US, would be on standby to take part in Nato’s Response Force (NRF) if it is activated, but would also be available “if other situations develop”. The alert order issued by the defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, reduces the number of days it would take to deploy but it is not itself an order to deploy. The USS Harry S Truman aircraft carrier, along with its strike group and air wing, joined patrolling activities across the Mediterranean Sea on Monday, the first time since the cold war that a full US carrier group has come under Nato command. Kirby said: “In the event of Nato’s activation of the NRF or a deteriorating security environment, the United States would be in a position to rapidly deploy additional brigade combat teams, logistics, medical, aviation, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, transportation and additional capabilities into Europe.” Any deployment in Europe, he said, “is really about reassuring the eastern flank of Nato” of the US readiness to come to the defence of alliance members. The force would not be deployed in Ukraine, which is not a Nato member. There are currently about 150 US military advisers in the country, and Kirby said there were no plans at present to withdraw them. Jen Psaki, the White House spokesperson, said the US had “a sacred obligation to support the security of our eastern flank countries”. “We are talking to them about what their needs are and what security concerns they have. So I wouldn’t say it’s a response to an abrupt moment. It’s a part of an ongoing contingency planning process and discussion,” Psaki said. Earlier on Monday, Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s secretary general, said the “deteriorating security situation” had driven the military alliance to bolster its “collective defence”. The Kremlin pointed to the new deployments as evidence of Nato aggressive posturing, blaming Nato for the rise in tensions. Its spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said: “We see statements by the North Atlantic Alliance about reinforcement, pulling forces and resources to the eastern flank. All this leads to the fact that tensions are growing. This is not happening because of what we, Russia, are doing. This is all happening because of what Nato and the US are doing and due to the information they are spreading.” In recent months Russia has massed more than 100,000 troops along Ukraine’s border and it is planning extensive military exercises in neighbouring Belarus and in the Mediterranean. The Belarusian leader, Alexander Lukashenko, said on Monday he would deploy a “whole contingent of the army” to the border with Ukraine, alleging: “Ukrainians have begun to gather troops [there]. I don’t understand why.” Russia continued preparations for sweeping naval exercises on Monday as the Baltic fleet announced that two corvettes had set sail to join in the military drills. The Kremlin has also dispatched six amphibious landing ships to the Mediterranean as part of the exercises, which will include 140 ships and more than 10,000 Russian troops. The tensions have helped fuel instability in global markets, while Russia’s main stock index plunged and the central bank suspended foreign currency purchasing after the ruble slumped. Washington is trying to maintain transatlantic unity to build a credible threat of sanctions as a deterrence against Moscow. However, members of the 27-nation European Union have starkly differing approaches and ties to Russia. The new government in EU economic powerhouse Germany in particular has faced anger from Kyiv over its refusal to send weapons to Ukraine, as well as hesitating over one of the harshest economic sanctions under discussion – cutting Moscow from the global SWIFT payments system. Echoing other US warnings, Kirby said on Monday that intelligence shows “it’s very clear that the Russians have no intention right now of de-escalating.” However, some European leaders are signalling less alarm. EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell said after talks with US top diplomat Antony Blinken that there was nothing to suggest an “immediate” Russian attack. “You have to stay calm doing what you have to do, and avoid a nervous breakdown,” he said. On Sunday and Monday the White House and Downing Street said they had started withdrawing diplomats’ families from Ukraine. The Ukrainian government has criticised the withdrawals as “premature”. Ukrainian security experts said that Russia has not yet made the preparations necessary for a large-scale invasion, such as the deployment of combat units and establishment of medical facilities. Oleksiy Danilov, the secretary of the national security and defence council, said he did not expect an imminent invasion and did not share the “panic” which he connected to “geopolitical and domestic” processes in the west. “The buildup of Russian troops isn’t as rapid as some claim,” Danilov told the BBC’s Ukrainian service. With Agence France-Presse • The map in this article was amended on 25 January 2022. Albania, Croatia, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Slovenia all joined Nato after 1989, but an earlier version indicated they had joined before this.The aged care and sport minister, Richard Colbeck, attended the Ashes cricket on the same day he declined to appear at the Covid-19 committee citing officials’ “urgent and critical” work combating Omicron. In an update to his register of interests, Colbeck declared that he received “sponsored travel or hospitality” to attend three days of the Hobart Test between Australia and England from Friday 14 to Sunday 16 January. Labor and independent senator Rex Patrick have blasted Colbeck for attending the cricket instead of the Senate Covid committee, which had asked him to a hearing on 14 January. A spokesperson for Colbeck said the suggestion he had “put his sporting commitments ahead of the health and wellbeing of senior Australians … [is] completely misguided” because he had performed other Covid-related duties on that day and the Test was a day-nighter. Colbeck was asked to appear alongside officials from the health department, but he and the prime minister’s department, which was to appear later in the day, rejected the proposed date, citing urgent Covid work. In a letter dated 7 January, the committee’s chair, Katy Gallagher, noted the “fast-evolving Covid-19 Omicron situation” and requested Colbeck attend to “facilitate the Senate’s scrutiny role” of the government’s response. Two days later, Colbeck replied that although he and the department “recognise the importance of accountability to the Senate” he was “concerned about the impact of the timing of this hearing”. “The Covid-19 pandemic is at a critical point with the onset of numerous Omicron outbreaks,” he said. “Diverting time and resources, including that of senior leaders within the department who are playing a key role in the management of the current Omicron outbreaks, to give evidence before the committee at this crucial time would impact the urgent and critical work the department is undertaking with other government agencies, states and territories to manage these outbreaks.” Colbeck offered an interim one-hour private videoconference briefing from the health department, which Gallagher rejected as an unsuitable alternative to a public hearing. The committee had asked for just two hours and 45 minutes of hearing time from Colbeck and the department. Gallagher’s letter acknowledged the invitation was at “short notice” because the outbreak occurred over the Christmas New Year period. Gallagher said “Australians have done their job throughout this pandemic and they expect Scott Morrison’s ministers to do their job”. “It is completely unacceptable that a minister in this government, who is overseeing another crisis in aged care where people are dying, chose to go to the cricket for three days of sponsored hospitality instead of fronting up to do his job,” she told Guardian Australia. Patrick told Guardian Australia that “a minister’s first responsibility is to parliament” and Colbeck “owes a duty to the public to turn up and answer questions” at the inquiry into the pandemic response. He said the committee wished to examine the Omicron variant, availability of rapid antigen tests, back to school plans, and how to “protect the elderly and vulnerable” in aged care. “These are important issues – far more important than the cricket,” Patrick said. “As much as I root for the Australian cricket team, I have a job to do and I would always put that before attending a game.” Colbeck’s spokesperson said on 14 January the minister had helped deal with the Omicron outbreak by meeting the head of the Covid vaccine rollout Lt Gen John Frewen, the aged care quality and safety commissioner, the acting secretary of health and the deputy chief medical officer. The spokesperson said Colbeck’s attendance at the test was “part of his commitments as minister for sport and Senator for Tasmania” and the Test “ was a “day/night match [that] did not start until late afternoon”. “At a time when the Australian government continues to work to protect the lives of senior Australians in care, attempts by the Senate select committee on Covid-19 to redirect resources away from the department of health for political purposes is of serious concern and should be noted by Australians as we navigate the impact of the pandemic.” Gallagher has previously criticised the Morrison government’s transparency with the bipartisan Senate committee, accusing it of obstructing access to information with public immunity claims. The prime minister’s department also requested the proposed 14 January hearing be deferred, with deputy secretary Stephanie Foster warning it could “divert attention and resources of senior staff” managing the outbreak. The committee then scheduled hearings on 21 January for the health department and 25 January for Colbeck, the latter at his request. On 19 January the acting health department secretary, Penny Shakespeare, objected to the “diversion of resources” of staff who were “essential to a rapid, effective response” in attending the two proposed hearings. Those hearings were cancelled for unrelated reasons. According to his register of interests, Colbeck also received sponsored travel or hospitality to attend the Adelaide Test on 16 December. Colbeck’s presence in the media since Christmas has been limited to issuing a statement that warned about the risk of drowning and one interview on Radio National on 6 January about the Novak Djokovic visa cancellation saga. He has previously come under fire for not knowing how many aged care workers have been vaccinated and not knowing the number of people who have died in aged care.I just returned to Sydney after two incredible days at the Australian Open. Dylan Alcott brought me to tears and the legends’ doubles had me laughing. As I dashed from court to court catching as many aces and rallies as I could pack in in 48 hours, the hot sun of Melbourne seemed far away from human rights concerns in Tibet, Hong Kong and Xinjiang. But curtailments to the fundamental human right to freedom of expression, both in Australia and China, were also playing out at the AO when two spectators held a banner and wore T-shirts that said “Where is Peng Shuai?” Their banner was confiscated, and they were asked to remove the offending shirts. Whether she has consented to our taking up her cause or not, Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai is now symbolic of all human rights abuse in China, as the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing start next week and where the International Olympic Committee has been accused by at least one Uyghur human rights group of hosting a “genocidal Olympic Games.” Days after the protestors were blocked, Tennis Australia flip-flopped, saying that while banners will still be banned (for safety) the T-shirts are OK as long as you are “not coming as a mob to be disruptive ...”. The focus of CEO Craig Tiley’s comments seem to be about intent, arguing spectators who are intentionally causing disruption to the safety and comfort of other fans are not welcome. The actual rules (when you search for them) on the AO ticket conditions of entry are clear – prohibited items do include “unauthorised” political or offensive items including clothing and banners. Some conduct is also prohibited, including “political disruption”. Unfortunately, TA’s reversal and Tiley’s statements raise more questions. It remains unclear who at TA decides what is political, offensive or disruptive. Now we are also left to interpret what is “intent to disrupt” or “a mob”. Also unclear is why the T-shirts were banned initially, and was the political nature of “Where is Peng Shuai?” that it related to the world of tennis or that one of the AO title sponsors is a Chinese liquor brand? Without having read the T&amp;Cs, I wore a Human Rights Watch T-shirt to the AO that said “Tyranny has a witness”, accumulating over 20,000 steps (personal record!) and showcasing my allegiance around Melbourne Park. Why was my T-shirt not originally problematic? Inconsistency of decision making and not knowing is the problem. If our rights are going to be curtailed, we must know why, and we should know how to remedy them when those in power make the wrong decision. Sport is a battle ground where competing interests of human rights, sponsorship dollars and host city/event legitimisation clash. Tennis Australia, along with all sports organisations, needs a human rights policy. They also need to commit to the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, which help organisations navigate these exact complexities. Not all speech is free. We see private social media companies curtailing speech that incites violence in the US, and creating the right balance at a major sporting event between “the comfort and safety of fans” and human rights is not easy. Fifa, world soccer/football’s governing body, is the only international sporting organisation to embed human rights in the governing and operations of their sport. Their human rights policy notes that freedom of expression may be impacted at events for security concerns, but only if “necessary and proportionate”. Who and how this is decided is still hard, but when a policy is committed to respecting internationally recognised human rights, there is a framework to make sense of complex situations. Tennis Australia’s T&amp;Cs seem to remain in place and still ban expression that is political, a sports fallacy supported by the Olympic Charter’s Rule 50.2 which bans demonstrations or political, religious or racial propaganda in any Olympic venue, including athletes on podiums and fans in the stands. Both organisations have failed to lawfully justify how this expression can be curtailed and TA’s reversal proves it is near impossible to decide what is political. Governing sport is hard. Most of us are volunteers and there is so much to do. Tennis Australia has 12 policies on their website to govern play, including safeguarding, anti-corruption and member protection. Tennis Australia’s reversal doesn’t seem to admit they were wrong, and I would love to see them honestly talk about how hard this is. If it’s about money, say that! That might not be the worst admission. Sport needs money for the equitable development of women and para sport. But if we engage meaningfully with athletes and use a human rights approach, then we can feel more comfortable when tough decisions are made. After an inspiring weekend at the AO, it’s disappointing that my article is about sports’ shortcomings. I would much rather write about my happy place – loving sports and remembering the glow from Alcott as he thanked the crowd for supporting him on his journey to build para sport and raise awareness of people living with disability. That’s why sport is awesome on the court. Off the court, we have a long way to go. • Nikki Dryden is an Australian Human Rights Institute associate at UNSW and a two-time Olympic swimmer. She competed in the 1992 and 1996 Olympics and was a medallist in the 1994 Commonwealth GamesAs Transparency International (TI) publishes their annual Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) this week, it will be interesting to see where certain countries land: 2021 has been a bumper year for corruption. In Britain, corruption has been on the minds of journalists, academics and practitioners alike, as Boris Johnson tries to get himself run out, the only hope of him continuing his innings lying with Sue Gray. However, in the ex-British territories of the West Indies this is not a popcorn moment. Similar scenes of state capture unfold in these islands and, to be honest, it is just not cricket. Very few politicians here play with a straight bat and even when caught out, the umpire is seemingly blind. Spectators are leaving in droves: a massive brain drain has weakened Caribbean economies significantly over the past five decades, alongside cronyism, state capture and procurement fraud. The politicians left behind to run these countries are the most unqualified and unscrupulous one can find, a state referred to as a kakistocracy. Resources continue to be drained by corrupt infrastructure projects, while expenditure in health and education, critical to nation building, remains insufficient. But as these sectors fall behind the rest of the world, a new player has emerged in the Caribbean. In 2018, Trinidad and Tobago became the first Caribbean country to officially sign up to China’s $4tn global belt and road development initiative. Suriname, Guyana, Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada and even the progressive leadership in Barbados followed (“et tu Mia?”). Jamaica was last in to bat and did not put up much of a resistance. So what is China trying to achieve? Neocolonialism? Cynics would say there is no such thing as a free lunch. Just ask Sri Lanka and Uganda. The Hambantota port development project in Sri Lanka, led by the China Harbour Engineering Company, was predicted to fail and lived up to that expectation. The new Sri Lankan government, after struggling to make payments on the debt, handed over the port on a 99-year lease, including 15,000 acres of land. More recently, China has been forced to deny reports that it will gain control of Uganda’s Entebbe international airport if the country defaults on debt repayments. An old quote attributed to John Adams states that the way to subjugate a country is through either the sword or debt. China has assiduously chosen the latter. Debt deals have provoked criticism against Xi Jinping’s belt and road initiative and insinuations that his global investment and lending programme is nothing more than a trap, fuelling corruption and autocratic behaviour in struggling and vulnerable democracies. Some believe that the intent is twofold: to gain strategic trade footholds in the Caribbean and Latin America through debt and duress and to snare allies in its escalating feud with Taiwan. Taiwan’s remaining friends include Belize, Guatemala, Honduras, Paraguay, St Kitts and Nevis, St Lucia, St Vincent and the Grenadines. Much can be said for the rich kid who owns the bat – you can play as long as you are not mates with Taiwan. This will of course manifest in the UN arena as Xi buys more support though his use of corrosive capital. One can argue that the Caribbean islands don’t have much choice – the pandemic has been merciless to their economies. Should they approach the International Monetary Fund, cap in hand, and be subjected to austerity measures that make governments unpopular with their people? Is there another option? A recent photo of Clive Lloyd, captain of history’s most successful West Indies cricket team and one of the most successful test captains of all time, being knighted drew mixed reactions. The sight of Lloyd bending the knee, not in support of Colin Kaepernick, but to receive an affirmation from the monarchy of Britain, the ex-colonial masters, ignited fresh debate about reparations. Could reparations be the strategic tool for Europe to remove China’s hold on the Caribbean, and for these islands to throw off the shackles of poor governance, underdevelopment and inequality once and for all? It could be pure genius. In 2013, the Caricom Reparations Commission (CRC) was established by the Caribbean heads of governments to establish the moral, ethical and legal case for the payment of reparations by all the former colonial powers to the people of the Caribbean for the crimes against humanity of genocide, the transatlantic slave trade and the racialised system of chattel slavery. To deliver the CRC’s mandate, the Caricom Reparations Justice Program asserts that victims and descendants of these crimes have a legal right to reparatory justice, and that those who committed these crimes, and have been enriched by proceeds, have a reparatory case to answer. The CRC’s action plan includes debt cancellation, alongside financing of programmes including technology transfer, literacy, health and indigenous people’s development. It could take a long time to get all the parties to the table – a frequent remark by an old professor of mine resonates: “If you want to not get something done … form a committee”. But it is an opportunity. Transparency International’s 2021 index will reveal global corruption continuing to thwart opportunity, to hamstring countries’ abilities to protect public health and their economies during the pandemic. There has been no progress, only more allegations of Covid procurement fraud and corrupt contracts awarded to ministers’ friends and family. Last year, Delia Ferreira Rubio, the chair of Transparency International, said: “It’s a corruption crisis. And one that we’re currently failing to manage.” It is a sentiment unlikely to have changed. Kenneth Mohammed is a Caribbean analyst and senior adviser at Intelligent Sanctuary Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Reaching net zero climate emissions by 2050 will require a “fundamental transformation of the global economy”, according to a report by McKinsey, one of the world’s most influential consulting firms. It estimates that $9.2tn will need to be invested every year for decades to limit the global temperature rise to 1.5C and end the climate emergency. The sum is a 60% increase on current investment levels and equivalent to half of global corporate profits. The report warns that the economic transformation will affect every country and every sector, with those most reliant on fossil-fuel-burning experiencing the most change. McKinsey, which advises many governments and large companies, also says the transition will be front-loaded with, for example, the cost of electricity rising before falling later. However, the report says reaching net zero is vital to avoiding the most catastrophic impacts of global heating, which would harm billions of people, and that many low-carbon investments are opportunities for economic growth and would lead to a lower-cost, more efficient economy. It also says the transformation becomes more expensive the longer action is delayed. “$9.2tn is a very big number – big enough for anybody to pay attention to,” said Jonathan Woetzel at the McKinsey Global Institute, the consultancy’s in-house thinktank, and an author of the report. “But it’s not an impossible number. It’s not like we haven’t [made transformations] before in other ways”, such as the global shift to urban living. The economic transformation is from an economy that did not include the costs of environmental and social damage to one that does, according to Woetzel. “There will only be a sustainable economy, we won’t have any other kind.” The report says the front-loaded transformation raises a “critical question” of who will pay and whether higher costs of electricity, steel and cement are passed on to people or whether those on low-incomes are protected by governments. The goal of the report is to assess the scale of the economic transition required to reach net zero, assuming action is taken quickly, and concludes: “Achieving net zero would mean a fundamental transformation of the world economy.” It estimates that investment in energy, transport, buildings, industry and agriculture would need to rise by $3.5tn, with an additional $1tn of today’s spending switching from high-carbon to low-carbon goods, such as electric cars and heat pumps. As a proportion of global GDP, the total investment required would be 6.8%, rising to as much as 8.8% between 2026 and 2030 before falling. The McKinsey scenario suggests electricity costs could rise by 25% by 2040 before falling below today’s levels after 2050, because of the lower operating cost of renewable energy. Steel and cement face cost increases of about 30% and 45% respectively, it says. Bob Ward, a policy director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change at the London School of Economics, UK, said: “The McKinsey investment figures are not the net costs of reaching net zero globally, but instead the upfront annual costs without taking into account the benefits. “Investments in clean infrastructure will generate jobs, growth and huge savings, particularly by eliminating the need to buy ruinously expensive fossil fuels, and [will] yield much bigger returns when taking into account the avoided loss of lives and livelihoods from air pollution and climate change.” The insurance firm Swiss Re recently estimated that the damage caused by a 2.6C rise in global temperature by 2050 would reduce global GDP by 14%. In October, the climate economist and life peer Nicholas Stern said: “The move to net zero can be the great driver of a new form of growth – the growth story of the 21st century.” “While the immediate tasks ahead may seem daunting, human ingenuity can ultimately solve the net zero equation, just as it has solved other seemingly intractable problems over the past 10,000 years,” the McKinsey report says. “The key issue is whether the world can muster the requisite boldness and resolve.” If it does, the report says, the rewards would far exceed the avoidance of climate impacts alone because countries would have to work together and would then be better positioned to address other “age-old” geopolitical issues. “That is a hopeful message, we believe, for people to realise that there’s a need to – and a capacity to – create greater global collaboration,” Woetzel said. • This article was amended on 25 January 2022. An earlier version said an annual investment of $9.2tr would require a 40% increase over current levels, when 60% was meant.The old Lammas meadows are bustling with life, the brambles along the chalk stream rowdy with communal chit-chat. Somewhere in the scrub, a parcel of linnets is unfolding. Earlier in the afternoon they rose from the alders, perhaps a couple of hundred birds, and danced as one over the sedges. Now, the little finches are settling down to roost, filling the bushes with their non-stop twittering. Unseen, but definitely not unheard. I sludge through the boggy top meadow to the mud by the stream. Up ahead, the flame-licked willow tops resound with the noisy tidings of magpies. Most afternoons they congregate here in a pre-roost assembly, up to 30 birds jostling and trading places before diving into the safety of the wet scrub for the night. A sudden eruption from one of the shallow pools catches my attention. A wisp of snipe rises up. I can just make out four birds zigzagging away, melting into meadow. A few seconds later, they vanish back into the rushes. These are the first snipe I’ve seen here since last February, and their brief emergence is a burst of winter joy. Whistling wings overhead. Looking up, I realise I’m under the flight path of several mallards. They come in dribs and drabs: three, five, then a couple of pairs, flying in haphazard formation, quacking loud and low. Wheeling round in the failing light, each squadron ducks under the overhanging willows and splashes down in the disused watercress beds. No longer airborne, the raucous sord (from the Middle English sorde meaning to soar up in flight) transforms into a silent paddling of mallards. I ford the stream and slip out of the meadow through the kissing gate, full of the sights and sounds of birds gathering in parcels, tidings, wisps and paddlings. I almost expect to see crowds in the pub, busloads of commuters returning from work. But the main road is muted. Pedestrians edge past each other, trying to maintain a polite distance. Four masked passengers sit in the corners of the 98 bus. Ours is a world apart. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryNeil Young has demanded that his music be removed from Spotify due to vaccine misinformation spread by podcaster Joe Rogan on the streaming service, saying: “They can have Rogan or Young. Not both.” In an open letter to his manager and record label that was posted to his website and later taken down, Young wrote: “I am doing this because Spotify is spreading fake information about vaccines – potentially causing death to those who believe the disinformation being spread by them. Please act on this immediately today and keep me informed of the time schedule.” Young specified that his decision was motivated by The Joe Rogan Experience, which is currently Spotify’s most popular podcast and one of the biggest in the world. Rogan signed a US$100m deal in 2020 giving Spotify exclusive rights to the show. “With an estimated 11 million listeners per episode, JRE, which is hosted exclusively on Spotify, is the world’s largest podcast and has tremendous influence. Spotify has a responsibility to mitigate the spread of misinformation on its platform, though the company presently has no misinformation policy,” he wrote, adding: “I want you to let Spotify know immediately TODAY that I want all my music off their platform … They can have Rogan or Young. Not both.” The letter was addressed to his manager Frank Gironda and Tom Corson, the co-chairman and chief operating officer of Warner Records, which releases Young’s music through its Reprise Records imprint. Gironda confirmed the letter was authentic to The Daily Beast. “It’s something that’s really important to Neil. He’s very upset … we’re trying to figure this out right now.” Last month, 270 doctors, scientists and healthcare professionals signed an open letter requesting that Spotify implement a policy for dealing with misinformation because of Rogan’s “concerning history of broadcasting misinformation, particularly regarding the Covid-19 pandemic”. The letter cited an episode in which Rogan interviewed Robert Malone, a virologist who was involved in the mRNA vaccine technology that led to some of the leading Covid-19 vaccines but has since been criticised for spreading vaccine misinformation. Both men were criticised for promoting several baseless conspiracy theories, including the false claim that hospitals are financially incentivised to falsely diagnose deaths as having been caused by Covid-19, and Malone’s assertion that world leaders had hypnotised the public into supporting vaccines. The Guardian has approached Spotify for comment.Laura Mount became a doctor – she visibly winces at repeating such a cliche – to help people. Also, she was good at school. Her dad was a chemist, which is where she got her love of science; her mum, who was a hairdresser, gave Mount her drive. “If you didn’t do well and get on with it, you knew,” says Mount. “She felt she missed out on all that. So she was quite strict. She wanted us to do well.” Mount, 44, has been a GP for 15 years. She is a partner at the Folly Lane medical centre in Warrington, Cheshire, which is also where she grew up and has lived her entire life, apart from her training in Sheffield. In addition to being a GP, Mount is the clinical director of a primary care network, coordinating six GP surgeries across Warrington. On top of this, she runs a vaccine clinic from a community centre in Orford. “It’s all a bit mad,” she says. Mount has always enjoyed her job, but lately she has felt dissatisfaction creeping in around the edges. It’s partly the patients. “We call them the Amazon Prime generation,” says Mount. “They’re used to ordering something and it comes the next afternoon.” Three or four years ago, Folly Lane would get a patient complaint every three to six months. “We’d get really upset about it,” Mount says, “and spend ages replying to it.” Now, it’s not uncommon to get a complaint every day. When patients don’t get what they want, they harangue reception staff. The surgery records incoming and outgoing phone calls, and Mount gets emotional when she listens back to them. If a patient is particularly abusive, Mount will send out a zero-tolerance letter, warning them that if it happens again, they will have to find a new GP practice. Today, in her treatment room at the beginning of October, Mount writes one such letter. The patient was abusive because they didn’t get their prescription as fast as they would have liked, even though they got it the same day. In her letter, Mount suggests the patient comes in and listens back to the audio of their phone call. The patient won’t take her up on this offer. They never do. The other thing grinding Mount down is the recent spate of hostile headlines in the press. In May, the Daily Mail launched a campaign to make GPs see all patients face-to-face. The newspaper has condemned GPs for being “overpaid” and “moaning”, suggested part-timers choose not to treat patients on Fridays so that they can “enjoy long weekends off” (a claim debunked by the factchecking organisation Full Fact), accused them of being uncaring, and castigated GPs who choose to work part-time. Similar pieces have appeared in the Times, Daily Express, the Sun and the Telegraph. In September, the Doctors’ Association UK complained to the media regulator IPSO about the Telegraph columnist Allison Pearson’s inflammatory anti-GP rhetoric. (In one column, Pearson urged the public to “turn the heat up” on GPs.) To Mount and many of her GP colleagues, opening the newspaper every day feels like sticking their hand in a box of sharps. She is in a WhatsApp group for fellow GPs, which lights up as another invective-laden article is published. “I can cope with long hours and being busy,” says Mount. “I don’t mind working hard. I do it for the patients. But when you are actively being slagged off in the media and being made out to be the villain, that is the lowest point of my career. I feel really demoralised.” What makes the whole thing so infuriating is that GPs were following orders when they switched to remote models of triage. NHS England advised them to do so in March 2020, to mitigate the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic, and did not revoke this guidance until May 2021. And yet in September, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, backed the Mail. “I am grateful to the Daily Mail for launching this campaign,” he said, adding that it was “high time” GPs went back to their pre-pandemic operation models. This perception that GPs are refusing to see people face-to-face has contributed to increased patient hostility. A September survey of 1,000 GPs from the healthcare publication Pulse found that 74% had experienced increased levels of abuse post-pandemic. Sometimes, patients complain about the lack of face-to-face appointments while sitting in Mount’s office. “I say: ‘What are we doing right now?” she says. In the period October 2020 to October 2021, 48% of Folly Lane’s patients were face-to-face; in pre-pandemic times, this figure was 60%. While it is true that face-to-face primary care appointments are not back to pre-pandemic levels – in October 2021, 64% of English primary care appointments were face-to-face, compared with 80% in January 2020 – GPs are demonstrably working harder than ever. The number of appointments provided by English primary care increased from 27.2m in January 2020 to 30.2m in October 2021. This is despite the fact that England has lost 1,307 GPs since 2015, nearly 5% of the former total. “Twenty years ago,” says Prof Azeem Majeed, a GP and primary care expert at Imperial College London, “being a GP was very attractive.” In 2005, Majeed would expect 50 applicants for a GP position at his surgery; now, he’s thrilled if they get one decent candidate. There are two vacant GP positions currently open at his practice. “All this press about how we aren’t seeing patients,” says Mount. “Well, maybe you can’t see us because there aren’t that many of us, because it’s such an undesirable profession. Don’t beat up the ones who are still around.” Many of Mount’s friends and colleagues have left. Those who remain have to pick up the slack, in an era of ever-increasing patient numbers. Across England, the average number of patients per GP practice is up 22%. By October, Folly Lane had treated 7,000 more patients than it did in 2019, and there were still two months of the year to go, and winter months at that. “We can’t say we’re full,” says Mount. “It’s uncontrollable. More people will keep coming, and you don’t want to leave them without being seen.” This is Mount’s account of a winter of exceptional demand. 14 October NHS England writes to GPs, announcing a £250m package for primary care – but only if GPs increase the number of patients they see face-to-face. It also informs them that it will be publishing data on face-to-face appointments, and naming and shaming underperforming surgeries. “It’s like another kick,” Mount says. “You aren’t doing a good enough job, and we’re going to punish you for it.” Almost immediately, patients start citing the NHS England letter in their complaints. Morale among GPs is at an all-time low – their WhatsApp groups are aflame. “It’s a job I love,” says Mount. “But some days I also hate it.” 21 October The British Medical Association (BMA) England GP committee rejects the government’s funding package, – specifically the decision to name and shame GPs. It ballots its members on industrial action. English GPs have only gone on strike once since 1975, in a 2012 dispute over pensions. During this strike, GPs continued to treat urgent cases. “The ballot was a cry for help,” says the BMA England GP committee chair, Dr Farah Jameel. “Saying: ‘We can’t carry on like this any more.’” (While the ballot suggested a range of potential options, a strike of GPs was not on the table.) But the issues predate Covid: for years, primary care has been underfunded. In 2005, general practice received 9.6% of the NHS budget. In 2019-20 this figure was about 8.7%. The BMA has called for a minimum of 11% of the NHS budget to go to GPs. In a way, GPs have been enacting a private form of industrial action for years now. “The workforce is leaving,” says Jameel. “We can’t retain clinicians. We can’t even retain reception teams. Do we need to organise for it to be a strike?” Early November Newly installed security cameras blink in the reception at Folly Lane. The partners are spooked: in September, four members of staff were injured in an attack at a surgery in Manchester. Two people had to be taken to hospital with head injuries. “I have members of my reception team who left because they couldn’t cope,” says Jameel. “They were constantly crying at how they were being spoken to by the patients.” She has found it impossible to replace them, despite advertising the role five times. GPs, she says, are inured to the abuse. “Like boiling frogs,” she says. “We’ve learned to live with it.” Were politicians to have realistic conversations with the public about the pressures GPs are under, things might be different. “This frustration,” says Jameel, “is because the public is being led to believe that everything is fine, and GPs are lazy, and that’s why you can’t see them. That’s how the public is being stoked. And of course, if that’s what you believe, you would be angry, too. But if they understood the challenges, they might direct that anger at policymakers.” In Mount’s office, her patients are distressed, with good reason. The pandemic has created a huge backlog in non-Covid care. Between April 2020 and November 2021, there were 4.2m fewer elective procedures, and 29.1m fewer outpatient attendances. In October 2021, 312,665 patients had been waiting more than a year for treatment; in October 2019, this figure was 1,321. Mount sees a patient in his late 60s who has been waiting months for a urology consultation for a prostate operation. Technically, he’s a low-risk patient, but his condition is seriously affecting his quality of life. He can’t leave the house for more than an hour or two, because he constantly needs the toilet. There’s nothing Mount can do; she has tried medicating the issue but it doesn’t work. He needs surgery. A woman in her late 40s comes in with a gynaecological issue. The woman has been waiting for surgery for five months. They agree that Mount should refer her to a different hospital where the waiting list is shorter, even though she’ll have to go to the back of the queue. “She’s in pain,” says Mount, “and can’t leave the house for a week or two every month.” As the afternoon wears on, it seems that almost every patient is presenting with a waiting-list-related issue. They need a hip replacement, or a knee replacement, and they’re in pain. This has never happened to Mount before. “As a doctor, you want to help people,” says Mount. “It’s not nice when you watch your patients suffer, and you have to explain to them why they have to continue suffering.” 12 November Last night, on BBC One’s Question Time, Alastair Campbell excoriated the government for its treatment of GPs. “I’m getting really worried about these attacks on GPs,” Campbell said. “Which I think are being orchestrated.” A colleague shares the clip via WhatsApp. Mount watches it while eating breakfast. “It was nice to hear that someone was speaking up for us,” she says. “Because everyone thinks we’re shut.” Mid-November Mount spends a day at the vaccine centre. Currently, they are rolling out booster vaccines to over-40s and the clinically vulnerable, although there has been chatter that the rollout will be widened to all adults soon. Mount is dealing with a routine query when there’s a commotion. Staff peer out of the window. There’s an anti-vaxxer outside. “Only the vaccinated die young!” he chants. Bizarrely, he’s carrying a golf club. Mount is unfazed. He has been coming since spring. Because of him, the practice had to install opaque screens across the windows, so that he wouldn’t be able to view confidential patient information. After a few hours, the man gets bored and goes off to play golf. The worst anti-vaxxers are the ones who disrupt the clinics. In May, Mount was running a vaccine bus outside the town hall when two anti-vaxxers went to the car park, told everyone the clinic had run out of vaccine, and sent them home. Late November Mount sees a patient with Covid symptoms. Folly Lane has a designated treatment room for patients with suspected Covid, but the patient is insisting she be seen in a regular treatment room. The woman, who is in her mid-30s, keeps telling Mount that she believes that she has a bacterial chest infection, and is asking for antibiotics. Mount tells her that she needs to rule out Covid first, and sends her for a PCR test. “People get angry when you ask them to go for a PCR test,” says Mount. “Like you’ve accused them of doing something wrong. They feel like they know it’s not Covid.” This is a daily occurrence at Folly Lane. “When I say they have to go to a special room, they get upset,” says Mount. “They don’t want to go in that room. That’s the room where patients with Covid have been.” Sometimes patients lie and say they have had a negative PCR, not realising that the results come through to Mount’s computer. That evening, Mount has a bath when she gets in, and washes her hands. The patient was coughing all over her. The test comes back the following day: the patient has Covid. “It makes me angry that my staff have to expose themselves to the risk because patients refuse to get a test,” says Mount. “They’re expecting us to expose ourselves to the illness. And we can’t say no. We have to see them.” Despite the fact that Mount’s team regularly see Covid-positive patients, they are not given high-quality FFP3 masks. At the beginning of the pandemic, the surgery couldn’t even get surgical masks from central supply. When they eventually arrived, they had a sticker stuck over the best-before date. 26 November The Omicron variant has been detected in South Africa. Mount has been given orders to ramp up the booster rollout. Her new target, set by NHS England, is to give out boosters to 90% of those eligible by 19 December. So far, she’s at 68%. Mount would like to give out more vaccines, but just doesn’t have the stock. “We are begging for more vaccines,” she says. “We are going as fast as the supply allows.” Another patient complaint. A nurse used a tongue depressor to examine his throat, and it made him gag. Mount dashes out the response. “I am very sorry for any distress you have felt,” she writes, explaining that use of a tongue depressor is a routine part of a physical examination. Early December An exhausting day at the surgery. “You have to be fully functioning,” says Mount. “It’s like a conveyor belt. Patient after patient after patient.” Because minor conditions are screened out during telephone triage and assigned to junior doctors or nurses, every person Mount sees has a complex condition. Appointments are scheduled into 10-minute slots, which gives them a Generation Game-like feel, but with life-and-death stakes. On an average day, Mount treats 40 patients. According to BMA guidance, any more than 25 patient-doctor contacts a day is unsafe. “We are already at the point where patient safety is being compromised,” says Jameel. “It has been for a long time.” She has colleagues who see or speak to 120 patients a day. Every one of these contacts is fraught with risk. Every one of them is potentially life-threatening. Mount sees a pregnant woman in her early 30s with abdominal pain. Mount suspects an ectopic pregnancy, which can be fatal if untreated. The gynaecological registrar at the hospital won’t accept the patient without blood tests to rule out appendicitis. But these tests can take 24 hours to come back. Mount pleads with the registrar, who relents. Mount checks the patient’s notes the next day: it was an ectopic pregnancy. 12 December In light of the fact that Omicron cases are rocketing, the BMA has offered the government an opportunity to “reset” its relationship with GPs. Mount is at home with her family. It’s her son’s 14th birthday. As she cooks his favourite meal – roast chicken and chocolate cake – news breaks that Boris Johnson has scheduled a press conference that evening. Her WhatsApp lights up. “All the GPs are going crazy,” she says. “Saying that the press always finds out about everything before us.” She feels a spike of anxiety: throughout the pandemic, she has found out about changes to the vaccination programme via the news, and there’s no reason to expect this evening will be any different. Come 8pm, Mount watches the press conference. Johnson announces that all English adults will have the chance to get a booster by the end of the month, provided they had their second dose of the vaccine at least three months previously. People can walk in for vaccines, without appointments. Getting everyone boosted before the new year is to be the NHS’s No 1 priority. When the press conference is over, Mount opens her laptop. She crunches the numbers: her primary care network needs to deliver 10,000 boosters before January. For context, they have delivered 9,000 boosters since September. They are effectively being told to do three months’ work in three weeks, during the busiest time of year for GPs, when patients present with seasonal flu and staff are off for the holidays. First, Mount applies for permission for all of the surgeries in her primary care network to become vaccination sites. Then, she emails the team at her vaccination centre, to see what extra dates they can put on. Afterwards, she warns her husband that she won’t be able to see him and the kids much before Christmas. She tells her daughter she won’t be able to take her to the Christmas market in Manchester any more. She cancels all of her days off, leaving only Christmas Eve, for present wrapping. She sleeps badly and arrives at Folly Lane early the next morning. By the end of the day she has seen 28 patients, reviewed a batch of prescriptions, filled out her paperwork, supervised a trainee GP and a pharmacist, written a plan to increase vaccine capacity to 1,120 doses a day, and obtained all the permits. “If things feel out of control,” Mount says, “I need to get back in control again, as quickly as possible.” 14 December The Orford vaccine centre is vaccinating 1,000 people a day. The queue stretches around the building. “A few weeks ago,” says Mount, “ministers were saying not particularly nice things about general practice. We’re doing this for the patients, not for the government. That’s how the NHS runs. It’s on the goodwill of people. Primary care will always deliver.” Mount puts an out-of-office on her email, informing people that she will only answer urgent queries and emails about the booster rollout. Folly Lane has postponed a few non-urgent disease review clinics. “In three months,” says Mount, “are GPs going to be criticised for what we did have to postpone? Will the government accuse us of earning money from it?” Her nerves are frayed. She’s exhausted, and living on coffee. 15 December The centre is vaccinating 1,400 people a day. Mount gets a strange email. The person asks for their vaccination data, and then tells them to watch the prime minister’s press conference, later that evening. Come 5pm, Mount is at the vaccine centre, packing Pfizer vials into freezer bags full of ice to take out to GP practices. She turns on the press conference, and is flabbergasted to hear Johnson thank her personally, for her work rolling out the booster campaign. Her dad messages her almost immediately. “The prime minister just said your name!” he writes. 20 December Mount dashes to Asda to pick up bits for the Christmas meal. She’s so tired, she leaves her keys at the checkout. A member of the public flags her down. 23 December Mount’s final day in the office before Christmas. Across the country, Omicron cases are surging. There are 106,199 cases reported in England today: a new national record, to be broken tomorrow, and the day after that, and the day after that. Testing labs are overwhelmed by the sheer number of people presenting for PCR tests. Government-issued lateral flow tests have run out. The local microbiology lab is so overwhelmed with PCRs, it has had to stop doing urine and sputum samples. Without the samples, they can’t find which specific infections the patients have, so Mount has been told to prescribe broader antibiotics than she would typically use. “We’ve spent years trying to avoid broader antibiotics because of the problems they can cause,” she says. “We might end up in a pickle next week with people with resistant infections.” At lunchtime, one of the Folly Lane nurses is getting ready to go out and vaccinate a shelter for rough sleepers. As the nurse is preparing to leave, Mount gets an email from her communications manager. The prime minister wants to video-call her at the homeless shelter, to thank her for the work she has been doing. “I said to the comms lady: ‘Are you sure you want me to do this? I’m known for speaking my mind.’” Mount has a break in between clinics, and she rushes to the shelter. They cram into a small meeting room. The prime minister is characteristically dishevelled and tries to fix the Teams connection halfway through. After 10 minutes, they click off. “If we’d had more time,” says Mount wryly, “I might have mentioned a few things about how best to communicate with us. But then he’d probably have said that his computer failed.” Afterwards, Mount and her team vaccinate 30 people at the homeless shelter, which feels amazing. “Sometimes the ones you get the biggest sense of achievement about are the smallest numbers,” she says. Wrapping the children’s presents on Christmas Eve, Mount realises to her dismay that she ordered far too many online, and sets some aside. “You overcompensate, don’t you?” 29 December Mount is at the vaccine centre. It’s ghostly quiet. They have space for 1,100 appointments, but only 250 people are booked in. Over Christmas, studies emerged indicating that Omicron is less deadly than earlier variants of the virus. Mount thinks this is why people aren’t bothering to book their boosters. “For someone in their 90s or who is immunosuppressed,” she sighs, “it might not be mild.” Around 11am, anti-vax protesters set up a table outside the centre. “You’re not being told the full picture,” a protester tells people as they leave the clinic. He hands them a leaflet. “How many jabs to freedom?” it reads. “Never before has a ‘vaccine’ required continuous top-up every few months! Surely your gut feeling tells you something isn’t right?” One of Mount’s team waves at the protesters cheerily through the window. “They had a poster last week with a picture of Madeleine McCann on it,” observes a volunteer, eating a biscuit. Mount asks the building manager if they can’t be moved on, but it’s public land so there’s nothing she can do. Around 2pm, one of the protesters starts shouting at patients in the observation room. She yells that everyone’s going to die, and it’s all a hoax. Mount tells the woman that she has to leave, at which point the woman falsely accuses her of assaulting her. Mount’s team forms a human chain around the woman, walking her out. The police arrive, investigate the woman’s claim of assault, conclude there’s no case to answer, and leave. The protesters linger outside for a while until a security guard arrives, then disappear. Afterwards, everyone is worked up. They debrief over cups of tea. Mount is disturbed. “The worry is that you don’t know who could be violent or aggressive towards you,” she says. 5 January Turnout is still low at the vaccine centre. Mount’s more pressing concern, however, is staffing. Two of her GPs are out with Covid, and two of her nurses. The agencies she would usually call for locums can’t help: the north-west has become the centre of Omicron. It’s a similar picture across the country: more than 35,000 NHS staff are off sick. In London, the military has been drafted into crisis-stricken hospitals. To prevent her remaining staff from contracting Covid, Mount seeks permission to purchase FFP3 masks out of Folly Lane funds. When fitted correctly, FFP3 masks are up to 100% effective at protecting the wearer from infection; surgical masks are only 40-80% effective. In the UK, FFP3 masks are only available to NHS staff performing aerosol-generating procedures. Despite this, when Javid visited an NHS hospital this month, he wore an FFP3 mask; he was photographed talking to an ICU doctor who was wearing a surgical mask. “We’re two years into this pandemic,” says the BMA’s Jameel. “We know that Covid is airborne, and we’re still telling general practice: ‘Here’s a flimsy mask. This will protect you.’” At Folly Lane, Mount drafts in a paramedic and pharmacist to deal with minor ailments, but it’s not enough, and they have to cancel a diabetic review clinic. She’s worried about patient safety should things get worse. “In the next two or three weeks,” Mount says, “it could get to the point where we just haven’t got the people. I don’t know what we’ll do.” When she has a moment to think, Mount asks herself how long she can continue working like this; how much longer she can keep driving herself at the expense of her family life, wellbeing and health. Not much longer, in all honesty. She has seen other GPs have heart attacks from the stress. She plans to get out by the time she’s 60, at the latest. “There’s no way I can do this until I’m 65,” she says. “No way.” Until then, Dr Mount and her colleagues hold together the crumbling edifice of primary care with exhaustion and goodwill. There may not be many GPs to replace her, if things carry on as they are. Some dates and details have been changed for patient privacy. • This article was amended on 25 January 2022 to remove a sentence that said FFP3 masks were mandatory on public transport in Germany. While masks are mandatory in such settings there, they can be FFP2 or medical face masks.The global fight against corruption has been at a standstill for a decade, with 86% of countries either worsening or making no progress in tackling the problem, and with numerous governments accused of using the pandemic to erode human rights and democracy, a report has found. Transparency International’s annual corruption ranking, published on Tuesday, also found countries that violate civil liberties consistently have low scores, underlining how failure to tackle corruption exacerbates human rights abuses and undermines democracy. First launched in 1995, the corruption perceptions index (CPI) has become one of the leading global trackers of public sector corruption, drawing data from 13 public sources, including the World Bank and the World Economic Forum. At least three sources are required to provide a ranking for each of the 180 countries included. The index gives a mark out of 100 – with 100 representing “very clean” and zero representing “highly corrupt”. Countries are ranked relative to each other. The 2021 index highlights the connection between corruption, democracy and human rights – from the lowest-scoring countries to advanced economies. It notes that out of 331 recorded cases of murdered human rights defenders in 2020, 98% occurred in countries with a CPI score below 45. The report cites recent cases in the Philippines and Venezuela. “The Philippines has continued its fall beginning in 2014 to a score of 33, as President Rodrigo Duterte has cracked down on freedoms of association and expression since his election in 2016,” said Transparency International. “It also has an exceptionally high murder rate of human rights defenders, with 20 killed in 2020.” In Venezuela, the report says: “The government of President Nicolás Maduro has repressed dissent of political opponents, journalists and even healthcare workers. The country has significantly declined on the CPI over the last decade, earning its lowest score yet of 14 in 2021.” The index also examines regional drivers of corruption. In eastern Europe and central Asia, the report describes a “vicious cycle of increasing authoritarianism, human rights abuses and corruption [where] political leaders used the Covid-19 pandemic as a pretext to reduce oversight and accountability for public procurement and foreign aid spending, from Albania to Kyrgyzstan”. Altynai Myrzabekova, Transparency International’s central Asia regional adviser, said: “2021 has been devastating for civil rights across eastern Europe and central Asia. Corrupt leaders repress all dissent – from opposition parties, to activists and the press. “While doing little to combat the Covid-19 pandemic’s impact on the population, governments have utilised it to further curb rights and freedoms, further entrenching authoritarianism.” While the index noted some improvements in sub-Saharan Africa, it described them as being “overshadowed by backsliding and stagnation in others … [with] serious corruption problems … exacerbated by ongoing violent conflicts and terrorist attacks in countries from South Sudan to Mali”. Samuel Kaninda, the group’s Africa adviser, said: “A decade of stagnating corruption levels has been devastating for sub-Saharan Africa. Natural resources are plundered and millions of people lack access to public services, while violent conflicts rage on and terrorist threats rise. Meanwhile, grand corruption allows elites to act with impunity, siphoning money away from the continent and leaving the public with little in the way of rights or resources.” Similarly, in the Middle East and north Africa, Transparency International found “systemic political corruption obstructs progress and exacerbates human rights abuses. “In light of rampant political corruption across the Arab states, the region is struggling to achieve any tangible results in the fight for transparency, human rights and democracy. Not a single country has significantly improved since 2012. Political elites and private interests time and again overtake the common good to benefit themselves and maintain autocracy.” Denmark, Finland and New Zealand topped the index with scores of 88 out of 100, while in its lowest reaches Somalia and Syria each scored 13, and South Sudan 11. The index also reported 27 countries – among them Cyprus (scoring 53), Canada (74), Lebanon (24) and Honduras (23) – reaching historic lows last year. Delia Ferreira Rubio, chair of Transparency International, said: “Human rights are not simply a nice-to-have in the fight against corruption. Authoritarian approaches destroy independent checks and balances and make anti-corruption efforts dependent on the whims of an elite. Ensuring people can speak freely and work collectively to hold power to account is the only sustainable route to a corruption-free society.”A rogue prime minister on the verge of defenestration drives out news of almost anything else. But housing usually languishes in the forgotten in-tray anyway. It sits low in voters’ and government concerns: the last 17 housing ministers remained in post, on average, for barely more than a year. Housing stories fill news pages, but only if they provide an opportunity to gloat over escalating property prices. So it shouldn’t be a surprise that a shocking report on a Conservative flagship housing policy fell below the news radar. The Lords-built environment committee has revealed that all of the £29bn spent on the help-to-buy scheme has been wasted. The scheme gives subsidies for homeownership, but all they do is “inflate prices by more than their subsidy value”. They “do not provide good value for money”, which would be “better spent on increasing housing supply.” The report, chaired by the Tory ex-minister and businesswoman Lucy Neville-Rolfe, shows that Margaret Thatcher’s signature right-to-buy policy lies at the heart of the ballooning housing crisis. The council house sales under this policy symbolised a rolling back of the state to create a property-owning, share-holding, Tory-voting electorate. (Pollsters use homeownership as a strong indicator for voting Conservative.) Councils that were forced to sell at knockdown prices were also barred from using the receipts to replenish the council housing stock. This meant a bargain for the 2 million tenants who bought council homes, but a disaster for the low-earners who came after. In 1980, a third of people lived in socially rented homes, at genuinely affordable below-market rents. That’s now fallen to 17%. Over the past 30 years, England has seen a net loss of 24,000 social homes every year on average. Another 29,000 social homes vanished alone through sales and demolitions. Those disappeared tenants end up in the expanding private-rented sector. Instead of paying for lasting brick-and-mortar council homes, the taxpayer subsidises private landlords through housing benefit, costing £22bn a year. The Lords report quotes the housing analyst Toby Lloyd: “The private rented sector is by far the most expensive, by far the lowest quality and by far the least popular. It is absolutely the worst possible tenure for almost everybody in it.” Of the many destructive Tory social policies, help to buy, announced in 2013, was always an especially egregious example of naked vote-getting. Its creator, George Osborne, knew a subsidy to buy homes worth as much as £600,000 would just inflate prices – and it did. It slightly speeded up the purchase date for those who were already likely to buy, often via family help. More people on high incomes – over £80,000 – use the scheme than low earners. Yet ownership is still falling and the age of first-time buyers keeps rising. Bringing up a family in a private-rented home means living under the shadow of eviction, with private landlords using section 21 orders to evict tenants for no reason. I once followed the misfortunes of one family that was forced to move, time and again, sometimes having to move their children’s schools too, often living in squalor, once through a long winter with a broken boiler. They weren’t destitute, both parents were in work, but their children were deprived of a permanent home in their early years. Last month’s excoriating report by the National Audit Office (NAO) on private renting found that in 29,000 instances in one year, “households were, or were at risk of being made homeless following an eviction that was not their fault”. I heard a few of those voices of distress last week when I listened in to the helpline at the housing charity Shelter, hearing the struggles of those who should be in social housing. Among the many homeless, Jay (not her real name) was typical of those NAO findings. Frail and on personal independence payment, she was suddenly facing eviction. Why? She complained to her landlord about frequent sewage flooding; getting no response she called environmental health. Her landlord, taking revenge, is evicting her, needing no reason. The NAO says a quarter of private rentals are of “non-decent” standard, and 13% have at least one serious hazard. The government long ago promised a bill to protect tenants, abolishing section 21 evictions, but there’s no sign of it. What hope is there of “levelling up”? Access to quality, affordable housing is going into reverse, according to a report from Legal &amp; General this week. Property is where the nation’s wealth is stored, and there it stays – useless and unproductive. Who dares break the taboo on the sacred right of homeowners not to be taxed on their ballooning unearned property wealth? A hypothecated tax spent directly on council housing would link the winners to the growing numbers of those who lose out in Britain’s grossly dysfunctional housing market. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistSouth America will endure a return of extreme heat during the next few days, after a brief respite from record breaking temperatures earlier this month. Temperatures into next week are forecast to rise into the low 40Cs once again through northern parts of Argentina, Uruguay and much of Paraguay. The heat coincides with severe drought that is currently gripping much of South America. Meanwhile, torrential rain has caused significant flooding in Antananarivo, Madagascar. Homes have been destroyed with a number of landslides reported due to the intense rainfall. At least 10 people are thought to have been killed, with about 12,000 left homeless. The country usually experiences flooding during the wet season, but the rains have been exceptional during the past week, overwhelming the poor drainage systems. Unbeknown to much of the global population, the recent volcanic eruption in Tonga sent shockwaves around the world which were large enough to be easily detected by meteorological observation data. In the UK, atmospheric pressure observations showed sharp changes of between 1 and 2hPa just over half a day after the eruption occurred. A second shockwave, travelling the other way around the world, followed a few hours later, then several smaller pressure perturbations.The last time Erin Doherty was meant to do a big interview with the Guardian, she got out of it by faking an illness and sending her grandmother, an eccentric nun, along instead. Admittedly, Doherty was in character at the time, playing Princess Anne as a sarky 16-year-old in The Crown, annoyed with her father’s plan to salvage the royals’ reputation by showcasing her, his headstrong, no-nonsense daughter. Unfortunately, his headstrong, no-nonsense daughter would not comply. So it does feel quite satisfying to finally pin Doherty down, even if we are Zooming from our homes rather than tête-à-tête-ing amid the gilded majesty of Buckingham Palace, as the fictional journalist in the Netflix hit did. “I’m having a great time!” grins Doherty, her perkiness and high-pitched estuary accent so different from the deep, hyper-posh drawl she used for Anne. But perhaps we should get used to it – now that the 29-year-old is appearing in a new genre-bending BBC One drama called Chloe, in which she plays down-at-heel temp Becky, a woman who is – vocally, at least – much closer to the real Doherty. The plot revolves around Becky’s decision to infiltrate Bristol’s stylish arty set after one of their number – a woman Becky obsesses over on Instagram – is found dead, having mysteriously phoned our protagonist during her last hours. The show is part thrilling social media mystery, part glossy Insta-life romp. And Becky is an intriguingly complex character: a wily con artist, a self-hating recluse, a sparkling social butterfly, a reluctant carer, an inveterate scroller – desperate, deceptive and difficult to get a handle on. In other words, a proper challenge for any actor: Doherty is playing not one character, but multiple, and very different Beckys. At home, she is moody, monotone and distant in the face of hectoring from her ill mother. At work, she is capable, sensible and keen to blend into the background. And in her new, duplicitous social life, she is confident, sleek, witty and well travelled. Doherty negotiates this with subtlety and aplomb. But her great skill is to make us empathise with this often impenetrable woman: we don’t quite know what is going on in Becky’s head, but feel for her and root for her nonetheless. Fans of The Crown will not be surprised by Doherty’s stellar performance: this is a woman who not only comfortably held her own alongside Olivia Colman’s Queen Elizabeth and Helena Bonham Carter’s Princess Margaret, but often stole the scene with her biting wit. The Crown’s creator Peter Morgan has admitted that her performance was so good, he was continually asked to feature more Anne in the fourth series. “Erin’s portrayal means that everybody has fallen in love with her,” he said. “Searches about Anne on Google went through the roof. She’s now one of the most popular royals.” It was a performance fuelled by affection: Doherty became a huge fan of Anne while making the show. Today, she describes her as a “rock star” who “is devoted to telling the truth at all times, regardless of how someone may respond. For me, a rock star is someone who just feels what they feel, and they say it in the moment and the other person just has to deal with that.” As if to prove the point, Princess Anne recently took umbrage with comments made by Doherty, who had said in an interview that it took two hours for The Crown’s hair stylists to perfect the royal’s idiosyncratic bouffant. The princess said she was baffled, insisting it only took her 10 minutes. “Oh no!” says Doherty, looking mortified. But surely this shows that her portrayal – that straight-talking, suffer-no-fools attitude, that low-key, unfussy style – was spot on? Doherty relaxes and nods. “Oh, that’s great. That’s so Anne.” Doherty does not consider herself a rock star in the Princess Anne mould. In fact, she says she has far more in common with Becky’s tendency towards anxiety and doubt. “When I leave a meeting room or whatever, I’m the type of person who will walk back to the train station replaying every moment. I can’t let it go unless I’ve done that.” Chloe is full of lingering shots of Becky scrolling, dead-eyed, through Instagram profiles of people with nicer, more photogenic lives than her. I’d wager there has never been a more uncomfortably realistic portrayal of social media use in British drama. Doherty thinks that’s important. “It’s not until you see someone behaving that way that you’re like, ‘Oh crap, I do that.’ I wake up in the morning and I reach for my phone and I’m there for an hour, without even thinking about it. It’s terrifying. It really impacts your mind.” The self-flagellation that is part of looking at – and aspiring to – lives online is something Chloe captures incredibly well. “That’s the scary thing about Instagram. It has all these glorious things. Even for someone like me, who isn’t on it day to day, I still find myself looking at all these photos and being like, ‘Right, well, where am I going to get that set of plates from?’ Why do I care? It’s crazy!” She adds: “People who lived in the 1970s had it sorted. They rang people in telephone boxes and met up at places and that was it. Hopefully, something will happen and social media won’t be what our culture revolves around.” At least Doherty was able to enjoy a phone-free 1990s childhood. She grew up in Crawley (“Whenever anyone asks, I just say near Gatwick airport, which is all it has going on”) and was heavily into both football and acting. But when her dad got tired of ferrying her between hobbies, she was told to choose. It was acting, she decided, that made her happiest. School was substantially less joyful. “I never felt at home there. I bunked off a lot – there was no big connection to a subject, there was no social group.” Instead, she found friends at her weekend drama classes, and that’s how she still operates. “I’m quite introverted, I don’t have a big social life. Work provides that.” Despite the detachment, it was actually school that convinced Doherty acting was her calling. In what she calls “the most random but vital experience of my life”, her drama teacher took some pupils to a youth theatre festival in Bosnia, where they performed a silent play based on Timberlake Wertenbaker’s The Love of the Nightingale, a feminist retelling of the ancient Greek myth about the rape of Philomela and the revenge she takes. After a week of drama workshops and lectures, Doherty sat on the plane home and thought: “Right, there’s no two ways about it: I’m going to be an actor.” That conviction made her initial rejections from drama schools all the more unnerving because “I didn’t have another option”. She took a year out and worked in the PE department of her old school, “pumping up all the footballs and washing all the football kits. It was really horrible.” Eventually, she won a place at Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, whose alumni include fellow Crown cast members Colman and Josh O’Connor, who plays Prince Charles. The rest, however, seems to have been plain sailing. Rave reviews for her theatre work followed, particularly her 2017 performance in My Name is Rachel Corrie, a one-woman play, created by the late Alan Rickman and the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, about the American activist who was killed by an Israeli bulldozer on the Gaza Strip. So breathtakingly good was Doherty that this paper called her “one of the year’s great discoveries,” describing her version of Corrie as “if Sylvia Plath had been crossed with Jane Fonda”. She’s certainly not the only talented actor to have been rejected from drama school. Does she think there’s a correlation? Doherty nods. “Rejection is really great. Being rejected is an opportunity because you’re literally being told no. So rather than just going A to B, you’ve got to figure something else out. And figuring that out is an amazing opportunity. As an actor, regardless of what you do, you’re always going to get told no at some point. You don’t get every job you go up for, that’s just impossible, so you have to be alright with that.” Judging by the response to Doherty’s work so far, it’s hard to imagine that rejection is the reason she is currently not working. No, she says, she’s just increasingly picky. “It’s a privilege to be able to choose, because I’ve gone through the phases when I would just be gagging to work.” Now her criteria for taking a role is “whether I would want to see that. Like, what’s the point? Why is this story being made?” The baton of Princess Anne has now been passed to Claudia Harrison, who plays her as a fortysomething in The Crown’s fifth series, currently in production. Doherty would have liked to do an in-person handover, but it wasn’t possible in the pandemic. “It’s been gutting,” she says. “We’ve sent some texts but we haven’t been able to meet up, with all the blimmin’ rules changing all the time.” Still, it seems Anne will continue to loom large in Doherty’s life for a while yet. “During filming, my family would be like, ‘You literally just spoke to me like Anne then.’ I had no awareness of it. Even now, I say some words and I’m like, ‘That is not my voice.’ She’s there!” Chloe begins on BBC One on 6 February.The middle and upper classes are more likely to hold prejudiced views about Islam than working-class groups, according to a survey from the University of Birmingham. In one of the most detailed surveys conducted on Islamophobia and other forms of racism in modern Britain, data showed 23.2% of people from upper and lower middle-class social groups harbour prejudiced views about Islamic beliefs compared with 18.4% of people questioned from working-class groups. The survey, carried out in conjunction with YouGov, found the British public is almost three times more likely to hold prejudiced views of Islam than they are of other religions, with 21.1% of British people wrongly believing Islam teaches its followers that the Qur’an must be read “totally literally”. “It’s the people from an upper and middle class background, who presumably are university educated, who feel more confident in their judgments but [are] also more likely to make an incorrect judgment,” said Dr Stephen Jones, the report’s lead author. “It’s almost like because they’re more educated, they’re also more miseducated, because that’s the way Islam is presented in our society.” The findings, presented in a report entitled The Dinner Table Prejudice: Islamophobia in Contemporary Britain, were based on interviews with a sample of 1,667 people between 20 and 21 July 2021. The survey found more than one in four people, and nearly half of Conservative and Leave voters, hold conspiratorial views about Sharia “no-go areas”, while Muslims are the UK’s second “least liked” group, after Gypsy and Irish Travellers, with 25.9% of the British public feeling negatively towards Muslims. The survey also found 18.1% of people support prohibiting all Muslim migration to the UK, a rate 4-6% higher than the same view for other ethnic and religious groups. The report suggested a lack of public censure for Islamophobia, citing the example of Conservative MP Nadine Dorries supportively tweeting remarks made by anti-Islam activist Stephen Yaxley-Lennon (also known as Tommy Robinson), was one reason why prejudice was so widespread. “There’s a lack of criticism that follows Islamophobia, and that seems to correspond to the way in which Islamophobia is dealt with in public life,” said Jones. “The survey shows quite clearly it’s a very widespread prejudice. But it’s just not given the same kind of seriousness as other forms of prejudice. “People who work in public office, whether MPs or councillors, who have got away with saying things about Muslims that they simply would not get away with if they were talking about other kinds of minority. That’s not to say those other issues don’t need to be taken seriously as well, it’s simply to say that this particular form of prejudice doesn’t get due recognition.” Researchers recommended the government and other public figures should publicly acknowledge the lack of criticism of Islamophobia, and how it stands out compared with other forms of racism and prejudice. The report also suggested civil society organisations and equality bodies should recognise how systemic miseducation about Islam is common in British society and is a key element of Islamophobia. Jones said: “No one is calling for laws regulating criticism of religion, but we have to recognise that the British public has been systematically miseducated about Islamic tradition and take steps to remedy this.”The return to school in regional Australia amid rising Covid-19 cases could exacerbate existing teacher shortages and fatigue, and ventilation requirements may leave classrooms more exposed to the fierce summer heat. Tim Danaher, the central west organiser for the New South Wales Teachers Federation, said many high schools in the state’s west were already starting the school year with two or three vacant teaching positions, while in towns such as Walgett the number is even higher. He said the “massive” staff shortages will only become worse as staff are affected by rising case numbers. The President of the Griffith Teachers Association, Jenna Woodland, has been preparing for students to return on Friday, after having contracted Covid-19 only the week prior. “I’m still having to have a sleep every day. My energy levels are depleted,” Woodland said. She has been worried whether the government has a plan for how to aid teachers coming back to work after after having Covid if they also feel their energy levels have been depleted. If other teachers contract Covid-19, Woodland said the existing staffing issues will become more apparent. “How long before these classrooms are without a teacher?” Woodland said ventilation in ageing regional schools is another concern as they prepare for the return. She said the air conditioning in her classroom doesn’t work despite it being newly installed, while opening a window only lets the heat in. “In February we always have two or three weeks of low- to mid-40s. “Thirty hot and sweaty bodies in that room at the best of times it’s very uncomfortable, let alone we know this virus likes to hang around and we’re exposing kids to air that is contaminated with the virus.” Danaher agreed ventilation was a concern for schools in the west, where it’s not viable to have the window open when it’s in excess of 40C heat, which leaves the “teachers and students suffering”. A Department of Education spokesperson told Guardian Australia the department would continue to provide guidance and solutions relevant to a school’s local setting. “In general, windows will be left open in all practicable circumstances with air cooling and heating systems being utilised in parallel to maintaining ventilation,” the spokesperson said. Woodland is also concerned that time spent having to prepare for Covid-safe measures leaves teachers with less time to devote to education. She said the two staff development days usually devoted to professional development and training have been “put on the back-burner”, replaced by outlining Covid-safe risk management. “We thought the last couple years were bad, but I think it’s about to get a whole lot worse before it gets better,” Woodland said. An anonymous teacher from Singleton said the quality of students’ education would suffer as teachers falling ill would leave their colleagues covering their classes. “Taking someone else’s lesson cuts into your planning time, marking time, and lesson preparation.” She said during a normal term a teacher might have to cover two or three lessons, but that the previous term she covered more than eight lessons and expects she will have to cover more this term as there are no casual teaching staff in Singleton. “Our administrator tried last term to find retirees, there’s no availability. You can’t magic them they’re just not around.” She said the situation had been exacerbated by fewer people wanting to travel out of their own area because there was enough casual work there. She expressed concern that the final year university students and retired principals who have volunteered to be part of the backup workforce would only cover metropolitan areas. “They’ll all be in the cities – not for Singleton, Bourke, Cowra,” the teacher said. A Department of Education spokesperson said “this contingency workforce will be deployed where possible whether in the metropolitan or rural and regional areas of NSW.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In Gilgandra, Wendy Fong said her daughter Tiffany was looking forward to going back to school, and at the local pool, friends Lisa McLeod and Sandra Eason said their kids were “excited” to go back to the classroom. Lauren, whose son will start year 11 in south west Victoria on 1 February, said the return to in person learning means a lot for her son who suffered academically and socially from remote learning. Living on a dairy farm, Lauren’s son had no school friends within the five kilometre radius limit imposed and consequently struggled with the isolation socially and academically. She said many others at her son’s school would have been in a similar position as the school has a large intake area with most students coming farm properties often over 100 kilometres away, rather than from town. After the experience of remote learning saw her son loose his aspiration of studying engineering at university, Lauren hoped the return to face to face learning will see him regain motivation.Hospital bosses fear that pregnant women could be denied a home birth or water birth in the event of an exodus of midwives triggered by compulsory Covid vaccination for NHS staff. There are concerns that mothers-to-be could also be unable to have their baby at their local hospital as already understaffed maternity units in England struggle to cope with the loss of up to 2,000 midwives. Others may have their child delivered with the help of a doctor rather than a midwife, or be assisted during their birth by a midwife who is simultaneously looking after another labouring woman, they said. Hospital chiefs have described preparing to scale back the care they offer to expectant mothers from 1 April, the deadline for frontline staff to be double-vaccinated or lose their jobs. Hospitals in England are already 2,500 midwives short of the number they need to give every pregnant woman the right standard of care, the Commons health committee has estimated. Midwives and nurses are the two groups of frontline staff most likely to resist getting jabbed, NHS chiefs said. Last week the Bishop of London, Sarah Mullally, a former chief nursing officer, told a House of Lords debate that as many as 12.5% of all midwives in London may lose their jobs because of their determination not to get vaccinated. There has been speculation that the government is to delay introducing the policy, though it has insisted the date will not change. The medical royal colleges representing midwives, nurses and GPs have urged ministers to delay. NHS insiders told the Guardian privately of their concern that women may not be able to exercise their rights under the NHS constitution to decide whether to give birth at home, in a midwife-led unit or in a hospital labour ward. Maternity guidelines say women should have the support of one midwife with them throughout their labour. “The truth is that we won’t cope [if many midwives leave rather than get vaccinated]. It’ll be much harder to have a home birth and women may have to resort to [hiring] doulas,” said an executive at one hospital where many midwives remain unvaccinated 10 days before the 3 February cutoff set by NHS England for receiving a first dose. Trainee midwives will also have to play a bigger role to help compensate for the loss of experienced, fully trained colleagues, the executive added. The chief executive of another NHS trust said: “[The loss of midwives means] neighbouring units would have to do mutual aid when busy, so yes, more women will be asked to change their hospital of choice at the last minute. “Hospitals will also have less capacity to do antenatal and postnatal appointments and midwife birthing units will be compromised because you would pull staff on to labour wards.” Barking, Havering and Redbridge trust in London recently said its existing lack of midwives combined with a likely loss linked to mandatory jabs will pose a major challenge. Matthew Trainer, its chief executive, told a board meeting that the birth centre at its Queen’s hospital in Romford, Essex, which is already closed because of the midwife shortage, would have to remain shut “if we lost another chunk of midwives” as a result of the new requirement. Another senior NHS figure said: “From conversations I’ve had, I think that more than half of all maternity units will have difficulty maintaining their normal maternity services.” Chris Hopson, the chief executive of hospital body NHS Providers, last month cited the case of an unnamed maternity unit that is facing the potential loss of as many as 40 midwives. The Department of Health and Social Care defended the policy and gave no hint of a delay. A spokesperson said: “Health and social care workers look after the most vulnerable people in society, who could face serious health consequences if exposed to the virus. “Ensuring staff are vaccinated is the right thing to do to protect patients and those in care. The vast majority of NHS staff have had the vaccine which is our best defence against Covid-19.”Critically acclaimed smaller West End shows are being squeezed out of theatre’s post-Omicron recovery as major players use discounted tickets to attract returning audiences. The award-winning theatre producer David Pugh told the Guardian that he feared it could spell the end of plays in the West End. His latest show, the highly rated Pride and Prejudice* (*Sort of), will close next month despite original hopes that it would have an open-ended run. Pugh said his 112 investors had all lost their money, with the production facing expected losses in the region of £750,000 – as much as £25,000 a week. The losses meant a decision was made to end the run in February, he said. “It’s why I’m not sleeping at night,” he said, adding that the rug had suddenly been pulled from underneath what he described as a carefully calibrated economic plan designed to ensure the play was accessible to as many people as possible. By contrast with his show, where tickets have a top price of £59, major West End shows have cut prices to as little as £10 amid competition for members of the public cautiously returning to theatre, and the continuing absence of tourists. Written by Isobel McArthur, who also co-directs and performs in the musical take on the Jane Austen novel, Pride and Prejudice (Sort of) has been playing at London’s Criterion theatre since last year after an initial production in Scotland and a tour. The Guardian’s chief theatre critic, Arifa Akbar, wrote in a review in November: “However inconceivable a production it sounds, with its karaoke numbers and its silliness, it creates something new and joyous from the old.” Pugh, who has won two Tony awards in the US and four Olivier awards in the UK, said it had been a priority to keep ticket prices low when he brought the production to the West End as he believed that theatregoing was too often elitist, with costs prohibitive for many people. “We also didn’t know who had money any more as a result of the pandemic and where the audience would come from, so we deliberately avoided booking fees and went for a simple price structure people could see, which was a top price of £59.50 that went down to £9.50. By contrast, other shows set their prices at what I think were ridiculous highs,” he said. Pugh said he and others behind similar-sized productions simply “couldn’t win” against larger ones that had bigger marketing campaigns, larger capacities and, in some cases, wealthy backers that included hedge funds. Productions of all sizes are only now emerging from the impact of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, which caused high absence rates among casts and backstage staff. Many theatres have said they will continue to ask audiences to wear masks. Even after almost two years of uncertainty, theatres across the UK are still in the most precarious of positions. The producer Kenny Wax, whose hits include the musical Six and the Goes Wrong series of comedies, told the Guardian last month that there was much greater audience confidence on Broadway where “everyone wears masks in the theatres”. Sir Nicholas Hytner, the artistic director of the Bridge theatre in London, said it was time to examine support such as short-term finance, loans and reviews of VAT and business rates. This week Pugh said he was highly concerned about the commercial viability of plays in London’s West End in the future. While he had been grateful to the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport for providing basic funding at the height of the pandemic that had enabled him and others to cover administrative costs, the threat facing his end of the sector was now acute, he said. “I am not sure that our current culture minister is really aware of how theatre helps other businesses’ going. I’m thinking of all the restaurants, cafes, taxis and shops in the West End who need the footfall from theatregoers,” said Pugh. “It would be nice if it was recognised that commercial theatre is integral to the West End. I think our culture minister thinks we rely on our investors, but they can only take so many losses. There’s a fear they may think twice before investing in the theatre in future.” Cheap seats? Pride and Prejudice* (*Sort of) Critically acclaimed anarchic reboot of the Austen novel. Tickets from £15 still available. Jersey Boys Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons come to life on stage. Tickets available at £28 (special offer 46% saving). Mamma Mia The Abba musical extravaganza is still going strong after its West End premiere in 1999. Tickets from £18. Source: Todaytix.comA senior commonwealth official who was sacked by Barnaby Joyce in 2015 has been promoted to become the second most powerful bureaucrat in New South Wales. Paul Grimes is the new state treasury secretary, continuing the revival of his public service career that included stints as a deputy secretary under then federal treasurer Peter Costello and as a senior adviser to Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd during the global financial crisis. Grimes, however, later had a public falling out in 2015 when Joyce was agriculture minister. Joyce sacked Grimes, his agriculture secretary, saying at the time that there was “no realistic prospect” he could have a “relationship of strong mutual confidence”. Joyce had insisted a correction to the Hansard parliamentary record of an incorrect answer he gave regarding drought support loans had been made by his staff, without his knowledge, and that he had asked for the changes to be reversed when he became aware they had been made. Grimes, though, implied there was a different version of events, even requesting an extraordinary Senate committee hearing. After his exit from Canberra, Grimes took up senior positions, including with the Victorian government. Almost two years ago, he was handpicked by Matt Kean, then NSW energy and environment minister, to coordinate his department. Now the NSW treasurer, Kean announced on Tuesday that Grimes would be the new treasury secretary – starting on Saturday – and praised his attributes as an older style official unafraid to give frank advice. “What a man of integrity he is,” Kean told Guardian Australia. “What a coup this is for NSW.” Grimes, an economist, will succeed two bankers in the top Treasury role, his appointment coming just as the government puts the final touches on a support package to aid the state’s economic recovery from Omicron. NSW accounts for about one-third of the national economy and a recent CBA State of the States report has its performance lagging all but the ACT’s. Kean said Grimes had worked to develop the state’s energy roadmap aimed at attracting billions of dollars of investment. The plan aims to accelerate the decarbonisation of the economy and provide lower-cost electricity to households and businesses alike. The new treasury secretary will oversee the next state budget, due by mid-year, which will be the last before elections in March 2023, Kean said. So far, there is little sign of additional economic support from the commonwealth. Grimes’s appointment follows an earlier-than-expected exit by current treasury secretary Mike Pratt, who had indicated he planned to leave by March. Pratt’s tenure had lately been clouded by a dispute between Treasury and the audit office, with the auditor general, Margaret Crawford, initially refusing to sign off on the state’s accounts over the controversial assessment of rail assets. That dispute ended earlier this month although the cost in terms of future accounting changes may tally as much as $4.1bn. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, who was treasurer when the rail assets saga began, praised Pratt for his almost decade-long service, including four and a half years as treasury secretary. Pratt played “a vital and leading role in guiding the economy through the greatest economic challenge that NSW has faced since the Great Depression – the Covid-19 pandemic – saving tens of thousands of jobs and businesses,” the premier said. “Mr Pratt’s sound fiscal management and expert advice allowed the NSW government to help people when they needed it most during drought, bushfires, floods and the pandemic, as well ensuring the state will continue to deliver for future generations.” Barnaby Joyce, now deputy prime minister, was approached for comment.The Gilded Age 9pm, Sky Atlantic Christine Baranski is at the top of her game as sharp-tongued, old money matriarch Agnes van Rhijn in this juicy, well-heeled period drama from Julian Fellowes (Downton Abbey, Gosford Park). In 19th-century New York City, when people started making their wealth in new ways – “the Gilded Age” – Agnes and her sister Ada Brook (Cynthia Nixon) welcome their niece, Marian Brook (Louisa Jacobson – Meryl Streep’s daughter), from rural Pennsylvania. Cue a perilous navigation of society, and working out which side to choose. Hollie Richardson The Decade the Rich Won 9pm, BBC Two After the 2008 crash, banks were bailed out and Britain fell into austerity as the people in power took decisions that have left deep scars. This two-part documentary speaks to prominent insiders from government and finance to recount what happened. HR Secrets of the Krays 9pm, ITV A series exploring the rise and fall of the endlessly fascinating and, at times, queasily glamorised London gangsters. Tonight, the baby steps of Ronnie and Reggie – quite rightly, the series doesn’t gloss over the implacable thuggery with which the brothers established their initial power base in the East End. Phil Harrison PEN15 9pm, Sky Comedy Excruciatingly awkward middle-schoolers Anna and Maya are on the run – and running straight into trouble (AKA boys) – in the climax of season two. Cue sexual trauma, breakups, messy retaliations and, for one of the pair, a first kiss. A funny, sad, beautiful meditation on friendship, and the agonising realisation that it might not last for ever. Ali Catterall Kings of the Wood 9pm, Quest Settle in for some wonderful, warm viewing with this new woodwork series from the makers of The Repair Shop. Each episode sees three people nominate a friend or family member who deserves the gift of a bespoke piece of crafted wood. First up, Alex is asked to make a beautiful bench for a selfless midwife. HR Toast of Tinseltown 10pm, BBC Two There are some great character names in this comedy series: Des Wigwam, Russ Nightlife, Rusty Halloween. Tonight we meet Richard Chickentoss (played by Matthew Holness) whose masterclass on “how to act like a doctor” wins the titular twit the role of a TV GP. But how long can Toast hold on to the part, after an unfortunate incident with a fan? ACTop story: ‘Appalling evidence of mismanagement’ Good morning, I’m Virginia Harrison and here are today’s top stories. Boris Johnson faces renewed anger from MPs and bereaved families after the disclosure his then fiancee threw him a surprise lockdown birthday party in 2020, as sources said an official inquiry had uncovered “appalling evidence of mismanagement” at the heart of Downing Street. In the latest alleged breach of rules, No 10 admitted that Carrie Johnson held a party for the prime minister and up to 30 staff on 19 June 2020 despite Covid rules banning indoor social gatherings. ITV reported that the prime minister attended the party in the cabinet room at No 10 at 2pm on his 56th birthday, and that the interior designer Lulu Lytle – who was not a member of No 10 staff – was there. The room was said to have been laid out with Marks &amp; Spencer party food and a birthday cake, with staff singing “Happy Birthday” and staying for 20-30 minutes. No 10 said Johnson attended for less than 10 minutes and denied reports from ITV that he held a party later on 19 June in his Downing Street residence. While the birthday do is likely to inflame public anger over the behaviour at Downing Street, Sue Gray – the senior civil servant leading the inquiry into the No 10 parties – is understood to have already been told about the allegations. That means the latest exposé is unlikely to delay publication of her report, potentially late this week. Gray is expected to make deeply critical recommendations on overhauling No 10’s operation after hearing of repeated failures of leadership, according to a Whitehall source who spoke to the inquiry. Here’s a full list of the rule-busting “parties” at No 10 likely to be scrutinised. * * * Biden declares ‘unity’ over Ukraine – US president Joe Biden has insisted there was “total” unity among western powers after crisis talks with European leaders on how to deter Russia from an attack against Ukraine, as Downing Street warned of “unprecedented sanctions” against Moscow should an invasion take place. Boris Johnson’s office also said “the leaders agreed on the importance of international unity in the face of growing Russian hostility”. Washington is trying to maintain transatlantic and Nato unity against Russia, which supplies about 40% of the European Union’s natural gas. At the same time, the US has placed 8,500 troops on heightened alert to deploy to Europe as Nato reinforced its eastern borders with warships and fighter jets, amid growing fears of a possible “lightning” attack by Russia to seize the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. The Kremlin pointed to the new deployments as evidence of aggressive posturing, blaming Nato for the rise in tensions. * * * Dementia study – Dementia patients who see the same GP every time have lower rates of health complications, fewer emergency hospital visits and a better overall quality of life, according to new research. The University of Exeter study – published in the British Journal of General Practice – analysed records for more than 9,000 people aged 65 and over in England living with dementia in 2016. It found those who were consistently seen by the same GP over the course of one year were given fewer medicines and were less likely to be given medicines that can cause problems like falls, incontinence and drowsiness. * * * Dental blitz – Hundreds of thousands of dental patients in England are to be offered weekend and evening appointments under NHS plans to tackle the backlog exacerbated by the pandemic. More than 350,000 extra dental appointments are to be made available in February and March, NHS England said, with a new £50m funding pot aimed at fuelling a dentistry “treatment blitz”. Still, senior dentistry sources said the cash was a “drop in the ocean”, with tens of millions of NHS appointments cancelled as a result of Covid-19 and the resulting backlog set to take years to clear. * * * Islam bias – The middle and upper classes are more likely to hold prejudiced views about Islam than working-class groups, according to a survey from the University of Birmingham. In one of the most detailed surveys conducted on Islamophobia and other forms of racism in modern Britain, data showed 23.2% of people from upper and lower middle-class social groups harbour prejudiced views about Islamic beliefs compared with 18.4% of people questioned from working-class groups. The findings come one day after the prime minister ordered a formal inquiry into allegations by the Conservative MP Nusrat Ghani that she was sacked as a minister after being told her “Muslimness” was “making colleagues uncomfortable”. * * * ‘Your hot take is completely false’ – Taylor Swift has called out Damon Albarn, lead singer of Blur and later of Gorillaz, on Twitter after the British musician told the LA Times she “doesn’t write her own songs”. “I was such a big fan of yours until I saw this,” the American singer, 32, wrote on Twitter to Albarn. “I write ALL of my own songs. Your hot take is completely false and SO damaging. You don’t have to like my songs but it’s really fucked up to try and discredit my writing. WOW.” Albarn later apologised, writing to Swift on Twitter: “I totally agree with you. I had a conversation about songwriting and sadly it was reduced to clickbait. I apologise unreservedly and unconditionally. The last thing I would want to do is discredit your songwriting. I hope you understand.” * * * Today in Focus podcast: Can Boris Johnson cling on? The new year has brought with it significant policy decisions for Boris Johnson: from how to respond to a worsening crisis in Ukraine, to how quickly to lift coronavirus restrictions. Should he move ahead with tax hikes in the face of an acute cost-of-living crisis? But all these questions have been drowned out by a more existential one for the prime minister: can his premiership survive the coming days? * * * Lunchtime read: ‘Princess Anne is a rock star’ Erin Doherty more than held her own against the likes of Olivia Colman in The Crown. Now the actor is the star of her own drama about a down-at-heel temp addicted to Instagram – a role that’s a bit too familiar, she says. Sport England’s Six Nations preparations are facing further significant disruption, with Courtney Lawes sidelined due to a head injury and Eddie Jones delaying a decision on who will replace the absent Owen Farrell as captain. The Australian Open has reversed its ban on “Where is Peng Shuai?” T-shirts following widespread backlash to the tournament’s claim they constituted “commercial or political” material, but banners will still be prohibited. Anthony Joshua has dismissed suggestions he signed a £15m deal to step aside from his rematch with Oleksandr Usyk. Dozens of fans have been injured and at least six are reported to be dead after a crush occurred outside Olembe Stadium in Yaoundé, the capital city of Cameroon, at the host nation’s Africa Cup of Nations match against Comoros. And Manchester United have agreed to loan Anthony Martial to Sevilla for the rest of the season, with the Spanish club paying a fee of about €6m (£5m) and covering the forward’s £150,000-a-week salary. Business For years company bosses have feared “doing a Ratner” when it comes to speaking their minds and have chosen empty platitudes instead. Now a group of Britain’s biggest business names have come together to urge their boardroom peers to abandon dull corporate-speak in the national interest. Read more here. To the markets, and the FTSE is expected to open higher. The pound is buying $1.35 and €1.19. The papers The prime minister’s birthday bash dominates front pages. The Guardian leads with “Johnson faces fresh outrage over birthday party in No 10” while the Times has “Johnson held lockdown birthday party at No 10”, and the Mirror goes with “PM’s No10 birthday bash in lockdown”. The Sun has “You can’t have your birthday cake … and eat it Boris”and the i newspaper leads with “Johnson’s problems grow with birthday party leak”. The Telegraph points to the gathering in its banner, “Now PM accused of No 10 lockdown birthday party” and splashes on Ukraine, with “Biden prepares troops to face Putin threat”. The Metro has “Nato Jets Ready To Scramble”. The Independent leads with “Islamophobia review ignored by ministers” and the Daily Mail has “PM’s Mr Brexit: Kill Off Tax Hike”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.Farm workers in Portugal appear to have been working illegally long hours picking berries destined for Marks &amp; Spencer, Tesco and Waitrose for less than the minimum wage, according to a Guardian investigation. Speaking anonymously, for fear of retribution from their employers, workers claimed the hours listed on their payslips were often fewer than the hours they had actually worked. The workers, mostly from south Asia, are the backbone of Portugal’s £200m berry industry, which employs upwards of 10,000 migrants. They have been drawn to the country by immigration laws that allow foreigners of all nationalities to gain legal status (and eventually citizenship) through full-time employment and the payment of taxes. While they dream of what some jokingly call the “raspberry passport”, many migrant workers fear changing jobs would nullify their residency application, despite what they describe as exploitative conditions. The lack of Portuguese workers in the berry fields is unsurprising, said Alberto Matos, who heads the regional office for migrant rights organisation Solidariedade Imigrante. “Nobody wants to be a slave in their own country.” In two visits between September and November 2021, the Guardian spoke with more than 40 men and women from India and Nepal, employed either directly or through intermediary agencies, on farms across Odemira, a region to the south of Portugal that bustles with south Asian restaurants and international money transfer services. Evidence seen by the Guardian suggests that workers who were either underpaid or worked more than the maximum overtime limit were employed by at least three farms which supply their berries to European supermarkets through the California-based berry seller Driscoll’s. The legal minimum wage for agricultural workers in the region in 2021 was €680 (£570) a month, but the Guardian has seen 14 payslips dated from May onwards which appear to show workers earning the general Portuguese national minimum wage for 2021 of €665 a month. Lusomorango, a Portuguese organisation of soft fruit producers, claimed there was the possibility that workers had since been repaid retroactively. “Before I came here, I thought Portugal is good work,” said a worker on one of the farms that paid below the legal minimum wage. “I work fast, and they don’t give me the money.” Every month, he sends whatever he can afford to his parents in India. “If I don’t [send money] they don’t eat. That is the problem for me.” The Guardian also saw seven payslips that appear to show people working beyond the maximum amount of overtime allowed on farms that supply Driscoll’s. One employee worked more than 300 extra hours a month, according to their payslips, far above the 60 hours a week allowed in Odemira by Portuguese law. Another worker on a farm that supplies Driscoll’s claimed his employers fired him in October last year after he refused to work when he had booked time off. Afterwards, he said he was denied a document that would have allowed him to claim unemployment benefits. Management at one of the farms that appeared to be underpaying workers said that their berries end up on shelves in Waitrose, M&amp;S and Tesco. Lusomorango said its berry growers, which include at least two of the farms named as underpaying, or where workers claimed to have done more overtime than allowed, supply UK supermarkets. Driscoll’s berries are marketed to UK supermarkets by Berry Gardens. The long hours and low wages seen in payslips would appear to breach the worker welfare standards of Tesco, M&amp;S and Waitrose, and their supplier Driscoll’s. Waitrose, Tesco and M&amp;S are members of the Ethical Trading Initiative (ETI), which stipulates that workers should be paid wages and benefits that meet national legal standards or industry benchmark standards, whichever is higher. The ETI base code also states that workers should not work more than 60 hours in any seven-day period, except where this is allowed by national law and collective agreements freely negotiated with workers’ organisations representing a significant portion of the workforce. Farmworkers interviewed by the Guardian also raised concerns about on-farm health and safety. Three supervisors, each responsible for managing teams of approximately 40–75 berry pickers on two farms, claimed they had not received first aid training and did not know how to use the first aid boxes on site. Evidence seen by the Guardian suggests the two farms supply their berries to European supermarkets through Driscoll’s. Two workers on farms supplying Driscoll’s claimed they required hospitalisation after severe allergic reactions to bee stings, yet both allegedly continue to work close to dozens of hives. One worker claimed that after informing his boss about his condition, he was expected to continue installing the farm’s bee hives despite the risk involved. “I am scared,” he said. To his knowledge, there was no allergy medication on site, just paracetamol and antiseptics. Berry Gardens, M&amp;S, Tesco and Waitrose said they were urgently investigating the allegations and would take any action required to ensure their standards on worker welfare were met. A spokesperson for Driscoll’s said its growers were required to abide by local laws and standards, including on wages, overtime and worksite health and safety. They said a “detailed set of requirements is included in the appendix of the grower’s contract, which specifically addresses the requirements for trained staff, first aid kits and other related topics”. “If any of our independent growers’ practices conflict with our standards or the local legal framework, Driscoll’s defines corrective actions that, in severe cases of noncompliance, can lead to a termination of the relationship with Driscoll’s.” The spokesperson said all its growers in Odemira would face a more thorough audit at the start of this year’s season. And that it was working with local and national authorities, government, immigration NGOs and grower associations to provide “safe communication channels to prevent and denounce abuse and harassment”. Lusomorango said it condemns any acts contrary to those defined in its code of conduct and the law and that it would continue, through its own and external audit mechanisms, to monitor the activity of its producers and would accompany this with training, awareness and information actions in order to prevent and correct any situations that did not in comply. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:With Joel Coen’s The Tragedy of Macbeth streaming and in cinemas, I am struck by the way this particular Shakespeare tragedy acts as a magnet for movie-makers. It has obvious attractions: it is short, atmospheric, confronts the nature of evil and is open to adaptation. Parallel versions range from Akira Kurosawa’s magnificent samurai epic Throne of Blood to a low-budget film noir from the 1950s, Joe Macbeth. But, after viewing four versions that stick closer to the original text, I am intrigued to see what they tell us about the filming of Shakespeare. Although it got rave reviews and has some original touches – such as opening with the silent burial of the Macbeths’ child – I was least impressed by Justin Kurzel’s 2015 film. There is no denying Kurzel’s visual sense: we get epic battles and seductive shots of mist-wreathed Scottish landscapes. But, put bluntly, the film seems terrified of Shakespeare’s language: Michael Fassbender and Marion Cotillard as the Macbeths speak in hushed, conversational tones and insert pauses between each line that would make Pinter blush. “If we should fail?” asks Macbeth of the projected murder of Duncan. Five seconds later Lady M finally gets round to replying: “We fail.” That same verbal hiatus appears in Roman Polanski’s 1971 film where Jon Finch and Francesca Annis again handle the language with kid gloves. There are several things to like about this movie: the mocking laughter with which Macbeth and Banquo greet the Witches’ predictions, the elevation of Ross into a slippery traitor, the final hint that the killing of kings is a cyclical process. But, with its real castles, its shots of horses galloping across beaches and its sense that the Macbeths are handsome ciphers, it feels more like a costume epic than an imaginative exploration of Shakespeare’s play. With Coen’s stunning new Macbeth, we are into a different world. Bruno Delbonnel’s black-and-white cinematography and Stefan Dechant’s design eschew realism: the Macbeths inhabit a brutalist castle whose long perspectives suggest a de Chirico painting. Visual and aural motifs, deriving from the text, include flights of ravens, echoing footsteps, the coalescence of dripping blood and water. Cinema is also used to supply information missing from the play: we see Brendan Gleeson’s sleeping Duncan wakened by the terrifying sight of his knife-wielding host. Above all, the film charts in detail the collapsing relationship between Denzel Washington’s Macbeth and Frances McDormand’s Lady Macbeth. A friend suggested their severance stems from the moment when Macbeth returns from the murder clutching the daggers. For me, the real revelation was McDormand’s look of total dismay when she passes Banquo’s hired killers on the stairs. Much as I admire the Coen film, my favourite movie Macbeth remains Orson Welles’s 1948 version. Filmed in 23 days on a budget of less than $200,000, it attracted much derision at the time for its papier-mache sets and palpable cheapness. Yet it stands up beautifully today for its visual bravura and clear vision of Shakespeare’s play. Welles had already staged what in 1937 was known as the voodoo Macbeth where the witches became practitioners of the dark arts. In the film he pits a palpably Christian world against one of pagan witchcraft. Welles creates the character of a Holy Father who leads Duncan’s troops in prayer (“Dost thou renounce Satan and all his works?”) and fills the screen with Celtic crosses and iconic religious images. But Welles also makes brilliant use of the cavernous quality of his studio set to suggest the labyrinthine nature of Macbeth’s mind. It is an astonishing film which clearly left its mark on the Coen movie. What they both prove is that in filming Macbeth – or possibly any Shakespeare play – the last thing you need is a doggedly realistic approach. The Tragedy of Macbeth is in cinemas now and on Apple TV+Adam Boulton has said Sky News faces “existential” questions about its future as it grapples with changing audience habits and the long-term funding necessary to keep an intensive 24-hour operation on the air. “I know there are executives at Sky that take the view there will only be one news channel in the UK in 10 years’ time and it probably won’t be Sky,” the former Sky News’ editor-at-large told the Guardian. “Any corporation is going to ask, ‘What’s the point of Sky News? Is everything it’s offering being done by others anyway so we might as well not bother?’ Colleagues at Sky News think about it all the time. It’s existential.” When Rupert Murdoch sold the wider Sky business to the US media conglomerate Comcast in 2018, the new owners promised to fund the prestigious but lossmaking news service for a decade. Boulton, who left the channel last month after serving as editor-at-large, said Comcast had honoured the deal but the channel’s long-term future was unclear: “People are wondering what’s going to happen when the guaranteed funding under the takeover deal expires … the problem with the takeover arrangement was it put Sky News in aspic with the same funding and the same management.” Boulton, 62, is one of a number of big-name television news presenters who left their jobs at the end of last year, along with the likes of Andrew Marr and Jon Snow. He said there was less appetite for an authoritative “grey haired man that told you the news” and that it was time for baby boomers to hand over to a younger and more diverse set of presenters. However, having spent more than a quarter of a century as Sky News’ political editor, he defended the idea of authoritative “gatekeepers” in the media who can explain and contextualise events in real time. He said: “This is where my disagreement with [Sky News boss] John Ryley is sharpest. I think there is a general questioning of the whole notion of authority … There’s a feeling, which I think is John’s position, which is ‘put stuff out digitally and leave the public to decide what they want’. “John’s answer to that would be if you put the information out there with lots of digital analysis you’re still doing the job. My argument is that you’re not doing it in real time. I think it’s beneficial for society that’s there’s analysis and invigilation – not just post-fact but while things are happening.” An estimated 8 million Britons a month watch Sky News but most only watch briefly, meaning typical viewing figures during the daytime are nearer 100,000 people. It has also built up a substantial audience online. Asked about concerns from some Sky News employees that the channel’s coverage of the climate crisis is tipping over into campaigning, he said it was “basically benevolent” but did raise issues. “We had our chief executive appearing on a platform at Cop26, which we were sponsoring at a corporate level with Boris Johnson and [Joe] Biden and [Narendra] Modi. That made me think, really, how free are we to comment and analyse what they’re saying?” Boulton said he remained a believer in TV news but that the format needed to change, with audiences for traditional news bulletins continuing to fall. He said: “Sky is a fantastic company and should have a very good future. I wouldn’t say anything negative about it but all of us just have to look at changing markets. “This is not a static industry and nothing is for ever. You’ve got to recognise that these are the inevitable changes thrown up by technology.”In the pitch-black depths of a winter night, we pull off a deserted lane in the north-west of the Lake District and swerve into a deeply muddy farm field, wheels spinning in the gloop. Stepping out into the blackness I kick myself for not having my headtorch to hand – only occasionally does drizzly light from the crescent moon break through to illuminate the outline of the Lorton Valley hills above. It is the first weekend of January, bitterly cold, and after many hours of driving cross country through snow, ice and hour-long traffic jams, my friend Charlie and I have followed a location code on the What3Words app to find an isolated shearing shed. Arriving here is just the start of the adventure. Our accommodation, the Hidden Hut, lies in a secret location somewhere up on the fell and we must find it with only an aerial photo marked with the route to guide us. Owners John and Hannah Graham usually lead guests, but it’s so late I’ve assured them we’re adventurous sorts, happy to find our way. Are we though? I’m soon re-evaluating when wet mud, heavy rucksacks and steep sections make tough work of the challenge. Pairs of red, robotic-looking sheep eyes reflect our torchlight, and as city folk unused to total darkness, our creeped-out minds fly immediately to Blair Witch. Yet with a few steers by text from John (there is phone signal) the cabin finally appears and inside it’s a different world – cosy, safe and stylish too. The Hidden Hut is the latest addition to Hinterlandes, the Grahams’ Lakes-based self-catering collection, launched in 2018, including a converted American school bus with hot tub and a family-sized black timber cabin. All are self-contained and transportable, moving from location to location every 28 days around local farmland that John leases from a friend who owns 200 acres. John also founded (and recently sold) the Lakes’ coolest cafe, Merienda, in Keswick, and has a 1958 Airstream, coastal yacht and more off-grid huts in the pipeline. In a land of a thousand cabins and glamping pods, it’s the element of adventure and challenge that makes the Hidden Hut something different. Sleeping in such an isolated hilltop position usually requires camping or roughing it in a bothy, but making the cabin small (7ft x 12ft) and movable gets around building regulations. “It’s probably one of the highest cabins in the UK, at about 1,000ft,” says John. “It’s not for everyone, but for someone who wants to get right into the depths of the countryside, it’s ideal.” It’s comfy too. The Scandi-ish interior is styled with a cutesy quilt, black wooden stools, industrial solar lighting and shelves of books and games. There’s a separate composting loo and marble shower and a wood-burning stove keeping it sauna-toasty. We warm a tagine we’ve brought on the hotplate and fall asleep top-to-tail in the double bed, nestling against a picture window. I wake with my face pressed against an incredible view, a restless expanse of hillocks and peaks rolling towards the coast. On a nearby hillock, two designer Hay chairs are arranged for admiring the raw splendour of the sheer-sided peaks around Loweswater and Buttermere to the south. Morning people would have risen before dawn to light the stove, but we are not them, so potter around the immediate private landscape waiting hours for the kettle to boil. It doesn’t. We wish we’d brought a camping gas stove for quick cuppas and resort to filling flasks at night for morning and infusing coffee bags in cold water. It’s our only complaint, though the “small hamper with wine and beer” containing two Tunnock’s wafers and one small can of sauvignon blanc is somewhat disappointing (the inclusion of oat milk saves it). But these are minor in the grand scheme of the surroundings. A short drive south past Loweswater and Crummock Water finds us in Buttermere, where imposing mist-wreathed giants – Kirk Fell, High Stile, Great Gable, Hay Stacks – that are immensely satisfying to scale are topped with snow. Given the scant daylight hours, we opt for a shorter run up Whiteless Pike, where strong winds nearly flatten us, finishing with an ecstatic sprint along the grassy lakeside ridge of Low Bank as the sun sets, gabbling idiotically about how we must become serious fell runners and should plan a hardcore expedition, perhaps to the Arctic. The overambition of this idea is pulled into focus when we’re hiking back up the vertical mud bath to the hut later that ink-dark night. The hut has an outdoor pizza oven, and provides dough ingredients and passata, so while climbing we plot the most efficient timing for the tasks ahead: firing the stove, making dough, breaking firewood into tiny pieces, lighting the oven, brewing coffee for tomorrow. The route is wetter and muddier, the wind insane, but finally, sweatily, we reach the hut. It starts to rain. And then it dawns on me. The key. We’ve left the goddamn key in the car. Such absentmindedness would be no big deal elsewhere; here it means an hour and a half’s hike back down and up again. Somehow, we don’t mind. We take beer and embrace the thrill of being outside on a wild winter night, and our own form of shambolic adventuring. At 1am, after burning through an entire box of matches, succeeding in lighting the oven only by using an emergency foil blanket as a windshield, we sit on the low tree trunk that wraps around the outdoor table like a bench, eating our delicious pizza (minus spinach, which blew away). Maybe we can hack the Arctic after all. The next day we seem to only have time for a brief, invigorating swim in freezing Crummock Water (something I agree to reluctantly, letting the Guardian side down by wearing a thick wetsuit), and a long warm-up in Buttermere’s Croft House Farm Cafe, before night falls again. But the winter darkness feels joyful now. We hike an hour down the road with head torches to Loweswater’s Kirkstile Inn, the best of Lake District pubs (an alternative route goes over the fell), for a superb dinner of Loweswater Gold tempura monkfish and nightcaps of salted caramel vodka from the brilliant Lakes Distillery. No cars pass by and the sky is extraordinarily clear, the stars brighter and more abundant than I’ve seen them in years. Blair Witch doesn’t cross my mind and the robo-sheep even look friendly. Our intention to go fell-running at dawn before leaving is reneged upon, but we are armed with cold coffee and feel shaken awake by this break, uplifted and fortified, with new goals and positivity. The cabin has been perfect for half-baked adventurers like us, the right mix of challenge and comfort. Making such a trip at the very start of January is a revelation. Christmas and New Year are left for dust and when I get home, it already feels like spring. Gemma Bowes was a guest of Canopy and Stars. A stay in the Hinterlandes Hidden Hut costs from £190 per night sleeping two; Hinterlandes Cabin costs from £155 per night for two adults, two children; the school bus costs from £145 per night sleeping twoThere’s a book by Nassim Nicholas Taleb called Skin in the Game. It’s wrong about many things, featuring an account of Prince Andrew’s place in UK culture that was hilariously misjudged even before we realised what his place truly was, but has a theory about families and their eating habits that used to sound right. When one person restricts their diet – goes vegan or keto or whatever – the whole unit defaults to that restriction. It’s just easier, when three people will eat anything, to build your menu around the one person who will only eat some things. The parable was supposed to illustrate a broader point, that the intolerant minority will always come to triumph over the more tolerant majority. Let’s not dwell on his mental leap, because one of my kids just went vegetarian and I now know that even the starting block is untrue. For about a fortnight, we all went veggie and nobody noticed. It’s not as if we were living a traditional, Harvester-buffet, meat-centrepiece, side-salad life before all this. I passed off black beans as a luxury food item, squash lasagne as classic Italian cuisine. Besides, meat substitutes have moved on a lot, and now they can make pretty much anything taste like pork so long as it has first been rolled into a ball. Then came a fateful observation from one of the carnivores: “We haven’t had meat for a while.” After that, it became a relentless clash of pre-eminence, in the classic sibling mould. Every domestic argument from the day child two is born until the day child one leaves home amounts to this: in whose interests has this decision been made? If in theirs, then by definition, not in mine. We forged on for a couple of weeks, making vegetarian food with frankfurters on the side, but soon the incredibly not-silent majority had had enough of sausages. It’s got to the point where they want to know why the potatoes aren’t cooked in duck fat, and who left the ham out of their smoothie. I didn’t think I could ever be reconciled to a meatless future, where all flesh was synthetic, and actual animals only existed for petting and touristic purposes. After a couple of months of bickering, I now honestly can’t wait. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistWe have just moved into a house in Woodford Green on the edge of London but BT is unable to offer us broadband. The previous occupant had it, and as soon as I had a moving date I asked BT to switch us. However, it seems that this was not processed properly and the connection has been given to someone else in the road. Incredibly, BT has told me that the local fibre cabinet is full, and there is no longer an old-style copper line connection. We need wifi to work at home and can’t believe this is happening in 2022. PC, Woodford Green This unusual case has been something of a trial to resolve. You’d have thought that BT would have taken a keen interest in getting you connected given that it lost your original order, but it has been anything but. Following my call to Openreach, which manages the overall network, an engineer was dispatched to install one of the old copper wires which will deliver you a basic broadband service. You are just waiting for a replacement router. I fear we will see more of these cases as landlines are withdrawn over the next two years. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsApple’s AirPods need no introduction due to their ubiquity on the street, but is the third generation of the most popular wireless earbud actually an improvement? The new earbuds have been redesigned to resemble the Pro models with shorter stalks and a better fit. They don’t block your ear canal, like the Pros though, just rest in place with all the benefits and disadvantages of an open fit, including an airy feel and complete lack of isolation from the outside world. Costing £169 ($179/A$279), they are being sold alongside the older 2nd-gen versions, now reduced to £119, and the £239 AirPods Pro. They stay in place even when jumping around or violently shaking my head, and are fairly comfortable for upwards of 90 minutes at a time. But as anyone who has tried the previous versions only to have them immediately fall out will tell you, your mileage may vary as each ear is unique. The shorter stalks have the same pressure-sensitive strip on them as the AirPods Pro. Squeeze it once, twice or thrice to pause the music or skip track, or hold to access Siri on an iPhone. Take one out and the music pauses and resumes when you put it back in your ear. Specifications Connectivity: Bluetooth 5.0, SBC, AAC, H1 chip Battery life: six hours playback (30 hours with case) Water resistance: IPX4 (splash resistant) Earbud dimensions: 30.8 x 18.3 x 19.2mm Earbud weight: 4.28g each Charging case dimensions: 46.4 x 54.4 x 21.4mm Charging case weight: 37.9g Case charging: Lightning, Qi wireless (MagSafe) Features and battery life The charging case is slightly larger than that of the previous generation, but smaller than the AirPods Pro and is one of the smallest and most-pocketable of all true wireless earbuds. The battery lasted over seven hours in testing for music. And four for calls. A fully charged case can recharge the earbuds up to four times. A five-minute quick charge of the earbuds gives up to one hour of playback. The new AirPods have the same H1 chip and advanced features as other Apple headphones. They instantly pair with an iPhone or iPad, share the audio of one device to two sets of AirPods and automatically switch connection between Apple devices. The latter feature is magic when it works, but can easily get confused requiring manual switching. They are standard Bluetooth 5.0 earbuds, though, so can be used with most non-Apple devices such as Android phones and Windows PCs, but without the long squeeze, pause-on-remove and advanced features. Improved sound The AirPods sound surprisingly good for non-isolating earbuds – a step up over their predecessors – and are able to produce more bass for a more rounded sound despite their open fit. They have an easy-listening sound with slightly accentuated treble. They handle complex tracks well but lack some of the detail and nuance really good earphones can produce. They can’t manage deep, thumping bass, making some tracks sound a bit thin, too. Their biggest issue is background noise. They can’t block anything so you can forget trying to listen to tracks on the London Tube or block out your co-workers in an office. That does mean you’re more aware of your surroundings, however. New for the AirPods is the support for virtual surround sound with Apple devices called “spatial audio”, which works for movies and music with Dolby sound tracks. It tracks the movement of your head and adjusts the sound so that it is always centred on the screen in front of you. Turn your head to the left and it will still sound as if the voices are coming from the screen, now predominantly into your right ear. It’s all very clever. Sustainability Apple does not provide an expected lifespan for the batteries. Those in similar devices typically last at least 500 full charge cycles while maintaining at least 80% of their original capacity. A battery service costs from £45. The earbuds are not repairable, scoring a zero out of 10 on iFixit’s repairability scale, but Apple offers replacements costing £65 per earbud. The AirPods and case are made from recycled rare earth elements, tin and aluminium, but Apple does not publish environmental impact reports for accessories such as headphones. The company offers trade-in and free recycling schemes, including for non-Apple products. Price The third-generation AirPods cost £169 ($179/A$279). For comparison, the AirPods Pro cost £239, the Beats Studio Buds cost £130, the Google Pixel Buds A-Series cost £100, the Microsoft Surface Earbuds cost £199 and the Samsung Galaxy Buds 2 cost £99. Verdict The AirPods 3 are a solid revamp of one of the most popular sets of true wireless earbuds, adopting a better design, improved sound, longer battery life and more advanced features such as spatial audio. Their open-air fit is unrivalled in the industry and certainly has some advantages. But the complete lack of noise isolation makes them hard to use in loud environments and stops them sounding as good as rivals with silicone earbud tips. They work really well with an iPhone and other Apple gear, but are more limited with Android and Windows devices, so I would only recommend them if you use at least one compatible Apple gadget. For the money you can certainly buy better-sounding earbuds, but none that have the open fit of the AirPods 3. If you don’t like silicone tips in your ear, these are for you. They are essentially unrepairable, however, making battery replacement improbable and ultimately making them disposable, losing a star. Pros: open fit, solid sound, decent battery, great case, good squeeze playback controls, great connectivity, special features with Apple devices including spatial audio, decent call quality. Cons: no sound isolation at all, no noise cancelling, lack features when connected to Android or Windows, no on-board volume control, cannot be repaired, expensive. Other reviews AirPods Pro review: a touch of Apple magic Beats Studio Buds review: Apple’s Android-loving noise-cancelling earbuds Surface Earbuds review: Microsoft’s AirPods rivals Samsung Galaxy Buds Live review: novel bean-shaped AirPod rivals Pixel Buds A-Series review: Google’s cheaper but good earbudsCelebrity chef Andi Oliver’s east London restaurant business has admitted taking weeks to hand over at least £6,000 in tips after staff say they downed tools in a dispute over pay. Up to 20 staff at Wadadli Kitchen and Wadadli Roadside in Hackney, both of which are currently closed, said they had received only a portion of the payment owed after writing to Oliver’s business partner, Garfield Hackett, in November saying they were going on strike. They said at the time: “We ask for nothing more in return than what we are rightfully owed.” They estimate they were owed up to £9,000. The restaurant, co-founded by Oliver, who is the host on the BBC’s Great British Menu, charged customers for service on top of their bill and customers were also able to add tips. At present, there is no legal requirement to distribute such non-cash tips or service charges unless a worker’s contract states they will be distributed as part of their remuneration. However, the government has pledged to ban restaurants from keeping the service charge after numerous cases of staff losing out. Wadadli Kitchen admitted it had been slow to pay the service charge. It said the restaurant had closed after the end of the season, and because of government measures after a planned winter barbecue in late November rather than because of any strike. It said that two members of staff continued to work for the business and two had been employed at some point in recent weeks. It said £6,000 was owed and half of this had been paid in October and the other half in January. It said staff had been contacted with an explanation in December. The December letter to workers said management would get a third of the service charge with 70% of the rest going to waiting staff and 30% to the kitchen team. But one worker said the team had expected the service charge to be evenly split between kitchen and front of house staff and “there are still part-time team members who haven’t seen a penny”. The worker said the team had expected the restaurant to be open for at least a year. Hackett said: “Much like all other hospitality businesses, we’ve had a really hard time in the pandemic and were hoping that Christmas would help us get back on a solid footing. “Sadly, with the surge of Omicron this was not to be. Within a matter of days, 85% of our Christmas bookings at our event space were cancelled, which in turn decimated our already stretched cash flow. “All our staff, with the exception of three who did not invoice on time for the pay schedule, have been paid in full and we have agreed payment plans with our suppliers, but each one is happy with the arrangement and will be paid in full. We are grateful to them for understanding.” He said payment had been delayed by waiting for government Covid support grants and the company had been forced to secure a short-term loan to ensure it could make the payments this month. “We are embarrassed that we were not able to pay the entirety of the service charge shares immediately at the end of the pop-up run, as we are aware our staff rely on these payments. “We know this has been a really tough time for everyone and we are deeply saddened by letting our staff down. We have poured our heart and soul into last year’s Wadadli Kitchen pop-up restaurant.”Pressed to name the most influential novel of the past decade, you could do worse than Rachel Cusk’s Outline, which laid a blueprint for fashionably decluttered fiction about barely-there narrators wafting through random encounters in unspecified European cities. Jhumpa Lahiri (Whereabouts) and Katie Kitamura (Intimacies) have well-thumbed copies, at a guess, and it seems a safe bet that the Turkish-born Ayşegül Savaş, who writes in (American) English, also had one close at hand while composing this oddly enthralling tale about a postgrad student bearing witness to an artist’s marital breakdown. Its unnamed protagonist comes to an unnamed city to spend a year viewing gothic nude sculptures as research for a thesis on medieval views of nakedness. She’s renting a flat from Pascal, an academic who lives in a nearby town with his wife, Agnes, a middle-aged painter. A couple of months into the narrator’s tenancy, Agnes turns up to join her in the flat, in a supposedly brief return to the city to plan a new exhibition of work inspired (coincidentally) by local sculpture. A peculiar bond ensues over kitchen-table coffee breaks as the narrator, craving approval from her magnetically elegant landlady, listens attentively to Agnes narrate at length her bitter experiences as a daughter, artist, wife and mother of two. By contrast, we learn next to nothing of the narrator, as Agnes’s tale unspools in piecemeal vignettes. When Agnes first brought Pascal home to her parents, he cut the visit short to write a paper for a symposium; when, after the birth of her first child, Agnes became friends with another new mother, Pascal hired an “extraordinarily beautiful” au pair to save her needing company. If the reader twigs more or less right away that Pascal is something of a wrong ’un, Savaş deftly draws a veil over the exact shape of his iniquity until a surprisingly tense climax that sees him deliver his side of the story. For a novel in which, for the most part, very little happens, Savaş maintains suspense impressively via, say, ominously blank descriptions of sunlight playing on the flat’s fixtures and fittings. Rare lapses come when she seems to fret that the action, or lack of it, can’t hold our attention. When Agnes says she’ll stay longer in the flat, the narrator’s reply closes the segment with unnecessary force: “I didn’t mind, I said. In fact, I was glad to hear it, even though I did wonder what it was that kept her away from her marriage.” It helps that Savaş is happy to acknowledge the in-built contrivance of the book’s delivery mechanism, or what the faceless protagonist calls “the monologue unravelling daily, without cease”. “I’m going on and on,” Agnes admits; the narrator, for her part, tells us she doesn’t know how to “get up and leave”. She’s essentially an old-style frame narrator lent a sliver of psychological intrigue by her situation’s creeping strangeness; eventually, the book plays out as a kind of year-abroad tale in which her education isn’t about her studies so much as Agnes’s painful dispatch from the battle lines of later life. At one point, Agnes explains that she set herself “the challenge of painting only in white”. By telling its story at a deliberately chilly remove, White on White rises to a similar task, even if its stylish austerity can’t fully shake the sense that it also represents a canny dodge of novel-writing’s more basic grunt work. • White on White by Ayşegül Savaş is published by Harvill Secker (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyUntil recently, Ron M would take illicit drugs in what space he could find: public restrooms, subway alleyways or just in the street. He often used alone; the possibility of a fatal overdose was high. That’s why the East Harlem overdose prevention center has been such a blessing to him. “It’s saved many lives since it’s been here,” said Ron, 31. “It keeps us from having to get high in bad places.” Ron, whose last name has been withheld for privacy, has used heroin for years, but the New York opening of the nation’s first two sanctioned overdose prevention centers (OPCs) on 30 November has significantly increased his chances of survival. The center provides those who use substances with a safe and clean space to do so, and with help available in case of an overdose, which has already helped avert many deaths. “This place is a blessing – and if there were more, it would save so many lives,” Ron said. The stress, anxiety and isolation of the Covid-19 pandemic, combined with widespread contamination in the illicit drug market from the synthetic opioid fentanyl, has worsened America’s overdose epidemic. More than 100,000 Americans died of an accidental overdose in the year ending April 2021, a sharp increase compared with the previous year. The largest increase was among Black men. For many people struggling with problematic substance use, traditional methods of abstinence-based help – such as month-long rehab stays, or 12-step meetings such as Narcotics Anonymous – have failed to work. Such interventions can even increase the chances of a fatal overdose if a patient relapses. “In so many instances, it doesn’t meet people where they’re at,” said Melissa Moore, director of civil systems reform at Drug Policy Alliance. “It doesn’t match the reality of what that person’s going to be able to navigate.” Textbook tactics left over from the “war on drugs” have also failed, leaving thousands struggling with addiction entangled in the legal system and still unable to get help. In the wake of continual failures to address the surge of overdose deaths, experts across the country have backed the creation of OPCs that allow participants to use illicit drugs in safe environments under direct supervision. The centers challenge long-accepted beliefs that addiction can be solved only through abstinence, and connect clients with other services such as medical care and housing. “The people here, whatever they do in our organization, are helping save someone’s life,” said Sam Rivera, executive director of OnPoint NYC, the non-profit behind the city’s two new OPCs, one in East Harlem and the other in Washington Heights. OnPoint NYC was formed in a merger of the New York Harm Reduction Educators and Washington Heights Corner Project, groups that have been operating for decades. “We’ve been here,” said Rivera of their years of community engagement. “All we did to our program is improve it.” Since the centers opened, over 100 overdoses have been reversed without medical attention; an ambulance was requested once, for a participant with additional medical complications. No one has died at either center, nor at any of the more than 120 OPCs operating in other countries. Rivera and his colleague Kailin See, the senior director of programs for OnPoint NYC, have both been instrumental in creating the OPCs, and have a long history in harm reduction: Rivera started in HIV advocacy and syringe exchange, while See worked in North America’s first legal OPC, Insite, in Vancouver, Canada. The pair felt that although increasingly popular harm reduction interventions – such as giving substance users clean syringes and providing naloxone, the opioid reversal medication – are necessary, many people who struggle with substance use have remained vulnerable because they lack a place to safely use. Overdose interventionalists would often have to race to find someone who had overdosed, often on foot or by bicycle. Often they would arrive too late. Now, OnPoint NYC organizers say the OPCs’ safe space for drug use has made reversing overdoses quicker, so much so that typically supplemental oxygen or small amounts of naloxone are the only interventions needed. It has also allowed staff to connect participants with other resources. “You don’t have to be alone in an alleyway, and you don’t have to be approached from a law enforcement point of view. It’s about keeping that person safe,” said Floyd Mitchell, the reduction assistance manager at the Alliance of Positive Change, Lower East Side Harm Reduction Center. Anyone can walk into the OPC, check in anonymously, and fill out a form to specify what drug they will be using, where they would use if the OPC was unavailable and other standard questions. The overdose prevention room (OPR) has a booth equipped with a sterile counter and a mirror, allowing for participants to see behind them more easily and interventionists to spot someone in need of assistance, as well as sterile needles, cotton gauze and other tools. The rooms have timers so staff can assist if an overdose occurs. The OPCs also act as a hub for other necessary services: for example, the East Harlem location hosts a holistic center with lounge chairs, aromatherapy and other services. Doctors and nurses are on site to address any medical problems. There are group discussion sessions, laundry facilities and even showers. “[The goal is] to invite people in who are really marginalized, deal with the immediate crisis need of a lack of safety and the possibility of a fatal overdose, and stabilize and engage in care. And that’s happening,” said See. She added that the OPCs have encouraged addiction specialists, such as treatment and detox providers, to approach their work differently. She recalls the time a treatment director sat for two hours with a woman who was using in the OPR booths but was hesitant about a previously agreed-upon treatment; the director talked with her until she was ready to attend. “As [the director] left, he said, ‘You changed the way you’re working. We have to change the way we work, too,’” said See. Despite the successful implementation of OPCs in New York, other attempts to create similar solutions have been blocked nationwide. A supervised safe injection site in Philadelphia was cancelled by the Trump administration’s justice department in 2019; attempts in Chicago, San Francisco and other cities have stalled. The Biden administration has withheld explicit endorsement for OPCs. But, although New York’s OPCs have faced some pushback from politicians and community groups who worry they could increase drug use in already marginalized communities, Rivera and See argue the centers provide a direct response to persistent community complaints about discarded syringes, public intoxication and other drug-related concerns. “Any organization that’s courageous enough to open an OPC is saving the community by bringing people in,” said Rivera. “It’s supporting your request, cleaning your neighborhood, by bringing people indoors to a safe environment. “You might not know this was the solution you’re asking for. But this is part of the solution you’re asking for,” said See. Above all, they say, people have to see it for themselves. “When people get over the noise and the stuff in their own heads and just, in a sense, simplify it, they’re really able to see the impact,” said Rivera.It’s a little more than 15 years since John Cameron Mitchell’s Shortbus exploded – interpret that verb as lewdly as you like – into cinemas, and in a sense, it feels a whole lot longer. Which is not to say that Mitchell’s brazenly queer, joyously sex-positive comedy, about a female sex therapist pursuing the orgasm she’s never experienced at New York’s raunchiest underground club, is outdated. Rewatched today, as it enjoys a rerelease in US cinemas, it veritably hums with erotic vigour and philosophical playfulness, a presciently liberated film with its eye on the future of sexual connection, in all its poly, nonbinary possibilities. It’s just that it’s hard to imagine film-making this proudly and playfully carnal coming out of the American indie scene now: we’re living through a remarkably chaste period of cinema, perhaps marked by post-MeToo caution and responsibility, as film-makers reconsider the boundary between exuberance and exploitation. With its copious unsimulated sex scenes, Shortbus certainly raised some eyebrows in 2006 – but it could well be a lightning rod today, throwing a wrench into debates over who is allowed to depict what on screen. “It’s interesting seeing young people see it now,” Mitchell says over the phone from Los Angeles. “Because they’re like, ‘Wow, is that what it was like?’ There’s been a certain sex panic in the air in the last few years amongst young people, and not just because of Covid. I think the digital culture has kind of kept people from interacting, and you get a lot of young people having less and less sex these days. Whereas it was getting to be more and more after the Aids drugs came in – it started coming back to 70s levels – but now it’s gone down. They call it the Great Sex Recession.” Where Mitchell – then bullish after the unlikely success of his jubilant genderqueer musical Hedwig and the Angry Inch – intended for Shortbus to reclaim the language of pornography for mainstream art film, he feels the chasm between those two branches of film-making has only grown wider in the last two decades. “The film is coming out again now at a time when sex has largely been confined to porn: even nudity has been removed from films and television shows these days. There’s no sex, and certainly no real sex. So in a weird way, porn won.” He pauses, then hastily clarifies his stance. “And porn is great if it’s good, of course. But it doesn’t really show a lot of the other dimensions of life that sex is connected to.” Shortbus, meanwhile, still feels radical its depiction of sex on a spectrum from banality to euphoria, sometimes beautiful and often hilarious. You certainly can’t turn to porn for a scene of one gorgeous, hard-bodied gay man singing The Star-Spangled Banner into the arsehole of another: Mitchell’s film took that peculiar gap and ran with it. His film was a riposte not just to porn, moreover, but the sterner aesthetic of sex in the arthouse. “There was a lot of experimentation at that time, at least in independent film, with sex in cinema,” he says, citing the work of such film-makers as Michael Winterbottom, Patrice Chereau, Carlos Reygadas and Catherine Breillat. “All those people were pushing it, but I found a lot of the sex was kind of grim, you know – certainly valid in some cases, but drained of humor. So I wanted to kind of attach it to my punky New York chosen-family aesthetic.” The raucous underground sex club in Shortbus was inspired by a friend’s salon that combined 16mm film screening, vegan food and group sex. “I was fascinated by the equation of art, food, drink and sex as the important things in life. And that’s all gone. Even the place where we shot it, which was a weird collective where parties like that happened and bands like Le Tigre got started, that’s gone. The people are still there, but the scene has been decimated by digital, by the apps, certainly by Covid. I didn’t expect the film to be a time capsule.” With hindsight, Mitchell sees films like Shortbus and Tarnation – the raw, ragged documentary self-portrait by the queer artist Jonathan Caouette, who cameos in Shortbus – as beneficiaries of a last gasp of punk sensibility in American film. “I had thought that Jonathan’s film would launch a million David Lynches on YouTube,” he says, “but narrative film-making has kind of faded out in favour of people even just making a web series. ‘Art for art’s sake’ is no longer a term that’s used by young people; selling out is an incomprehensible term to them. Because they’re just trying to get their clicks and create their brand, even if they’re 10 years old.” He laughs. “Youth used to be the golden moment when you were untouchable and you could try anything and you wanted to change things and you weren’t worried about commercial considerations. But social media has changed that.” All of which isn’t to say that Shortbus was a walk in the park to make, even in the 2000s. Mitchell explains that it took nearly three years to finance the film after it was cast: the independent golden age of the 1990s was already over. “Literally the year after we came out, the financial collapse happened,” he sighs. “I think of our party at Cannes, after we premiered in the Palais at midnight and Francis Ford Coppola there and we had a concert on the beach: it was expensive and it was fun and it was the end of an era. People stopped going to films, especially small films. And then our distributor [ThinkFilm] went bankrupt, which is why Shortbus has been out of print for so long.” Not inclined to wallow in the past, however, Mitchell has adapted to changing times. His next film after Shortbus was the tender, solemn Nicole Kidman grief drama Rabbit Hole, adapted from David Lindsay-Abaire’s Pulitzer-winning play: a director-for-hire gig, and one far outside his experimental queer wheelhouse, but one he remains proud of. “Would it be a little more adventurous if it was my own film?” he asks, before answering himself. “Well, yeah. But I was very happy with the result.” He and Kidman got on so well they collaborated again on 2017’s less well-received How to Talk to Girls at Parties – his last film to date, and not one he’s in a hurry to follow up. “In the present environment, I don’t know whether small films are really viable right now. Do I want to chase financing for five years for something that no one will see? I’m not sure,” he says. “As opposed to other forms which I’ve always been interested in: TV series, podcasts, albums, musical theater piece. I’m thinking about a novel now, and I’m doing more acting. I’m happy to diversify my portfolio.” Sure enough, Mitchell has been busy: in recent years, he has released his musical Anthem: Homunculus as an all-star podcast series, released a couple of concept albums for charity, popped up on TV in series such as Shrill and The Good Fight, and will shortly be seen as Joe Exotic in Joe vs Carole, Peacock’s dramatic adaptation of the documentary phenomenon Tiger King. Notwithstanding the challenges faced in film specifically, it is, he says, a good time to be an out queer artist in the mainstream – though even he has found latter-day representation politics thorny to navigate. He cites a recent controversy over a production of Hedwig and the Angry Inch in Australia, where protests were made against the casting of a cisgender queer actor in the title role, as an example of counter-productive conscientiousness. “First of all, Hedwig is forced into an operation, without agency, so it’s not exactly the trans story that some people think it is,” he says. “But we’re in a supercharged moment where we’re trying to correct the world very quickly, and the world doesn’t always take to that, and the intentions are good but sometimes the execution is ham-handed. And then Trump and Boris laugh from the top, because we’re doing their work for them.” “I get annoyed when people say you can’t write something that you don’t know, that you must stay in your lane, that it’s not your story to tell,” he continues. “Does that mean I can’t play Hedwig? I haven’t experienced the events of their life, but I certainly have experienced many of their feelings. That’s why I wrote it. So many people who have played that role have discovered a lot about themselves, including their own nonbinary identity. People are all on a journey.” Returning to Shortbus, he wonders if he’d get flak today for centering the story on an Asian woman trying to have an orgasm. “Is that my story to tell? Yeah, I would argue that metaphorically and emotionally, it is, and so would the actress. But other people would prefer that we only have autobiographies out there. It was a collaborative film: each actor brought elements of their life to it, and that was the joy of it. So I don’t like rules that are not contextual. I don’t like replacing one set of authorities with another.” Shortbus, certainly, is not a film that bows to any authority, though it advocates strength in community more than rebellious individualism. Mitchell stands by that philosophy. “Identity politics is about fixing unfairness,” he says. “But do you do it in a dictatorial way or do you try to do it in a consensus way? That’s the big question.” Shortbus will be rereleased in US cinemas on 26 JanuaryWith that wild exchange, we will wrap up the blog for the evening. Here were today’s major developments, on the two year anniversary (if you could call it that?) of Australia’s first case of Covid-19: Australians in Ukraine are being urged to leave immediately as the threat of Russian military action against the country increases. Defence minister, Peter Dutton, warned Russia against advancement but said Australia would not join the conflict if it ensued. Speaking of Dutton, he confirmed today there is a Covid outbreak on the HMAS Adelaide, bound for Tonga. 23 cases have so far been detected. A day out from Australia Day, the Australian federal government has completed a deal to take ownership of the Aboriginal flag copyright, enabling its free use. Anthony Albanese announced Labor’s election priorities at today’s National Press Club address, including a significant funding injection into wellbeing in schools. NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, is promising businesses reeling from the effects of the Omicron wave of Covid-19 will get fresh support within a week. It comes as the state recorded 29 Covid deaths and 18,512 new cases, with Covid restrictions to continue for another month to deal with the resumption of elective surgery and schools. Victoria recorded 29 Covid deaths and 14,836 new cases, while Tasmania reported its third Covid-19 death. Queensland reported 11 deaths and 9,546 new cases, while the ACT recorded another Covid death and 904 new cases. SA recorded five deaths, and WA recorded 15 cases including mystery cases. Police have confirmed that nine-year-old Charlise Mutten died from a gunshot wound. Justin Stein, 32, has been charged with her murder. Perhaps the biggest news of the day, though, was this extremely cringe image of Grace Tame alongside prime minister Scott Morrison today. A picture tells a thousand words. The red carpet has been well and truly rolled out ahead of tonight’s ceremony. “I want to win this fucking thing, to be honest,” says Kyrgios. “Sink piss and come here [Kia Arena],” adds Kokkinakis. An Australian teenager is among dozens of people who could be harmed as Islamic State militants attempt to storm a prison in Syria. Guardian Australia has confirmed the 17-year-old, who was originally from Sydney, has sent voice recordings claiming he has been injured in the fighting. The teenager was taken to the Middle East when he was a boy after his family joined IS. Like many Australian men, women and children, he has been detained since the fall of IS in March, 2019. The teenager says in the recordings that he has suffered injuries to his head and a hand, and that friends have been killed. The acting chief executive of Save the Children Australia, Mat Tinkler, said: Save the Children is extremely concerned for the safety of children in north east Syria where fighting is ongoing. We are particularly concerned for an Australian boy we know is being held in Guweiran prison. We are distressed to hear reports that children are being used effectively as human shields at Guweiran prison. Save the Children warned Australian officials of the significant risks to Australian children in north east Syria, including this boy. Will it take the death of an Australian child to compel the Australian government to act? The only way the Australian government can guarantee their safety is to bring these innocent children to Australia immediately. If you missed it, tennis champion Dylan Alcott has had quite a busy week. He is not only up for Australian of the Year, but into his last ever Australian Open final as well. Following opposition leader Anthony Albanese’s Press Club address, Save the Children has welcomed Labor’s commitment of more than $400m in funding towards school students’ wellbeing. Executive director of Australian services, Matt Gardiner, said the past two years had placed “intense pressure” on children’s mental health, particularly for disadvantaged students: We cannot afford for students to disengage further from school. This would create disastrous ripple effects for children, communities and the economy well into the future. With hard-working teachers already overburdened, we need specialist mental health care to be bolstered in all schools. Along with the additional school counsellors and psychologists promised today, Save the Children encourages all major parties to invest in support which gives children practical skills to cope and build resilience to disasters. Save the Children is encouraged that both the government and the opposition have announced measures to address the mental health needs of children, but there is an urgent need for a comprehensive national plan for children’s Covid recovery. We urge governments at every level to fast-track their plans to prevent lasting effects on our children arising from the pandemic and their future prosperity. A major disability provider has Covid-positive workers supporting Covid-positive group home residents in regional Victoria, a union has reported. The Health and Community Services Union says the local public health unit granted three workers an exemption to continue working while Covid-positive, citing “critical workforce shortages”. Current orders only allow for an exemption to be granted to asymptomatic close contacts who have tested negative for Covid in Victoria. There is no information from the Victorian government or Department of Health on working while infectious after a positive Covid test. Acting state secretary, Kate Marshall, said: The union is strongly concerned about the safety of both our members and the vulnerable people they support. We are appalled that we have not been consulted on this and that no up-to-date Covid plan has been discussed with us. Yet again, disability has been left behind, and treated inconsistently in comparison with other health services. HACSU members and disability support workers have found themselves in incredibly challenging circumstances and should be commended for continuing to provide essential supports to clients throughout the pandemic. Over in Queensland, the search for police dog Quizz has been scaled back in the area where he was separated from his handler. A reward will still be considered for anyone who has information that assists in locating PD Quizz. He is described as a three-year-old Sabel German shepherd with a black and tan hide, wearing a tracking harness and long lead. He went missing after his lead slipped through the hands of senior constable Daniel McGreevy while tracking an offender through dense bushland off Greenwood Village Road at Redbank Plains several weeks ago. As a lab owner, this story has caused me genuine distress. Wherever he is, I hope he is happy. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, has backed the right of fans at the Australian Open to wear shirts expressing concerns about the fate of Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai, saying freedom of speech should be defended. My colleague, Emma Kemp, reported earlier today that the Australian Open had reversed its ban on “Where is Peng Shuai?” T-shirts, after a backlash against the tournament’s claim they constituted “commercial or political” material. However, banners will still be prohibited. Payne waded into the issue at a doorstop press conference in Newcastle today. Asked for her view on Tennis Australia’s handling of the matter, Payne said she understood there were “wide international concerns” about Peng’s situation. The foreign minister praised “her strength” in accusing a senior Chinese official of sexual assault in early November. I respect her strength in making those disclosures and I would hope that it is handled appropriately by the Chinese authorities. For Australians who wish to message their support for her, as long as it is done in an appropriate way that does not disturb the courts themselves, then I can understand why they would be perturbed if they were prevented – in a country that values freedom of speech, freedom of expression – if they were prevented from wearing, for example, in this case, T‑shirts seeking to support her position. Back in November, the Australian government called on Chinese authorities to answer serious concerns about Peng’s welfare “with transparency and accountability”. Back in the world of politics, Labor frontbencher Katy Gallagher is appearing on ABC News, discussing the revelation that the minister for aged care, Richard Colbeck, accepted sponsored hospitality to watch three days of the Ashes cricket test in Hobart on the same day he declined to appear at the Covid-19 committee. Gallagher: We’ve tried to organise a hearing since about 7 January in light of the fact that ... we were having widespread problems with the government’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic. So RATs, aged care, the outbreak itself, testing more broadly. So we’re trying to organise a hearing and ... I’ve tried to work with ministers and officials to find a suitable time, acknowledging that their attention needs to be on the pandemic first ... the response he [Colbeck] gave me was he was working hard on the response and he didn’t want to divert officials. We took him at his word. We now find out he was at the cricket. I don’t think he was being straight with me. Reporter: Do you regard that as a bald-faced lie? Gallagher: I haven’t heard his response ... but all we can say is he’s gone to the Senate and said to the Senate, I was at the cricket for three days for sponsored hospitality. He’s told us he was at the cricket. He didn’t tell us that in the letter. He said he was essentially too busy, couldn’t attend and I took him at his word and tried to work with him to have another hearing. The Senate’s one thing. The broader issue is aged care is in crisis ... it sends a very worrying message about priorities and commitment of this minister. Speaking of boisterous tennis crowds, here is the moment Nick Kyrgios accidentally slammed a tennis ball moving at 120km an hour into a little boy’s stomach, then smoothed things over by gifting him a racquet. If you haven’t caught this story from Paul Karp, I would recommend you give it a read. The aged care and sport minister, Richard Colbeck, attended the Ashes cricket on the same day he declined to appear at the Covid-19 committee citing officials’ “urgent and critical” work combating Omicron. In an update to his register of interests, Colbeck declared that he received “sponsored travel or hospitality” to attend three days of the Hobart Test between Australia and England from Friday 14 to Sunday 16 January. Earlier we saw a “surprise” consumer price index result for the December quarter that indicated inflationary pressures are now the highest since mid-2014. Economists knew there would be some effect from the supply constraints caused in part by Covid-triggered staff absenteeism, and the huge build-up in savings and other stimulus aimed at supporting the economy. Anyway, now that the underlying inflation has quickened faster than economists and the Reserve Bank of Australia had flagged, we can expect more banks to lift expectations of when they think the central bank will lift the official cash rate. Westpac moved last week, bringing forward that rate change to August after earlier predicting a 2023 move. The CBA has today joined them in tipping an August move, although there’s a risk it might be June, the top economist Gareth Aird said today. The ANZ, though, is sitting on the fence for now. In a briefing note, it said: The RBA will now almost certainly need to adjust its forward guidance to acknowledge a rate hike is possible this year. ... We suspect the RBA won’t shift to a 2022 rate hike as being its central case, likely wanting to see wages growth clearly accelerate. But earlier than expected evidence of this is also possible. The official cash rate is at a record low of 0.1% so there is only really one way it can go. We may find out at the RBA’s meeting on 1 February – next Tuesday – whether it still thinks 2023 or even 2024 is when it might lift that rate. Nine-year-old Charlise Mutten was shot dead before her body was dumped in a barrel in bushland in the Blue Mountains, AAP’s Farid Farid reports. Homicide squad commander detective superintendent Danny Doherty said an extensive post mortem had revealed how the girl died. The child’s disappearance while holidaying at Wildenstein Private Gardens at Mount Wilson was reported on 14 January, triggering an intensive five-day search of bushland until her body was discovered a week ago, in a barrel dumped near the Colo River northwest of Sydney. “Charlise … suffered a fatal gunshot wound and that’s how she died,” Doherty told reporters today, describing it as an “unimaginable” murder of a child. Investigations are continuing and the crime scene at Mount Wilson is ongoing. According to court documents, Charlise was killed days before she was reported missing. Justin Laurens Stein, 31, faced court last week charged with murder after being arrested at a Surry Hills unit in inner Sydney. Police have interviewed Charlise’s mother Kallista who provided a formal statement that she was not present at the property at the time of the murder and corroborated other key evidence. Police say there was no evidence that puts her at the property at the time of the murder. Stein was alone with Charlise on the night of her murder, Doherty said. Police have released CCTV footage of a red Holden Colorado ute that was seen driving around and towing a boat in the inner Sydney suburb of Drummoyne followed by the northern areas of Wisemans Ferry and Colo River. They allege Stein had previously tried to float a “covered up” boat at an inner-Sydney dock after buying sandbags from a hardware store, before travelling back to the Colo River. A plastic barrel was missing from the property indicating a “high probability” of the murder taking place at the remote estate near the Blue Mountains. FYI, Victorians who test positive to the novel coronavirus between 8.30pm and 11.30pm tonight: In the wild world of sport, Thanasi Kokkinakis and Nick Kyrgios’ quarter finals match has just begun at Kia Arena, and it’s looking like another big, boisterous crowd. It appears the public are being evacuated from the Cataract Gorge, where police are employing the use of drones and choppers to search for a missing woman. A woman in her 20s has gone missing while swimming at Cataract Gorge in Tasmania after she reportedly became separated from her friends. A 40-year-old man has been charged with two counts of murder following the death of a woman and a six-year-old girl in Melbourne’s north earlier this month, Victoria police have confirmed. The Mill Park man will face Melbourne magistrates’ court at date yet to be determined. He remains under police guard in hospital. There have been 23 cases of Covid-19 recorded among the crew of HMAS Adelaide, which departed Brisbane on Friday to deliver humanitarian aid to virus-free Tonga, AAP reports. The Department of Defence confirmed the positive cases and close contacts were isolating as per Covid-safe protocols, adding the ship would continue on to Tonga and arrive off its coast early Wednesday morning. HMAS Adelaide would fulfil its mission to support the relief effort, with humanitarian and medical supplies, engineering equipment and helicopters on board, the department said in a statement: Defence recognises the Covid-free status of Tonga, and will ensure the humanitarian supplies and equipment on board are delivered in a Covid-safe manner. The ADF has significant experience conducting Covid-19 safe regional responses, including in Fiji following Tropical Cyclone Yasa, which will help contribute to the success and safety of this response. HMAS Adelaide has “excellent” medical facilities on board and a 40-bed hospital. All personnel are fully vaccinated, with Covid-positive people either displaying mild symptoms or asymptomatic. Earlier, the defence minister, Peter Dutton, said the government was working with Tonga to ensure no threat to the Pacific nation: They need the aid desperately but they don’t want the risk of Covid. We will work through all of that as quickly as we can. We are not going to put the Tongan population at risk. There are over 600 crew onboard. It is the second aid shipment from Australia where a positive case has turned up, with a C-17 plane turned around mid-flight after someone was diagnosed with Covid-19. Tasmania has reported 643 new cases of Covid-19 overnight and, sadly, one death – a 79-year-old woman with underlying health conditions. It brings active cases in the state to 3,668. There are 35 people being treated in hospital including three people requiring intensive care. It is the third Covid-19 death recorded in Tasmania. Victorian political correspondent Benita Kolovos has more on state opposition leader Matthew Guy’s doorstop in Cranbourne East earlier today. Asked if the Victorian government was “secretly trying to kill Australia Day”, Guy replied, “yes”. He went on: The Victorian government has absolute intent to do nothing for Australia Day. It’s ideological, it’s typical politics of division that this government engages in. Australia Day is our national day. Until it’s changed, if it’s changed, it may never be changed ... this is our national day. Find ways for all governments to unify us, to heal any issues of the past and bring us together. The government earlier this month announced the Australia Day parade was not going ahead for the second year in a row. Instead, smaller events including a free public concert will be held. Guy, who will be involved in a citizenship ceremony on Wednesday, said the cancellation was “sad”: We’ve got a state government that’s not interested in celebrating our nation. If they don’t like our date, then say it, but don’t try to secretly undermine Australia and everything we’ve achieved as, I think, the world’s most successful multicultural nation. Victoria’s health minister, Martin Foley, said the date of Australia Day was a matter for the federal government. Australia Day is a national public holiday that’s determined by the Commonwealth. Australians mark it, respect it and celebrate it, or mourn it in their different ways. If you haven’t seen the full video of Grace Tame’s uncomfortable meeting with the PM, Guardian Australia has it in full here. 2021 Australian of the Year, Grace Tame, has appeared stony faced beside the prime minister, Scott Morrison, during the 2022 Australian of the Year morning tea at The Lodge. Tame has not shied away from criticising the PM during her year in the spotlight. The sexual assault survivor and 2021 Australian of the Year has regularly commented on the government’s controversial handling of a number of alleged sexual assault and harassment scandals. A useful reminder: Speaking of 26 January: In Queensland, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander partnerships minister, Craig Crawford, has released quite an interesting statement in reference to 26 January. He says the public holiday “holds different meaning” for every Queenslander, and acknowledges their right to protest: Australia Day ... highlights the need for a reframed relationship with First Nations people in Queensland. This is the year Queensland’s Path to Treaty process really gains momentum. We will come together this year through truth-telling to reflect on our highs and lows, resolve historical tensions, and celebrate our state, its people, and our shared future. Truth-telling and an openness to listen is important on Queensland’s Path to Treaty and ultimately, towards reconciliation. Queensland is home to the nation’s second largest population of Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islander people, the world’s oldest continuous living cultures. Our state is enriched by the cultures, knowledge and contributions of First Nations people – who have occupied and cared for this continent for more than 65,000 years. We acknowledge the lived experiences, centuries of resilience, and ongoing contributions of Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islander people. We respect the rights of people to express their views about important milestones and calendar dates for the nation, including Australia Day. We also respect the right for lawful and peaceful protest. And we ask all Australians use the day to reflect, respect and honour the true history of this country. The Productivity Commission released its report into housing and homelessness today, and it’s bleak. As we reported this morning, the data shows nearly half of all people who sought help with homelessness last year in New South Wales did not get it. And it’s getting worse – five years ago, unmet requests for accommodation assistance from specialist homelessness services were at 37.2% in Australia’s most populous state; they’re now at 48.2%. The situation is getting worse in Queensland too, where unmet demand for homelessness services is at 35.9%, up from 25.9% in 2016-2017. Kate Colvin, national spokesperson for housing campaign coalition Everybody’s Home, drew attention to the extraordinary amount of rental stress that many lower-income Australians are living with: The Australian rental market now resembles a great white shark, swallowing family incomes almost whole. It’s simply astounding that even after receiving rent assistance, almost half of households are still in housing stress. The report showed that 45.7% of people receiving commonwealth rent assistance payments are still spending more than 30% of their income on housing – the definition of housing stress. Mission Australia executive, Ben Carblis, said the situation was “unacceptable”: Our dual housing and homelessness crisis is a blight on our country. With so much human suffering, the question remains: why isn’t more being done to repair and invest in Australia’s housing system? This crisis demands the federal government take the reins of a national plan to end homelessness in Australia which focuses on long-term investment to address the stark shortage of social and affordable homes. Kristen O’Connell from the Antipoverty Centre called for an increase in the rate of social security payments, saying the organisation had seen first hand how the fluctuations in jobseeker payments during the pandemic had changed people’s lives: Every state and federal member of parliament in this country should be ashamed of themselves. This is the result of decades of under-investment in public housing, chronically low income support payments and lack of access to appropriate healthcare for people with disability. We know that poverty is the number one cause of homelessness and housing stress in this country and we know the government could do something about it overnight if they cared. Well, that was fun! Quite a lot was covered today. Albanese is pushing hard on a few topics: Medicare, federation, education and childcare, the NBN and climate. Probably the largest announcement was the $440m to go to schools, and the overall enthusiasm for greater commonwealth intervention – through, for example, free rapid antigen tests. So nothing groundbreaking, but a clear sense of optimism and enthusiasm in his speech – which he contrasted to the commonwealth failures in the past two years of the pandemic. Wrapping up Albanese’s National Press Club address, Tingle asks whether he will commit to debating Morrison during the election campaign. Albanese says he will debate Morrison anywhere, anytime, name your date: Every day, every week is fine. I can’t get into debating him in the parliament. There has never been a prime minister who is so shy about having a debate ... no other government shut down debate the way that this one does and is so scared of having a debate. I am up for a debate here with the prime minister. I am up for a debate on ABC, seven, nine, 10, Herald, West, you can all host, Guardian, everyone can host one. I will turn up wherever they are. We will wait and see whether he turns up. I’m available next week, by the way, when he turns up here. I think an election should be a contest of ideas and I think the more debate, the better ... I think the National Press Club should host a debate, but I am up for a debate wherever, here now, have agreed to do one on Sky, I would debate him anywhere. I will debate on Andrew Bolt if he likes. Back to the other big C apart from Covid-19 (climate change), Dominic Giannini from AAP asks Albanese how he will enforce the promised legislation of net zero. He asks: will Labor strengthen the safeguard mechanism to cover more industries or lower the baseline? The safeguard mechanism is a requirement for the largest emitters of greenhouse gases to keep their net emissions below a certain baseline – building on the national greenhouse and energy reporting scheme. Albanese says no, to the latter: We think the current industries that are there provide certainty going forward. So we won’t include – there isn’t a single business that is currently not covered by the safeguard mechanism that will be covered. It’s a straightforward plan. And it’s one that will work. And that’s been fully modelled. And we put it all out there. Our plan didn’t have a little provision, a little asterisk in their pamphlet of stuff we made up that doesn’t exist yet. And by the way, it doesn’t even add up to net zero by 2050 anyway ... Journalist: But you have announced this policy, so what is your one answer about how you’re going to enforce it? Albanese: I’m not sure what you mean. Journalist: You said you’re going to legislate net zero. Albanese: Yeah, you have legislation. And the legislation includes, well the legislation for the safeguard mechanism is there. It was introduced by Tony Abbott. It was Tony Abbott’s legislation. And Tony Abbott’s legislation provides for the companies that are a part of the safeguard mechanism. What hasn’t happened, what hasn’t happened is that the Climate Change Authority hasn’t put forward an oversight of it that ensures it’s consistent with net zero by 2050. What we did, wasn’t to adopt 43% by 2030 and then decide how we’re going to get there. What we did was say these are the mechanisms we’re going to do. This is very good. Speaking of Western Australia, Lanai Scarr from the West Australian asks Albanese whether he still backs in McGowan’s decision to keep the borders closed and whether he could have done more to prepare for the pandemic. Albanese says he has backed in “every premier”: One of the reasons why [the national cabinet] has drifted away is this sort of game of the prime minister being critical of premiers selectively, even though they’re doing the same thing. I recall you can get a cup of coffee in Queensland, or you need to, um, you need to log on, in order to get a cup of coffee in Queensland. It was exactly the same rules in New South Wales. One of the things I do know about WA under premier McGowan, WA’s economy has been the strongest in Australia, the WA’s exports have kept the national economy going, people in WA have been able to have dinner, they’ve been able to associate and go to each other’s houses, they’ve been able to go to the pub, they’ve been able to to play footy, and I think hosted the grand final last year. So I’m not about second guessing premier McGowan and his decision making process. I make no apologies for saying he’s done a good job ... Mark McGowan has done an outstanding job as the premier of Western Australia. Western Australia has reported 15 new local cases of Covid-19 from about 10,000 tests, AAP reports. Two are unlinked to other cases, premier Mark McGowan told reporters today. Two infected people have been admitted to hospital and one is in intensive care. There were also three cases detected among quarantined travellers. It comes after 13 new local cases were detected yesterday. Scaling back a bit, and Albanese is asked by Max Maddison from the Australian whether he will state his position on Labor’s 2009 policy to implement a minimum tax rate on discretionary trust. Will he categorically rule it out? Albanese: You get into a game of: ‘will you rule out something else that you might just like to make up?’ It’s not our policy. It’s not our policy until we announce something. And we will work all of those issues through. I’ve been very transparent about what our policy process is. And can I say this, we have announced ... since December an expanded NBN. A climate policy which is fully costed. 465,000 free TAFE places. 20,000 university places ... a policy of 500 new community workers to deal with domestic violence. A shipping policy that includes a strategic national fleet. High speed rail being a priority ... A policy of disaster preparedness using the ERF. A Great Barrier Reef Fund ... that’s since December. That’s what we’ve done. You know what the government has announced in new policy for the next term since December? Zero! Crickets! An amusing question from the ABC’s Andrew Probyn. In light of the huge spotlight on Australia’s premiers during the pandemic, Probyn asks: “for all of those people who do know Mark McGowan more than they know you, who is Anthony Albanese?” Albanese answers the question in reference to the famed story of his upbringing, growing up in council housing and raised by a single mother: Anthony Albanese is the son of a single mum who grew up in council housing in Camperdown. She was an invalid pensioner. As I grew up, I understood the impact that government had, can have, on making a difference to people’s lives. And in particular, to opportunity. I had the security, because it was public housing, of a roof over my head. So I didn’t have to worry about that. Until there was a change of government in Sydney City Council. And a conservative group got control who thought that the council shouldn’t be involved in public housing. So they tried to sell my house. My first campaign, I was 12-years-old. We organised a rent strike. We took petitions around to everyone. That was my experience of that, that drove me. That was my first political campaign. And by the way, we won! And then, then my mum was crippled with arthritis. So I lived by myself for a long period of time ... I tell it straight. I lived by myself. It’s meant that I’m resilient and I’m tough. If people think I’ll go and you know, into a corner during the upcoming fight, they’re very wrong. They’re very wrong. Just watch. It gave me a determination each and every day to help the people like I was growing up, to have a better life. And I think that that is what Australians want, very simply. And no-one does it on their own ... One of the things that I’ve learnt in life, too, is that it’s often the poorest people, the most working class people, one of the reasons why I’m a supporter unashamedly of the trade union movement, is that it’s often those people who have less who will give more. That’s me. The Guardian’s own Katharine Murphy is up. She returns to Medicare, and asks Albanese if Labor would commit to more funding for public hospitals. It comes in reference to a letter sent to health minister, Greg Hunt, from state leaders last October, which told him there was an “effective underpayment” in the current national hospitals agreement. Albanese says “Labor will always be better on health and education than our opponent.” Murphy: Is that a yes? Albanese: That’s the answer I gave! Labor will always be better on health and education than our opponents. We’ve already announced a range of policies out there. And there will be more to come. Michelle Grattan from The Conversation is up next. She asks if Labor would hold a royal commission into Australia’s handling of the pandemic. Albanese says it is “beyond doubt” an assessment will be needed. Whether that be a royal commission or some form of inquiry, that will need to happen. And the best way to ensure support is to have more consultation with the opposition in general. I adopt that principle. I adopted it when I was a minister and when I was leader of the government in the House of Representatives. Laura Tingle from the ABC asks Albanese how Labor would provide free rapid antigen tests, as they have been arguing for repeatedly. He says other national governments have done it, while the Coalition has played catch-up: Other national governments have purchased rapid antigen tests for distribution. What occurred here, even in recent times, and I found the announcement extraordinary, after the government said that pharmacies would provide free rapid antigen tests for concession card holders. They then told pharmacies that they’re on their own getting them. Which is one of the reasons why they’re not available. You actually need to take responsibility for that. And I’ve been approached by companies, for example there’s one, that could provide [tests] and they’ve been trying to get the government to buy en masse up to, and we’re talking in the hundreds of millions, available each month, for $3.25. They tell me $4 including freight. Crickets I hear from this government. There are so many occasions where the government just makes an announcement and then that’s done – it’s like the box is ticked and they move on. We actually need a government with follow through. A government that plans. A government that puts in place structures. That’s not to underestimate the challenge which is there to rebuild the public service which has been gutted over the last nine years and to rebuild its capacity. Hopping out of Canberra for a minute, and Queensland health minister, Grace Grace, has provided an update on her positive Covid test: The conclusion to Albanese’s speech is very optimistic and future driven, a thread which has been sustained throughout – recovery as opportunity, and unifying the nation by overcoming division. We cannot look to our future without also reflecting on the past – including injustice for First Nations people. Until a nation acknowledges the full truth of its history, it will be burdened by its unspoken weight. We must acknowledge the wrongs, learn from them, and look for ways of healing. Truth telling can be confronting, but it need not be grounds for conflict ... a key part of that is to keep heading down the path to become a country deeply proud of being home to the oldest continuous cultures on Earth. A nation that takes up the Uluru Statement from the Heart and its gracious call, done so generously, for Voice, Treaty and Truth. A powerful and inspiring new chapter in a 60,000-year story. In conclusion, can I say, that this crisis has shown we are stronger together. But that truth is older and runs deeper than this pandemic. Tommy Wren was the closest person in my life I had to a father figure. He fought in World War II and he spent most of it as a prisoner of war. He always said that his fellow Australian prisoners survived because of a simple code. The healthy looked after the sick. The strong looked after the weak. And the young looked after the old. To me, that’s always been the best of Australia ... and those are the values I want to bring to the job of prime minister. Leadership that brings people together in a spirit of compassion and decency. A government that seeks to unite the country ... beyond the recovery, I see renewal and I see rejuvenation. I see an Australia rebuilding on the foundation of its people’s greatest strengths and best qualities. An Australia that is worthy of our people and their potential. An Australia where no-one is held back and no-one is left behind. Our best days are ahead of us. Together, we will get out of the pandemic and chart a path to them. Before finishing his speech, Albanese turns to Australian of the Year, Grace Tame, who was pictured looking significantly less than pleased alongside Morrison today. For our country to advance together as one, we must advance equality for women. We need to respect women across all elements of our culture – at work, at home, in schools and in our community. Women’s safety must be an absolute national priority. And on her final day as Australian of the Year, I want to take a moment to thank Grace Tame for her quite extraordinary courage and her fierce advocacy. Grace – you’ve inspired countless Australians and you’ve earned enormous respect. Now, the events that occurred in parliament not just in recent times but were made public in recent times, they constituted a powerful wake-up call. But we’ve had so many wake-up calls. We have no excuse to wait for another. Every time I look around our caucus room and see my colleagues, such as those who are here today ... I’m reminded of a simple, powerful truth. That our country will be so much closer to what it should be when women enjoy true equality and when our parliament reflects the population with 50% women’s representation. Albanese turns to Keating’s famed line, first uttered at the National Press Club: “if you change the government, you change the country”. He says if Labor is elected, it will prioritise federation reform and greater cooperation between the commonwealth and the states, as well as establishing a national Anti-Corruption Commission. My team and I want to change the government and change the way that government operates and the way that government is perceived. I don’t expect to make Australians fall in love with question time, but I do want more people to have greater faith in the integrity of their parliament and its representatives. Australian democracy is a great national achievement, but our system is no more immune to the threat of extremism and polarisation, corrosive influence of corruption and cynicism, than other democracies around the world, many of whom are grappling with these very challenges ... The best way to make democracy stronger is to make government work better, and that’s why I’ll advocate for federation reform with greater cooperation between the commonwealth and the states. To be true to that vision of Australia. So much more than the sum of its parts. And – to put it really simply, in our first term, we will have not just a promise, we will have a national Anti-Corruption Commission. One with teeth, to restore faith in government and trust in our public officials. We will end this government’s culture of rorts because public money should not be splashed around in cynical vote buying exercises. And just as I want to encourage the commonwealth and state governments to work together better, I want to encourage business and unions to work together, because ultimately, they share the same interests. Read Labor’s education plan in full here: Albanese moves to renewable energy, outlining Labor’s climate plan to reduce emissions by 43% by 2030, putting Australia “on track” to reach net zero by 2050. Albanese: It’s a plan with economic growth at its heart. Over 600,000 jobs created. $52 billion of private sector investment, spurring new industries and cutting power bills by $275 by 2025 for the average family. Unlike Mr Morrison’s glossy pamphlet, Powering Australia is underpinned by the most tensive independent expert modelling ever done for any policy by any Opposition. Our plan has the backing of the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Industry Group. The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry. The ACTU. The National Farmers’ Federation, and a range of non-government organisations. Pretty broad spread. That is just one practical example of how I will bring Australians together, united by a common vision and a national partnership for progress. We can, finally, put the climate wars behind us. Setting Australia on a path to a better future is not just about what we do, it also matters how we do it. Albanese turns to education, which he says is “fundamental and essential to the jobs, productivity and prosperity of the future”. He says education has been neglected by the Coalition preceding the pandemic, and announces a “student wellbeing boost” that would provide funding for school activities and wellbeing. Labor would also prioritise ventilation and improvement of outdoor learning areas in schools in response to the pandemic. Education is the biggest and most powerful tool we have against disadvantage. I’ve always seen it as one of the greatest divides in Australian politics. Labor sees education as about creating opportunity. The Liberals see it as about entrenching privilege ... it’s why Labor remains committed, working with state and territory governments to getting every school to 100% of its fair funding level. And it’s why today I’m announcing Labor’s plan to help our schools and students bounce back. Our plan starts with the student wellbeing boost. It will provide funding for school activities to get children back on track. This could mean more funding for school counsellors and psychologists. And for camps, excursions, sporting and social activities, that improve children’s wellbeing. Every Australian school stands to benefit from this investment. And the schools themselves will decide how to use the extra money to best help their students. Our plan will direct the education department to conduct an urgent review of the impact of Covid on students with disability so that they get the support that they need ... The other element of our plan is the Schools Upgrade Fund, which will provide much needed support for improving ventilation in schools and creating outdoor learning areas. Albanese says the “greatest lesson” that can be taken from the past two years is not to take Medicare and our public health system for granted. He reminds listeners Medicare was established by the Hawke government: “Labor built Medicare.” Right now, our health workers are paying the price for some of the most serious public policy failures that our country has ever seen. They are overworked. They are exhausted ... like firefighters during the black summer, they put their own wellbeing on the line for their fellow Australians. And they’re doing it every day. They embody the best of the Australian spirit. We owe it to them to study what the pandemic has revealed about the vulnerabilities of our public health system and strengthen it for the future. At heart of it all is Medicare – a proud Australian achievement. Medicare is part of who we are. It makes our way of life possible with its green and gold, it is the most patriotic piece of plastic that you can have in your wallet ... Labor built Medicare, not just as a safety net, but as a conscious act of nation building. Right now, we could strengthen both the safety net and our sense that we are all in this together by making rapid antigen tests available free to every Australian through Medicare. And that is what we should do. That is what a Labor government would have done at this moment, because Labor will always strengthen Medicare. We know there is nothing more central to our families, our communities, our schools and our economy than our health. Albanese turns to the pandemic, including a little pun (referring to Morrison) that got a laugh: “he doesn’t hold a hose and he doesn’t give a rats”. Albanese says Covid is the “greatest crisis” we have faced since the global financial crisis: It is beyond comprehension that this government has actively refused to learn from this pandemic. This government has failed repeatedly on testing, tracing, vaccinations and quarantine. The grand slam of pandemic failure. A prime minister who was repeatedly warned by experts about what is coming, and given the opportunity to plan ahead. But repeatedly fails to listen and more importantly, fails to act. And while Mr Morrison talks drivel at the cricket and shows off the contents of his kitchen, Australians are being confronted by empty supermarket shelves. And contrary to Barnaby Joyce’s extraordinary statements yesterday, Australians are dying from Covid in record numbers. Over 900 lives lost in the first 25 days of this year. Never before has Australia had a prime minister with such a pathological determination to avoid responsibility. He declares – it’s not my job, it’s not a race, it’s a matter for the states. He doesn’t hold a hose and he doesn’t give a rats. Every action, every decision has to be dragged out of him. And so often, after all of the build-up, he gets it wrong anyway. Albanese: If I’m successful, the future we are working towards will be demonstrated to Australians by the end of Labor’s first term. An Australia with rising living standards – lifted by more secure work, better wages, better conditions for small business, stronger Medicare and more affordable childcare. An Australia with more secure jobs in both existing and new industries. Industries that will be reaping the benefits of cheap, renewable energy. An Australia that is secure in our place in the world – standing up for Australian democratic values and for human rights on the global stage. An Australia with robust funding for the Australian defence force, which rebuilds our diplomatic service, revitalises our international aid program and works closely with our American ally and regional partners in the challenges and uncertainties that lie ahead. An inclusive society where gender, race, or religion, are no indication of a person’s opportunities or possibilities. An Australia that is reconciled with ourselves and with our history, and with a constitutionally recognised First Nations voice to parliament. The desire to leave that legacy for Australians, with the lessons of this moment at its core will be a driving force of a Labor government that I seek to lead. Continuing, Albanese goes through his shopping list of priorities for the upcoming election, which he says have been neglected by the Morrison government. It includes: Prioritising a “strong, properly funded public health system”, with Medicare as its backbone Addressing insecure work Investing in TAFE and the training sector Local manufacturing A high quality NBN Affordable childcare Albanese: In a recent profile when asked to reflect on his time in office, Mr Morrison suggested that he is not interested in leaving a legacy. For him – leaving no legacy is a conscious choice. I find this pretty remarkable. If given the opportunity, I want to make a real difference for the people of our nation and to strengthen the nation itself. I want a better future. Unbelievable! Albanese is somehow live tweeting while simultaneously addressing the National Press Club. And they say men can’t multitask. Alright, back to Albanese, who is making his case for government. He says we “must learn from the lessons of the pandemic” to build a more “resilient” Australia. His vision draws on past Labor leader Paul Keating, who said the lesson of the first world war was one about “ordinary people, and the lesson that they were not ordinary”. What stands before us now is the opportunity to build on the best qualities that characterise Australians, and to realise our potential as a people and as a nation more fully than at any time in our history. The chance is ours to seize. But it requires courage and it requires vision ... Just pushing through this pandemic is not enough. We need to learn from it. We need to use what the last two years have taught us to build a better future ... The Australian people have been simply magnificent during this crisis. Calm in the midst of turmoil – looking out for each other in tough times. If I’m elected prime minister of this great country of ours, I see it as my deep responsibility to repay these sacrifices. To reward these efforts. To prove worthy of the generosity and bravery of the Australian people. Hopping over to South Australia before we return to Albanese, and there have been 1,869 new Covid-19 cases detected in the state – a record low for 2022. Sadly, there have been five new Covid deaths including two in the past 24 hours. There are 287 people being treated in hospital, including 32 in ICU and five requiring ventilation. Big news coming out of Melbourne. The Australian Open is making an apparent backflip on its ban on the “Where is Peng Shuai” T-shirt following significant backlash – including within the tennis community. Hoping over to Canberra now, and the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, is fronting the National Press Club in the first address of the year. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, will be following suit next week. He begins by acknowledging tomorrow will be a difficult day for First Nations people: Australia’s best days are ahead of us. Not just the better days that we’re all hoping for right now, but the best our nation has ever seen. Together, we are ready for it. Australia Day is a good moment for us to reflect, to consider our blessings as a nation and to celebrate them. Perhaps that is more important now than it has been for decades. We’ve been through a time so challenging that none of us will ever forget it. And I know, as we enter the third year of the pandemic, a lot of Australians are exhausted. They’re worn down by bad news, uncertainty, inconvenience, disruption and separation from loved ones. And we look forward to the day when we can put all of this behind us. My argument to you today is that if we want to get this moment right, Australia can emerge from this once in a century crisis better, stronger, more fair and more prosperous. This morning’s sharemarket fall has turned into a bit of a rout, with the benchmark ASX200 index down by almost 3% shortly after midday. There’s red across the board and across sectors, with miners, financials and retailers all getting punished. Seven West Media fell almost 8%, as did forex trading group OFX. Millionaire’s factory Macquarie Group isn’t minting any richies today, down 3.98% – as was Gerry Harvey’s Harvey Norman. West African Resources, which has a mine in Burkina Faso, where there’s been a coup, remains the biggest loser, down 16.5%. Many thanks to the equally fantastic Matilda Boseley. I’ll be with you for the rest of this fine Tuesday. With that, I shall hand you over the always fantastic Caitlin Cassidy for the rest of the afternoon. Payne has again reiterated that Australia has no intention to engage militarily with Russia at this point, although other (less direct) measures are being considered if they do invade Ukraine. We’re working closely with Australians in Ukraine and our embassy is in contact with all of the Australians for whom we have details in Ukraine. As you know, from the change to the travel advice, our advice to those people is to leave Ukraine now, via commercial means. It is possible to do that. There’s basically regular services continuing out of Kiev. And this is, as I said, out of caution and out of prudence, to protect the interests and the safety of Australians. We have not been asked for further assistance from Ukraine. But we’ll continue those discussions, not just with Ukraine, but with our partners, with the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, the members of the European Union, the members of NATO, very closely engaged on these issues. Reporter: Is military involvement or advisors on the table? Payne: Military involvement is not something Australia [is] involved in offering. Both the prime minister and I have mentioned that in the last week. Police have confirmed that nine-year-old Charlise Mutten died from a gunshot wound. Mutten went missing in the Blue Mountains on 13 January and her body was found five days later inside a barrel on the banks of the Colo River. Homicide squad commander Danny Doherty spoke a short time ago: I can confirm that the cause of death for Charlise was that she suffered a fatal gunshot wound, and that’s how she died ... 32-year-old Justin Stein has been charged with Charlise’s murder. Police are now calling for anyone with further information, specifically about a car police believe is connected to the alleged murder, to come forward: Investigations are still ongoing. The crime scene at Mount Wilson is ongoing. Yesterday and today we’re still searching the building and surroundings at Mount Wilson, obviously now looking for a firearm. And that’s been with the assistance of police, divers and the dog unit ... As part that investigation, we’re releasing CCTV on the red Holden Colorado that was seen to be driven into the city area and also around the Wisemans Ferry area and Colo River area and that’s important for investigative reasons because there are some gaps in the timeline, where the vehicle is seen towing a boat and so we’re keen to appeal to the public who may have seen suspicious activity in those locations: On 13 January, the Thursday before Charlise was reported missing: 5:53pm in a BP at Marsden Park, Richmond Road; 7:19pm Victoria Road at Drummoyne; and at 7:30 at Bayswater Road in Drummoyne; and, importantly, up to 9:50 at the Five Dock boat ramp at Drummoyne. The follow morning: about 1:30am to 1:40am, the Windsor boat ramp and then at the Colo River on 14 January; at 2:25am to 2:30am in the Colo River jetty under the Putty Road Bridge; and 2:37am to 2:46am [on] Lower Colo Road. Police described Mutten’s death as “unimaginable and egregious”. Foreign minister Marise Payne is speaking now about Australia’s decision to urge all citizens in Ukraine to come home by any commercial means possible, as fears of a Russian invasion grow. We’ve taken the cautious and prudent decision to return dependants to Australia and that’s understandable I think in the circumstances. It’s one which we have discussed with our like-minded [allies] particularly the United States, Canada, the UK, and many European representatives who have diplomatic posts in Ukraine. I spoke to the foreign minister last week and talked with him, I spoke to our ambassador in Kiev at length on Friday evening. This is an important step and it is about protecting Australians and protecting the families of our diplomatic staff. She was asked about Australia’s ability to provide cyber-security assistance to help Ukraine fend off potential Russian cyber attacks: They’ve been victims of cyber-attacks, many reportedly sourced to Russian actors of various sorts. In that context, we have previously worked with Ukraine in cyber-affairs and cyber-security, including some training last year. My ambassador for cyber-affairs and critical technology is engaging with the Ukrainian system. Australia has worked very hard on our international engagement strategy on cyber. This is the time, this is the challenge, and we’ll be working with our partners. Here is a summary of the daily numbers so far: NSW Deaths – 29 Cases – 18,512 Hospitalisations – 2,943 (183 in ICU) Victoria Deaths – 29 Cases – 14,836 Hospitalisations – 1,057 (119 in ICU) Queensland Deaths – 11 Cases – 9,546 Hospitalisations – 928 (51 in ICU) ACT Deaths – 1 Cases – 904 Hospitalisations – 67 (three in ICU) SA Deaths – 5 Cases – 1,869 Hospitalisations – 287 (32 in ICU) WA Deaths – 0 Cases – 15 Hospitalisations – 2 (1 in ICU) Tasmania Deaths – 1 Cases – 643 Hospitalisations – 35 (3 in ICU) The Covid death toll in the ACT has climbed to 25 today after a woman in her 80s died after contracting the virus. In a statement ACT Health said it “extends its sincere condolences to her family and friends at this difficult time.” There are now 67 people in hospital in the territory, including three in the ICU. Queensland CHO Dr John Gerrard says the peak of hospitalisations across the state is lower than expected, but will still strain the health care system. There is no question that as we approach the peak, there will be strain and stress on individual hospitals. But the peak, it appears to be slightly less in most areas and it won’t necessarily be the same everywhere. Queensland health minister Dr John Gerrard says Queensland and specifically Townsville is now approaching the peak of the Omicron wave. The peak is expected, we expect an acceleration in the number of cases here in Townsville over the next two weeks. Townsville approaches its peak in about two weeks’ time, but thankfully you have high vaccination rates here in Townsville, and that will put you in good stead ... The good news is, in most of the world what we’ve seen is a steady rise in cases over a period of about one month followed by a steady fall over the next month. That’s what we are expecting to see here in Queensland ... I remind you that [the peak] is not the end. The peak is the high point, the high point of the pandemic and, over the next month after the peak, the numbers are expected to fall, to come to a level, and then we’ll see what happens thereafter. [It’s] still a little bit unclear worldwide what will happen at the end of this wave. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is speaking now and has confirmed the state has recorded 9,546 cases and sadly 11 more Covid deaths, all over the age of 50. I know this is very heartbreaking to families. Can I say none of this is easy. And, you know, we don’t want to be reporting this, but we are during a health pandemic and Dr. Gerard will go through a bit more detail about the status and the ages but they’re all over 50 years of age. Australia’s consumer prices rose 3.5% in the December quarter from a year ago, while the underlying rate climbed to 2.6%. The figures, just released by the ABS, will be pored over by economists for any hints that the nation’s inflation is on the same trajectory as the soaring levels seen overseas. It’s what you might expect if you juice up the economy with stimulus packages and add in Covid-related supply shortages. That 2.6% rate is the one of interest. Dubbed the trimmed mean, the tally is the highest since the June quarter of 2014. On a quarterly basis, the rise was 1.3%. More to come on this, but expect more of the banks to follow Westpac’s lead from last week, when they brought forward their guess of when the RBA will start lifting the official interest rate from the record low 0.1%. Westpac reckons it will be in August, with another rate rise two months later. Borrowing costs are already on the rise, and today’s CPI figures will likely add to that pace. Among the various sectors, the construction industry is a standout because of shortages to labour and raw materials. The cost of new dwellings has risen in the past two quarters to the fastest rate since September 2000 just after the GST got going, the ABS said. Fuel prices were another big contributor, rising 6.6% in the December quarter to a new record for a second quarter in a row. Oh my good gosh, you have to see these photos of Grace Tame meeting with prime minister Scott Morrison this morning. (Today marks the last day of her term as 2021 Australian of the Year.) Oh and there are more! Gosh, the Victorian press conference has gone on forever! From Victorian state correspondent, Benita Kolovos, who is still on the press conference which happened a bit earlier. The deputy state controller of Victoria’s health system operations, Adam Horsburgh, was still taking questions: When the code brown was activated last week, authorities said there could be more than 2,500 Covid cases in hospital by early February. There are currently 1,057 cases in hospital, an increase of 59 since Monday. Asked whether the code brown could end earlier than planned given the figures, Horsburgh replied: While the number of admissions and staff availability have either remained stable or improved slightly over the past seven days, the system is still under enormous strain. And therefore we do think that the code brown ... is still the appropriate response at this point in time. In the background, we are preparing work to consider how and when we can restore elective surgery. We’re very conscious of the impact that the deferral of elective surgery has on everyone on a waiting list. But we do not believe at this point in time that the system is in a position to restart elective surgery. The sharemarket is off to a weak start this morning, with the benchmark ASX200 index falling as expected. At about 11am it was down 1.36% off the back of falls across the board. West African Resources took the biggest tumble, with shares plunging more than 9% on news of a coup in Burkina Faso, where it has a gold mine. The company says the mine, Sanbrado, is “continuing to operate as usual.” Oil and gas company Beach Energy was down about 5.5% and retailer Harvey Norman fell 2.96%. Rival retailer Myer rose 5.41% after an upbeat sales report and BNPL operator Sezzle skyrocketed 20% on news it is in talks to merge with Zip. NSW’s new treasurer Matt Kean has announced his first major change since formally taking over from now premier Dominic Perrottet in the role in December. Paul Grimes, who was the coordinator general of Kean’s former Environment, Energy and Science division when he was environment minister, will be the 28th secretary of the NSW treasury from 29 January 2022. Grimes replaces Michael Pratt, who served in the top post for the past five years and had been rumoured to be leaving soon. Pratt’s term, though, will be marked down for the accounting controversy surrounding the state’s rail assets. The auditor general had refused to sign off on the state’s accounts over their valuation that puffed up the reported bottom line. The dispute ended this week, but there is a $4.1bn adjustment to come in the future. Kean, it seems, is eager to draw a line under that rail debacle. Jumping back to Victoria for a second: We have a bit more information about the 29 people with Covid-19 who sadly died in NSW from the state’s health department: Five people were aged in their 60s, three people were in their 70s, 14 people were in their 80s, six people were in their 90s and one was more than 100 years old. 21 people had received two doses, and six people were not vaccinated. One person who died was aged under 65. This man was not vaccinated and had serious underlying health conditions. From Victorian state correspondent, Benita Kolovos: Foley said currently one in five calls to triple zero are not for emergencies. The deputy state controller of Victoria’s health system operations, Adam Horsburgh, explained: In my role, I hear firsthand many of the stories of people who have felt the need to attend an emergency department or call triple zero because they didn’t necessarily know how else to access the advice or support that they needed when they tested positive. As we’ve outlined before, it’s vitally important that we work to relieve some of the pressure that our frontline doctors and nurses are facing. He also provided an update on the state’s hospital system since a code brown was announced for all metro hospitals and six regional ones last week. Since the code brown was called we have seen a drop in calls to triple zero and also a reduction in presentations to the emergency department, and this has been really important in relieving some of the pressure on those frontline emergency services. We’ve also seen improvements in the number of staff available to work as a consequence of the changes to the furlough policy and improved access to rapid tests ... Having said all of that, the pressure on the health system remains intense. And it’s important to remember the challenges that our frontline staff are dealing with every day. From Victorian state correspondent, Benita Kolovos: Health minister Martin Foley has announced a new campaign encouraging people with mild Covid-19 symptoms to recover at home. He said since the start of 2022 more than 550,000 people have contracted the virus but just 0.71% have required hospitalisation. He said: For every person who ends up in hospital – and there are a significant amount of Victorians in the hospital with Covid – thousands more get mild symptoms and are able to rest and recover at home. Foley said the campaign will also serve to remind Victorians to save triple zero and the emergency department for “the most serious of matters”. This is an interesting update on the HMAS situation. The wife of one of the crew on board says that lines of communication with the ship are down, and she can’t get in touch with her husband. Oh dear, it seems Tonga was right to take precautions to ensure foreign aid workers who are travelling to the island nation to assist in the volcano/tsunami recovery effort do not inadvertently spread Covid-19 throughout the community. Defence minister Peter Dutton says there is now a large outbreak of Covid-19 on the HMAS Adelaide (one of our big military ships bringing supplies to Tonga). So far 23 cases have been detected on board. Heads up to my beautiful SA readers: A 4.7 magnitude earthquake has hit the Great Southern town of Wagin in Western Australia shortly before 5.30am. Aftershocks have been felt, including a 3.6 magnitude one near Arthur River and a 2.6 magnitude one near Darkan, reports AAP. The quake was about eight kilometres deep, says Geoscience Australia. Wagin is a wheatbelt town about 230km southeast of Perth, known for its giant ram “Bart” and annual Woolarama event. Shire president Phillip Blight said Bart and the century-old buildings in the town had escaped damage. I’m just having a look right now at the giant ram in Wagin to make sure he hasn’t suffered any damage ... he’s great. [My wife and I] were having breakfast and it built fairly rapidly, it started and built fairly rapidly to a maximum intensity and it just rumbled along. It just wasn’t probably quite strong enough that I could see a plate or a knife or a fork moving on the table sort of thing, it didn’t do that. But yeah, just strong enough to certainly recognise what it was. Foley is addressing the increase of Covid-19 hospitalisations today, and the tragically high death toll of 29. However, it’s worth noting 17 of those deaths are historical (from recent weeks) which have been added to the Covid tally following investigations. Foley: Among people with Covid-19, yesterday we saw 1,057 people in hospital, up slightly from the figure of 998 from yesterday. That is a seven-day running average of 1,063. 119 of these Victorians are currently in the intensive care unit. We have seen a very small drop of people on a ventilator in the ICU, down from 47 to 45. We tragically saw 29 people with Covid-19 pass away, 12 of whom have died within the previous two days. If I can take this opportunity to pass on my condolences, best wishes, and thoughts to 29 families who have lost a loved one, 29 families who will be morning and grieving. It is a sad loss at this time. Okay, let’s listen in to the Victorian health minister Martin Foley who is speaking now. If your little one is still missing an “I’m vaccinated” sticker, here are the best places to get them in Melbourne. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, has been asked about Tennis Australia’s handling of a protester wearing a Where Is Peng Shuai T-Shirt at the Australian Open. Dutton told Sky News: A woman [Peng Shui] makes a claim of having been sexually assaulted, raped, in 2021 ... And still we don’t have answers to that, as to how authorities have responded other than her social media accounts have been wiped. We really haven’t heard a true account, she hasn’t departed China. It’s deeply concerning. We should be speaking up about these issues. Dutton said that everyone – celebrities, Tennis Australia and the Women’s Tennis Association – should speak up about the issue, but declined to criticise Tennis Australia’s response. Amid the gathering economic storms, as flagged here, there are a couple of more upbeat readings on the Australian mood this morning. The Commonwealth Bank of Australia’s weekly credit card spending tracker reveals a broad rebound has begun, at least in the figures to 21 January. Consumer spending is “holding up better than feared”, the report said, while adding the necessary caveat that it’s “still early days” in terms of living with Covid. Western Australia, which notably has put off its reopening date to the never-never, was leading all states in the spending rebound. The ANZ-Roy Morgan Australian Consumer Confidence Survey, also out today, is a bit patchier, but generally showed the mood to be picking up. Consumer sentiment improved 2.2% last week to be just above the neutral 100 mark in the index. Again, WA helped to lead the improvement along with Victoria and Queensland, while New South Wales slumped as did South Australia. Measures such whether it’s time to buy a major household item (a category that seems rather subjective) picked up 6.3 percentage points, reversing some of the 15.8% fall during the first two weeks of 2022. The ANZ attributed some of the rebound to reports last week that the jobless rate was now at its lowest in more than 13 years – or at least it was prior to the Omicron whack to supply chains, staffing levels, and so forth. “The live entertainment of the Australian Open tennis and great weather might have added to Victoria’s positive outlook,” the commentary said, though perhaps prematurely given the sultry conditions that have a week to run in Victoria’s fair capital. Inflation expectations, meanwhile, have edged up in the ANZ survey to match a recent high of 5%. That’s timely, as we’re about to learn a bit more about consumer prices. At 11.30am, the ABS will tell us all about how consumer prices fared in the December quarter. The market is expecting a “headline” figure of 3.2% compared with a year earlier, and a 1% increase compared with the September quarter. Economists, though, will be more interested in the underlying readings, which are supposed to strip out more volatile changes. Anything higher than about 2.5% on a yearly basis and 0.8% on a quarterly one will have the quills being resharpened to adjust the guesses of how soon the Reserve Bank will start to raise the official interest rate. Westpac broke ranks last week among the big four to predict the cash rate will start to rise by August, compared with the RBA’s insistence 2024, or maybe 2023 at a pinch, would be the time to start “hiking”. Today’s CPI figures may prompt other banks to bring forward their predictions too. The Australian defence minister, Peter Dutton, has warned Russia against invading Ukraine but said Australia will not be part of any military response if it does. Dutton told Sky News the situation is “precarious to say the least” because Russia is “obvious in its intent, amassing troops on the border”. Dutton said Australia wants to see a de-escalation, because conflict would “result in 10,000s of people losing their lives in Ukraine”. Dutton said Australia doesn’t expect to be asked to contribute troops or military assets because “we’ve got a lot on in the Indo-Pacific at the moment”. He said: We haven’t received a request nor would we expect to receive one. The Brits and the US in particular and the EU have provided support to Ukraine, so-called lethal aid, those countries are closer in proximity or have a vested interest in the circumstances as they play out. We hope deterrence means they [Russia] don’t continue on path to conflict with Ukraine. [Because if they do] 10,000s will die, there will be bloody scenes. It’s not too long ago where we saw tragic scenes in that part of the world – we want to make sure they’re not repeated. We would condemn any military action. Dutton noted foreign minister Marise Payne is discussing possible cyber assistance with her Ukrainian counterpart but did not give any concrete commitment. We will be getting the Queensland update in about an hour and a half when the premier stands up at 11.30am AEST. RING THE MELBOURNE PRESS CONFERENCE CLAXON - We will be hearing from the health minister for a Covid update at 10.30am AEDT. In other news, Joe Biden may or may not have just called a Fox News reporter a “stupid son of a bitch”. Very 2022 areas. Covid restrictions in New South Wales will remain in place for another month, the premier Dominic Perrottet has announced, saying the state was taking a “cautious” approach amid an expected increase in cases as schools resume across the state next week. The decision means that existing restrictions – which include a ban on singing and dancing in bars, as well as a one-person per square metre rule in hospitality venues, an indoor mask mandate and QR code check-ins – will now run until at least Sunday 28 February. On Tuesday Perrottet said the government still planned to keep its commitment to end its pause on elective surgery by mid-February. Perrottet said: This is a cautious approach, a safe and measured approach, as we move through this next phase and also ensures that we continue to instil confidence, particularly in our parents, sending kids back to school and as mobility increases. As Dr Chant has said, we will expect cases to rise, so this is a measured and proportionate approach to the situation that we are in here in New South Wales. There has been a little mini earthquake in Western Australia, but luckily authorities say there is no tsunami threat. Tweet me at @MatildaBoseley if you felt it! The number of people hospitalised with Covid-19 in NSW has now reached an all-time high, dashing hope that those numbers were already on the decline following several hopeful days of numbers. There are an additional 127 people in hospital with Covid-19 in NSW today, bringing the total to 2,943. However, there are now 183 people in the ICU, a decrease of 13. Victoria has also seen a jump in hospitalisation numbers, with 1,057 now in Covid wards, up from 998 yesterday. There are now 119 in ICU, which remains stable. Here is the premier’s full statement about the roll over of restrictions: The New South Wales premier says the current restrictions will roll over for another month, to help ensure the resumption of schooling and elective surgeries go smoothly. Perrottet: As we move through, we want to maintain that cautious approach as we continue to get our booster program moving. So the restrictions that we put in place last year, we will be rolling over for another month. This is a cautious approach, a safe and measured approach, as we move through this next phase ... As you’d be aware, those restrictions we’ll be rolling over include density limits of two square metres, wearing face masks indoors, no singing and dancing in hospitality venues. These measures are proportionate, but particularly, you know, taking a cautious approach as we move through and really focus on getting kids back in the classroom on the first day of school this year in a safe way, and as well, making sure that we get that non-urgent elective surgery back. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has confirmed the state will resume elective surgeries in mid-Febuary: ... as well that, we bring back as quickly as possible non-urgent elective surgery. We put a pause on that as we did during the Delta and Alpha outbreaks. I want to thank people for their patients. This is surgery that should occur over the 365-day period. We want that non-urgent elective surgery back as quickly as possible. We’ve set out a date in mid-February and that’s our commitment to maintaining that date. First up on the agenda today for NSW is once again the return to school: It’s been, obviously, a disruptive year in our education system in New South Wales and around the country over the last two years. But they’re doing an amazing job as well as we prepare with the school plan we’ve put together ... I want to thank our parents for their patience. For the last year or two, many parents have had to home school and we know that as we go through this next period of time in getting kids back in the classroom on day one, term one, that there will be disruption, there will be issues that come through as we move through this period of time. But from a New South Wales government perspective, we have put together incredibly strong plans. We have resourced those plans. We’ve invested significantly to ensure we can have kids back in the classroom on day one, term one, in a safe way, in a safe way for parents, for students and for teachers. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking now, let’s listen in. Just a reminder, we are about to get the daily Covid-19 numbers for NSW and Victoria, and shortly after that hear from the NSW leadership for their daily virus update. Australians in Ukraine are being urged to leave immediately as the threat of Russian military action against the country increases. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade on Monday night raised its advice to “Do Not Travel”. “Australians in Ukraine should leave now by commercial means, where safe to do so, noting that flight availability could change or be suspended at short notice,” it said in a statement. You can read the full report below: A major Guardian investigation examines the 1,700km Melbourne to Brisbane megaproject to find out whether communities along its route will benefit and whether their concerns are being bypassed. This one is definitely worth a read: The NSW premier is promising businesses reeling from the effects of the Omicron wave of Covid-19 will get fresh support within a week, reports AAP. The state Labor opposition says a business support package is urgently needed to lift small- and medium-sized businesses out of the summer’s “shadow lockdown” as the rampant virus keeps workers and customers at home. Premier Dominic Perrottet says treasurer Matt Kean is working with stakeholder groups and industry “to make sure the support that we provide ... during his period has impact”. “It will be within a week,” the premier told Sydney radio 2GB on Tuesday. Our focus ... has always been to put businesses and workers before the budget ... and we will continue to do that. He also promised non-urgent elective surgery would resume as soon as possible after an Australian Institute of Health and Welfare report found the median wait time for procedures blew out to 48 days in the 2020/21 financial year, an increase of nine days compared to the previous year. Perrottet said the government would commit funding to clear the surgery backlog when the pressure had eased on NSW public hospitals. As soon as we ... get advice from our medical teams that we can bring that non-urgent elective surgery back we will do so... It’s a key focus of ours ... that we would get that back on track as quickly as possible. The benchmark ASX200 is set to fall 1.7% this morning, according to futures data, following further losses on overseas markets overnight. In the US, the S&amp;P500 fell 0.72% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq index dropped 0.43%, while London’s FTSE100 shed a whopping 2.63%. If it plays out as futures markets predict, today’s fall will extend a run of losses that’s already seen the ASX200 shed 3.75% over the past week as coronavirus disruption and fretting over rising inflation roils global markets. US markets have shed about 5% over the past week. There are also signs that the bubble in crypto assets, which are purely speculative and have no underlying use, may be starting to burst, with the price of Bitcoin down 10% in a week. To bring you up to speed on goings on in the market and economy here’s my colleague Peter Hannam: You can read the full statement from the prime minister on the government securing the copyright for the Aboriginal flag below: The Australian federal government has completed a deal to take ownership of the Aboriginal flag copyright. Previously owned by the flag’s designer Harold Thomas and a non-Indigenous clothing company, the flag is now freely available for public use. It comes after a number of Indigenous groups were sent cease and desist warnings for using the flag in an apparent breach of copyright. Minister for Indigenous Australians Ken Wyatt is discussing the victory on ABC radio now: It means that, much like the Australian flag, people can use it to promote products. You can buy transfers and stickers, or you can have smaller flags that are used in terms of events. It means the AFL round or the NRL rounds, or major sporting events in this nation. the flag can be used without a charge being applied. And the charges that were applied could be significant, so that’s why the sporting events didn’t feature the Aboriginal flag. They will now be able to do that. It will hold its place and pride alongside the Australian flag and be used freely by many of our partners, and many of our women who started fledgling businesses in apparel. They can now use it without having to pay a fee for the use of flags. Scott Morrison enters a federal election year with his approval languishing at levels not seen since March 2020, and the Coalition’s handling of the Omicron wave has prompted some voters to signal they are now less likely to back the government on polling day. The first Guardian Essential poll of 2022 confirms the prime minister’s approval rating (46%) hasn’t budged since last December, and disapproval of Morrison is up two points to 46%. The Morrison government had hoped to recover standing with voters over the summer break, but the desired political fillip hasn’t eventuated. The prime minister needs to recover lost ground – voter approval of Morrison dived 19 points during the controversies and missteps of 2020. You can read the full report below: As I mentioned before Dfat has urged Australians in Ukraine to leave immediately. We are one of the first countries to do so, but Ukraine reckons this is premature. A representative for Ukraine in Australia, Volodymyr Shalkivskyi, says it’s important to avoid panic. Tensions are high, but there is no panic. Everyone understands that this time there may be a full-scale invasion ... Majority of the population is reviewing their first-aid tool kit. But he urged people not to believe that an attack from Russia was “inevitable”. I mean, the official responsibility of Australian officials and Ukrainian officials is to facilitate and assist in every possible way. But we in this situation we would like to avoid panic and different kinds of rumours that the invasion is inevitable ... But we do hope that we will be able to avoid a full-scale invasion. That we will prevail. And again, we consider international assistance and international support as one of the significant strengths of Ukraine in this situation. Foreign affairs minister Marise Payne has again confirmed that while Australia has joined the UK, US and EU in calling for the de-escalation of tensions, we will not engage militarily with Russia if the northern power does invade Ukraine. We have said that we will not be taking part or would not take part in relation to work and military assistance. I spoke with the foreign minister of Ukraine last weekend in a very constructive conversation and I had a further conversation with Australia’s ambassador in Kiev on Friday evening. However, she said we may help Ukraine fight off cyber-attacks. We are seeking to discuss possible avenues of assistance from Australia to the Ukrainian government. In the cyber context, there have been significant cyber-attacks already on Ukraine understood to come from potentially Russian sources. And just to be very clear, this is a challenge that they have been dealing with for some time. It’s time to talk about Ukraine. Australians in Ukraine are being urged to leave immediately as the threat of Russian military action against the country increases. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade on Monday night raised its advice to “Do Not Travel”. Australians in Ukraine should leave now by commercial means, where safe to do so, noting that flight availability could change or be suspended at short notice ... Australians who decide to remain in Ukraine should review their personal security plans, be prepared to shelter in place if required, maintain heightened security awareness and register with Dfat. Foreign affairs minister Marise Payne tells ABC radio that around 1,400 Australians are currently in the ex-Soviet country, confirming that “the security situation is unpredictable”. We strongly support Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and a unified European and Nato response ... Payne was asked what would actually happen if Russia invaded – could it escalate into a full-blown war? Again, I don’t like to speculate, but what is happening here is that authoritarian regimes are trying to exercise [their power] in relation to circumstances such as this, and it is not helpful to security or stability in any way, shape, or form. But we have been, again, very clear about that, as have multiple members of the EU, the UK and the United States, and we have clearly sort de-escalation of Russia’s behaviour in that regard. An early one from the NSW government today. We will be hearing from them at 9am AEDT. Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here, and there is a bunch of news to catch up on so let’s jump in. Two years ago today the first case of Covid-19 was detected in Australia, although back then it wasn’t even called that yet. We had heard of this scary-sounding virus circulating in Wuhan, as the news filtered through that the entire Chinese city was in lockdown. By the end of the day, we would have our first case, a man in his 50s who had spent time in the city and flown back to Melbourne from Guangzhou six days beforehand. Two years, 2.23m cases and more than 3,000 deaths later, here we are. But it’s not all bad news (although it’s still mostly bad news), as it seems like we might have seen the worst of Omicron for now (knock on wood). Federal health minister Greg Hunt yesterday declared infections had peaked in NSW, Victoria, the ACT and South Australia, with NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant also expressing optimism that the virus spread in her state appeared to be slowing and the situation stabilising. So is this light at the end of the tunnel? Or will we be sitting here reading another one of these posts in two years’ time? Why don’t we jump into the day’s news and see if we can find out?When Adnan Sheikh took his family on holiday to Sri Lanka last October, he booked them into a hotel for two weeks in Sarakkuwa beach, just off the coast from where the X-Press Pearl cargo ship caught fire and sank five months previously. Sheikh had been charmed by the online pictures of golden sandy beaches. But when the family arrived, it was a different story. “My kids wanted to play on the beaches and swim, but the beach was black and it seemed unsafe to even walk [on it],” says Sheikh. The charred fuel oil and burnt debris were from the wreckage of the container ship, and littered among them was perhaps the worst hazard of all: tiny plastic pellets called nurdles. Millions or even billions of nurdles have been washing up along the island’s coastline for hundreds of miles, from Mannar in the north to Kirinda in the south. A UN report called the incident in May 2021 the “single largest plastic spill” in history, with about 1,680 tonnes of nurdles released into the ocean. Most of them were partly burnt and contaminated with chemicals and debris from the ship spill, posing even more of a threat to marine life – and the local community. The disaster sparked a widespread clean-up effort. The the Marine Environment Protection Authority (Mepa) claim it organised about 50,000 local people to collect nurdles and other debris all across the island. Mepa says they have collected an estimated 60,000 bags of it so far. On Sarakkuwa, the volunteer cleaners are mainly women. They remove the nurdles using trommel machines, drum-like rotating sieves that filter plastic pellets from the sand. Other methods include hand-sieving and simply picking them out. In Sarakkuwa beach alone, the locals collect an average of 80-100kg of nurdles and debris every day, which they exchange for 3,000 rupees (£11) a day from the government. While the biggest, most visible piles of nurdles have been removed, it’s just the tip of the iceberg, says Hemantha Withanage, director and environmentalist at the Centre for Environmental Justice in Sri Lanka. “They completed the surface cleaning of nurdles, but nurdles are now buried under the sand, about two metres deep in some places. Most burnt nurdles are tiny particles we can’t remove with sieving or trommels.” A Sri Lankan firm has developed a new machine that can remove smaller pellets, but Mepa has rejected it due to its cost, says Withanage – though he claims the Sri Lankan government could attempt to recoup the expense from the shipping company. Sri Lanka has so far filed two interim claims. There is widespread anger here at the company’s perceived role in the nurdle spill. “These nurdles were stored inside polythene bags instead of hard containers, which made it easier to spill,” Withanage says. But Shmuel Yoskovitz, chief executive of X-Press Feeders, says his company is not to blame. “It is the responsibility of the shipper to pack the container, and thousands of containers are packed to these international standards every day as set by the International Maritime Organization, an agency of the United Nations. Our company carries boxes on our vessels; we are not a shipper and do not operate the boxes. Therefore we do not control the packaging in the containers. “Furthermore, we rely on accurate shippers’ cargo declarations for visibility into the contents of the container,” he says. “All containers are sealed and, by law, cannot be opened or inspected by us. As a company, we support tighter international regulations on the transportation of plastic nurdles.” A few weeks ago, a team from Mepa found a large polythene sack of nurdles buried a metre under the sand. Sri Lanka wants nurdles declared a toxic waste, and has submitted a proposal to regulate maritime transportation of plastic pellets to the IMO, which will be discussed this year. But that will not help Sri Lanka’s current situation. In 2019, before the pandemic hit, tourism made up 12.6% of Sri Lanka’s GDP, and is roughly the third largest source of foreign exchange. To Naleen Chathuranga, pastry chef at the three-star Goldi Sands hotel, located 10 miles north of Sarakkuwa on a vast sandy beach fringed with coconut palms and overlooking the azure ocean, the damage is deep. “Nurdles are everywhere now,” says Chathuranga, digging his toes into the moist sand to unearth dozens of tiny pellets. Nearby, as two teenage boys swim, every wave leaves a line of nurdles along the shore. But tourism can recover, he says. “Tourists know more than us about the ship disaster, but they still come here.” Visitors are slowly returning thanks to the area being close to the country’s international airport; for many tourists, Negombo is a pitstop before they fly out. The luxury hotels also spend money on their own private cleanup efforts to keep their local beaches clean. For the fishing community, however, there are fears the impact could be felt for a long time. “Fishing is really poor these days,” says Veerapalli Shiva, a 51-year-old fisherman originally from Kochchikade in Colombo. Shiva goes out to sea every day with 17 others who work for the owner of their boat. He only earned 250 rupees today, which is all he has to provide for his wife and three school-age children. “We’ve been fishing here since November, and not a single day was lucrative,” he says. “We only find small fishes now. Large fishes, who bag a better price in the market, are missing. This has never happened before.” Withanage says that most fishers were out of work for several months after the nurdle spill, and that the government was little help: Shiva only received 15,000 rupees as compensation; some received just 5,000. “The authorities have also forgotten that we are fishing in contaminated waters,” Withanage says. “These harmful effects should be added to the compensation claim so that the government can use funds to help them.” Meanwhile, the nurdles keep coming, piling up on the decks of the fishing boats. “Sometimes our feet were buried in tiny pellets,” Shiva says. “We don’t have a choice. We touch them every day. They have become a part of our life now.” • This article was amended on 26 January 2022 to clarify that the number of clean-up crew is an estimate by the Sri Lankan Marine Environment Protection Authority (Mepa), and to remove a reference to the 50kg capacity of the bags: in fact, the bags differ in sizeCampaigners who fought to “free” the Aboriginal flag have welcomed the federal government’s $20m deal to buy out the private companies who held exclusive licences over its use and charged Aboriginal community groups for permission. But they say questions remain about its future custodianship, now that copyright rests with the commonwealth, and are asking exactly how much public money the non-Indigenous businesses were paid to relinquish their control. “I feel like this is as good as we’re going to get in terms of freeing the Aboriginal flag,” Laura Thompson, convenor of the #freetheflag campaign, said on Tuesday. “It is a significant amount of money, but we paid $13m for the boxing kangaroo. Can you compare the significance of the Aboriginal flag to the boxing kangaroo? “My grandkids, my great-grandkids, will have the Aboriginal flag in their lives, uniting them and supporting their culture and making them feel safe in community.” On Monday, the federal government announced that after more than two years of “extremely complicated” negotiations, it had struck a deal to acquire copyright from the flag’s designer, Luritja artist Harold Thomas, and make it “free” for public use. Previously, Thomas’s sole copyright allowed him to grant licences to other parties to make copies of the flag, or refuse permission entirely. In 2018, he gave an exclusive licence to a non-Indigenous business called WAM Clothing, who raised the ire of many by issuing infringement notices to small non-profit Aboriginal organisations as well as the AFL and NRL, for their past use of the design. WAM Clothing is part-owned by Ben Wooster, whose previous company, Birubi Art, was fined a record $2.3m by the federal court after finding it had breached consumer law by selling fake Aboriginal art. The #freetheflag movement began after Thompson’s business, Clothing the Gaps, was served with a cease and desist notice from WAM. Thompson said it was a relief that private companies were now “out of the picture” but some questions remained. “The fact that the Aboriginal flag was controlled, and privately owned, is just absurd,” she said. “The question is now, with this payout, are they going to pay the fine back to the ACCC? We’ve got the Aboriginal flag back in the public domain, now we [have to] start to look at how did we end up in this mess in the first place, in a copyright tangle with the flag? “It really has to come back down to when the government proclaimed the flag back in 1995. They should have made sure that they bought the copyright, and made sure that it wasn’t under copyright at that time before they proclaimed it as an official flag of this country.” In 1995, the governor general proclaimed it along with the Torres Strait Islander flag. Other claimants came forward asserting they were the artist behind it but in 1997 the federal court officially recognised Thomas as the sole author. That meant he could assign licences. By 2019, amid mounting distress and confusion over who was able to use the design freely, a parliamentary inquiry was set up to look into the copyright and licensing arrangements. Its final report labelled WAM Clothing’s actions as “heavy-handed”. Labor senator Malarndirri McCarthy, who chaired the Senate select committee examining the Aboriginal flag, said she intended to seek answers about how future arrangements would operate. “I’d like to commend the people who gave evidence and advocated to help resolve this issue,” McCarthy said. “I look forward to examining the details around this deal through Senate estimates next month, in particular the copyright and custodianship of the flag.” The minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, told ABC Radio on Tuesday that “the benefits in the long term far outweigh what we expended”. “It’s about giving back the flag to be freely used,” he said. “Harold [Thomas] said he wanted the flag to be flown with dignity. It should be always be respected and from that first moment when it was flown in Adelaide, and then later at the tent embassy, it’s been highly valued. And our people do respect the three colours.” Thomas made a rare public statement on Monday and was photographed signing the deal as part of the government’s announcement. “I hope this arrangement provides comfort to all Aboriginal people and Australians to use the flag, unaltered, proudly and without restriction,” he said. “I am grateful that my art is appreciated by so many, and that it has come to represent something so powerful to so many.”The scale of the number of children who have lost out on their schooling during the pandemic is “nearly insurmountable”, according to a landmark new report. Up to 70% of 10-year-olds in low- and middle-income countries cannot read or understand a simple text, up from 53% pre-Covid, the research jointly published by Unesco, Unicef and the World Bank suggested. Classroom closures continue to affect more than 635 million children globally, with younger and more marginalised children facing the greatest loss in learning after almost two years of Covid, according to children’s agency Unicef, which called for intensive support to help students recover. Across the world, from Ethiopia to the US, children have lost basic literacy and numeracy skills and their mental and physical health has suffered. In South Africa, schoolchildren are between 75% and a whole school year behind where they should be, with up to 500,000 having dropped out of school altogether between March 2020 and October 2021. Learning losses have been seen in the US, including in California, Colorado, Tennessee, North Carolina, Ohio, Virginia and Maryland. In Texas, two-thirds of children in grade 3 (age eight to nine) tested below their grade level in maths in 2021, compared with half of children in 2019. In Ethiopia, primary age children are estimated to have learned between 30-40% of the maths they would have in a normal school year. Robert Jenkins, Unicef’s head of education, said: “In March, we will mark two years of Covid-related disruptions to global education. Quite simply, we are looking at a nearly insurmountable scale of loss to children’s schooling. While the disruptions to learning must end, just reopening schools is not enough. Students need intensive support to recover lost education. “Schools must also go beyond places of learning to rebuild children’s mental and physical health, social development and nutrition.” • This article was amended on 31 January 2022 to state that the report was jointly published by Unesco, Unicef and the World Bank; an earlier version had it as simply “the UN”.In late March 1948, the King Cole Trio released their second 78rpm single of the year. Already well known for crossover pop smashes such as (I Love You) for Sentimental Reasons, the trio were taking a flyer on something different for their next release. Initially buried on a B-side, Nature Boy was unlike anything else that they – or anyone else – had recorded. Cole sings the dreamy opening lyrics – “There was a boy / A very strange, enchanted boy” – with warm intimacy; the song ends with an eternal message: “The greatest thing you’ll ever learn / Is just to love and be loved in return.” The sides flipped, Nature Boy stayed at the top of the US pop charts for eight weeks in the spring of 1948, at a time of rapidly increasing tension: the start of the cold war and the anti-communist purge. For such a gentle, pacifistic song to have become the bestselling single of the year speaks to a sense of inchoate longing in the US at that time, barely three years after the second world war. After Nature Boy became a hit, in an appearance on the CBS show We the People, Cole finally met the man who had written his song, the year’s bestseller. In archive clips of the episode, eden ahbez (the lower case was preferred) has hair down to his shoulders and wears loose-fitting clothes; his style is nearly two decades ahead of his time. Reading from prepared scripts, these two outliers – a proto-hippy and an early African American crossover artist – tell the story of how Cole discovered the song, after it was delivered on spec to the Los Angeles theatre where he was performing. To the incredulity of the host, ahbez announces that he has “not much use for money”. It’s no small irony that this devotee of simple living – albeit with an entrepreneurial side – is being presented on a talkshow on a major US network, produced by Life magazine and sponsored by Gulf Oil. As ahbez rides on to the stage on his bicycle and then assumes a yoga position, he makes it clear that he will not conform to the values of corporate America: in his sheer strangeness, he is a harbinger of things to come. Nature Boy has gone on to become a 20th-century classic, with numerous cover versions recorded by artists as diverse as Miles Davis, John Coltrane, Mantovani, Grace Slick, Nick Cave, Frank Sinatra and David Bowie. It is one of those songs that transcends time and space: not just because of the sentiment, or the seductive swoon of Cole’s original, but also because of ahbez, who tapped into the deep longings that have always lain underneath the surface of mass culture. ahbez was born George Alexander Aberle in mid-April 1908, to a poor Brooklyn family. After his mother died, he was placed in an orphanage before being fostered, at the age of nine, by a family in Kansas. There is scant information about his teenage years, but during the Great Depression he hoboed his way around the midwest, working as an itinerant musician. Towards the end of the 1930s, he moved to Miami, where he learned about meditation and a healthy diet. It was at this time that he wrote an early version of Nature Boy. Moving to Los Angeles in the mid-1940s, Aberle became ahbez. He fell in with a group of nature mystics that included John and Vera Richter, the owners of the Eutropheon, a vegetarian cafe on Laurel Canyon Boulevard. Like the long-haired “hermit turned showman” William Pester – whom it is thought ahbez met in the late 1930s – the Richters were adherents of lebensreform (life reform), a philosophy that had begun in Switzerland and Germany in the first decade of the 20th century. Coexisting with the early Wandervogel – or wandering birds, the young, usually male, hikers who advocated a return to nature – lebensreform pioneers congregated in communities, foreswore private property, and practised vegetarianism and organic farming, in an attempt to counter the toxins of mechanised contemporary life. Visitors included Hermann Hesse, Carl Jung, Paul Klee, Rudolf Steiner and Hugo Ball. This was one seedbed for an alternative lifestyle that would flourish during the next 50 years. ahbez was directly influenced by Pester – thought to be the inspiration for Nature Boy – and came into contact with these ideas at the Eutropheon, where he worked. Nature Boy was the conduit through which vegetarian ideals, nonconformism and notions of living in harmony with nature began to filter into US culture. True to his beliefs, ahbez continued to live rough even after the song had earned him generous royalties; he camped for a short period under the then Hollywood sign. The first strands of ahbez’s influence can be seen in the mid-1950s exotica boom: the musical genre popularised by Martin Denny and Les Baxter that evoked escapist dreams. In 1960, ahbez released his only solo album, Eden’s Island, which gently evokes a Pacific Island with the sounds of surf and wind, gulls, soothing flutes and hypnotic sprechgesang. That year, he also recorded a song called Surf Rider, placing him at the start of the surf boom that began in 1961 with records by Dick Dale, the Bel-Airs and the Beach Boys. In 1963, he came up with a paean to the jazz festival at Monterey – featuring John Harris on vocals and the jazz great Paul Horn on flute – which namechecks Miles Davis and celebrates the place where “the hippies play”. ahbez finally found himself in tune with his time, as the early hippies around him began to assume the values he had held for 25 years. In 1966, Grace Slick played a version of Nature Boy with her first group, the Great Society; their echoey live recording – dominated by a flute that echoes ahbez’s favoured, handmade instrument – was the first time I ever heard the song. That year, ahbez was photographed in the studio with Brian Wilson, who was hitting new creative heights with Good Vibrations and the sessions for the Smile album: indeed, Beach Boys tunes such as Vegetables and the exotic instrumental Let’s Go Away for a While fit right into the ahbez aesthetic. Discouraged by the lack of success of his solo LP, and devastated by the death of his wife, Anna, in 1963, ahbez quit recording in the late 1960s, although hundreds of manuscripts of his songs were lodged at the Library of Congress. Even as he disappeared from popular culture, his influence persisted: in 1968, the Beatles released Mother Nature’s Son on the White Album; the song was written by Paul McCartney under the direct influence of Nat King Cole’s version of Nature Boy. ahbez died in Palm Springs in 1995 from injuries sustained in a car accident; he was 86. In recent years, there has been renewed interest in his work and life, with a reissue of Eden’s Island, and two excellent compilations of hard-to-find material: 2014’s The Exotic World of eden ahbez, and 2016’s Wild Boy: The Lost Songs. Compiled by film-maker and ahbez expert Brian Chidester, these albums range from exotica, offbeat rock’n’roll and surf to ahbez’s trademark beatific ambience. Chidester was also instrumental in producing the remarkable 2021 album Eden Ahbez’s Dharmaland, which showcased some of ahbez’s songs rescued from the Library of Congress and reinterpreted by the Swedish group Ìxtahuele. With a film of ahbez’s life, As the Wind: The Enchanted Life of Eden Ahbez, currently in production, this extraordinary time traveller seems finally set to get his due – well over 70 years after his most famous song introduced him and his beliefs to the world. An expanded edition of Eden’s Island is out now via Rough Trade.When it was announced in the first days of the coronavirus pandemic in March 2020, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, described the furlough scheme as “as one of the most significant economic interventions at any point in the history of the British state and by any government anywhere in the world”. Boris Johnson and Sunak were proud of a trailblazing scheme that would pay 80% of the wages of up to 11.7 million workers up to a maximum of £2,500 a month. “We have put aside ideology and orthodoxy to mobilise the full power and resources of the British state,” Sunak said from the 10 Downing Street lectern. Furlough payments were just one of a number of schemes hastily introduced by the government in the early stages of the pandemic to support individuals and businesses financially. Others included the self-employed income support programme, “eat out to help out” – and the business Bounce Back Loan Scheme (BBLS). In the House of Lords on Monday, Theodore Agnew, the minister responsible for Whitehall efficiency and counter-fraud, singled out lax oversight of the BBLS in his dramatic resignation speech. Lord Agnew criticised oversight of Covid loans by the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy and the British Business Bank, a state lender, saying it had been “nothing less than woeful”. He added that Sunak’s department, the Treasury, appeared to have “no knowledge or little interest” in the consequences of fraud. The warning signs have long been visible, such as multiple companies being formed at the same address. And the first prosecutions have started trickling through. The government has long pointed to the wartime footing under which its support schemes were rolled out, and the urgent need to pump cash into the economy or risk the collapse of vast numbers of businesses. In a debate in the House of Commons earlier this month, John Glen, economic secretary to the Treasury, claimed the government has “taken the issue of potential fraud relating to Covid grant schemes extremely seriously”, but said “it would have been impossible to prevent all related fraud”. However, right from the start the Covid financial support announcements sparked concern at the headquarters of HM Revenue and Custom further down Whitehall. “From the beginning it was clear the schemes would be targets for fraud and that customers would make mistakes,” HMRC said last year as it wrote off £4.3bn stolen through the various Covid-19 emergency support schemes. HMRC believes that about £5.8bn – or £1 in every £14 of the £81.2bn paid out through the schemes – has been stolen. So far just £500m has been recovered, and it expects only another £800m-£1bn may be recovered by 2023. In March, the business department estimated that 37% of bounce back loans, worth £17bn, would not be repaid and that 11% came from fraudulent applications. A subsequent investigation by the accountancy firm PwC in October revised the fraud rate down to 7.5%, although the National Audit Office said in its December report that it had not had time to check this estimate itself. The NAO had long singled out the government’s “inadequate” attempts to tackle fraud within the £47bn BBLS scheme that was designed to try to help save companies at risk of collapse during the pandemic. It said anti-fraud checks for the scheme had been “implemented too slowly”, with limited verification and no credit checks on borrowers. As the scheme progressed 13 additional counter-fraud measures were introduced, but most came too late to prevent fraud and were focused instead on detection. Gareth Davies, the head of the NAO, has warned that the fraud already identified could be just the tip of the iceberg. “The true level of fraud will become clearer over time,” he said.The Solihull Moors striker Andrew Dallas achieved a personal best on Saturday when he scored all the goals in the 5-0 victory over Dover Athletic. While being on the receiving end of such a feat was painful for Dover, the club could soon register an even less desirable landmark. Failure to beat Eastleigh at home on Tuesday would mean the National League’s bottom side will have gone a full year without winning a match. Actually, make that nearly two years. Because Dover’s 3-1 victory over Barnet on 26 January 2021 was expunged, along with all their other results from last season, meaning that, officially, their most recent win was the 5-1 triumph over Fylde on 22 February 2020. An amusing piece of trivia, perhaps, but Dover’s woes are no laughing matter. This is a club which had made great progress until the pandemic struck. The table only hints at how things have gone awry: four draws and 20 defeats from 24 matches this season have left them with a points tally of -8. They began their campaign on -12 points as punishment for not fulfilling fixtures last season, when their chairman, Jim Parmenter, refused to take out a loan to enable his team to play on. Parmenter, who had presided over three promotions since taking over his hometown club in 2005, maintains that, once it became clear that National Lottery grants would only cover the first two months of last season, the responsible course of action would have been for the whole National League to stop until crowds returned. But as a majority of clubs (13) voted to continue, Dover were ordered to toe the line. “Last season I said I’m not going to put the club in hock for half a million to a million pounds to play games in a nothing season with no crowds and no community activity,” says Parmenter, who argued that the league’s stance was hypocritical after years of encouraging clubs to be financially prudent. “I took the club over in 2005 when it was half a million in debt and about to go out of business and had suffered two relegations. I sorted all that out and got the club back into the National League. I said at the time I’m never going to put the club back into debt because it’s a road to ruin. “So last season I said I’m going to put all the people on furlough so that they’re still earning money because I can’t afford to pay them and we’ll sit tight until we’re allowed crowds back in. And for that I was punished with a 12-point deduction and £40,000 fine. How does that help the good of football?” He resigned from the league’s board in the wake of that decision. Parmenter also objected to suggestions he should have stumped up the money if he did not want to take out loans. “One of the written reasons [from the league] was that I didn’t tell them enough about my personal financial situation to justify what I did,” he says. “The football club is a limited company; why would I tell them about my personal financial situation? They were basically saying I should sell my house and pay for the football club. I’ve probably put £5m into the club since 2005 so I think I’ve done my bit.” Parmenter, who has retired from the grocery business he used to run, still bankrolls a portion of Dover’s annual budget, which he says is between £1m and £1.2m. He is looking for investors. “The good thing is we’ll get to the end of this season with no debt and then we’ll be in a position to push on next season,” he says. “We’ll be relegated – probably – but without the loans that the two other clubs who go down will probably have taken and I think that’s what prudent management should be.” Dover lost most of their players after their premature end to last season and began this campaign with an almost entirely new squad. “We had to go from full-time to part-time overnight because we couldn’t afford full-time wages,” Parmenter says. “We’re now training two nights a week instead of four days and, therefore, you have a different type of player. We can’t afford to compete with the multimillion-pound budgets in this league. We played Stockport County and I think two of their players were earning more than our entire squad.” Yet Dover have not looked completely out of their depth. Their home games attract between 700 and 800 spectators, about 30% down on pre-Covid levels. “I think what most football fans want to see is competitive matches and, funny as it sounds, I still go to the ground thinking: ‘We have a chance of winning today,’” says Paul Harrison, who has been watching Dover for nearly two decades. “Apart from four or five matches we’ve been in every game. You can still see the players’ effort and drive. Maybe when things go against them, like conceding a goal, it’s harder to get the oomph to fight back.” Harrison says he and his family will be in attendance on Tuesday. “Whenever we get that win, I hope it’s at home so that we can have a quick drink afterwards.”The Daily Mail and the Mail on Sunday have been banging on a lot lately about freedom of expression. An editorial declared it to be a “dark day” when the newspaper group lost its legal battle with Meghan Markle. She’d sued them for publishing extracts from a private letter she’d sent to her estranged father. I’ve got to know the Mail’s legal department quite well over the past few months – though its client’s commitment to freedom of expression hasn’t been quite so clear in my case. The Mail’s lawyers appear to be fixated with my play Bloody Difficult Women and have been bombarding the Riverside Studios theatre in west London and my producers with emails and letters. Paul Dacre, the Mail’s editor in chief, appears in it as a character, and the lawyers said Dacre would very much like to see a copy of the script to check it for factual accuracy. These repeated requests have all been declined. The play focuses on the court case my old friend Gina Miller won against Theresa May’s government over the issue of parliamentary sovereignty. Dacre is an unavoidable part of that story: the “Enemies of the people” headline he ran on his paper’s front page, alongside photographs of the high court judges who found in Miller’s favour, caused uproar. There were a great many – not least in the legal profession – who took the view it was the lowest point in the whole acrimonious Brexit saga. Apart from Dacre and Miller, Bloody Difficult Women features two other real-life characters, in Theresa May and Alan Miller, Gina’s husband. The Mail’s legal team suggested I had given May and the Millers sight of the script. For the avoidance of doubt, none of them has requested – or been granted – that privilege. Quite frankly, I found it hard enough writing a play without four of its leading characters leaning over my shoulder seeing if they come out of it well. Though the lawyers said their client had no wish to restrict my or the theatre’s artistic freedom of expression, the prospect of a character as menacing as Dacre going through every word of the script is, of course, more than a wee bit inhibiting. May’s office, while courteous and interested when I told them about the play, raised no objections. Even the title – a nod to Ken Clarke’s famous off-mic description of the former prime minister – left them unperturbed. With Gina, I wanted to check the basic timetable of events leading up to the case and beyond, but that was it. She gamely tweeted that she would be watching it through her fingers. Still, I can understand, given there has been press speculation that Dacre is the “villain of the piece” (and that I don’t share his views about Brexit), that he might have special concerns. Every day, however, a great many people no doubt have special concerns about what his newspapers are going to write about them, but they are seldom, if ever, granted sight of the stories ahead of publication. Long before the EU referendum and the start of that almighty national row, I’d worked for Dacre as a feature writer, and, latterly, deputy to the late diarist Nigel Dempster, for almost a decade. Our relationship was respectful, but not close. He was and is, as I make clear in the play, a strident character. The last of the all-powerful – one might say imperial – editors. The letters from his legal department have made for a few dark days for me, too, but I’ve had the play painstakingly factchecked. From the outset, I strained to be fair to all its characters and kept in mind Chekhov’s rule that plays shouldn’t be about good or bad people, only people. All I want now is for the show to go on. The plan had originally been to open last June, but that was put back to November on account of the pandemic and so its launch next month will, I’m confident, be third time lucky. It is a play that seems to be acquiring over time a certain radical chic. All journalists can, of course, be thin-skinned and I am no exception. I recall, when I was working for Dacre, being upset when I’d read that Norma Major, the former prime minister’s wife, had said a biography I’d written of her had been “99% inaccurate”. I asked Dacre if anything could be done and he wearily intoned that if I was going to dish it out, I’d have to learn to take it too. I await the reviews for Bloody Difficult Women in the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday with trepidation, but I’ve no intention of asking to “fact check” them ahead of publication. Tim Walker is a journalist and author. His latest book, Star Turns, is an anthology of interviews. Bloody Difficult Women begins its run at the Riverside Studios in west London on 24 FebruaryHundreds of thousands of predominantly older people and those living in rural areas will be forced to upgrade their mobile phones by the end of 2023, as Vodafone sets a deadline for switching off its ageing 3G network next year with a promise that “no one will be left behind”. Vodafone, which has about 18 million UK mobile customers, is to turn off the almost two-decade-old network as usage dwindles to focus on using the freed up spectrum to expand its 4G and 5G networks. However, the company, which is to phase out 3G along the same timeline as EE-owner BT, admits that there are hundreds of thousands of customers who have stuck with their 3G-only phones, particularly older owners who have not been enticed to join the smartphone revolution. In addition, areas of the UK including parts of Cornwall, rural Scotland and north Norfolk still only have 3G coverage, in total about 2.2% of the UK, although there is voice call capability in these areas thanks to a 2G signal. “We start communicating to customers about this today,” said Ahmed Essam, chief executive of Vodafone UK. “Our goal is for everyone to stay connected, and we will be doing everything we can to make sure that is the case.” Vodafone, which is launching an awareness campaign to make sure no customers are left in the equivalent of the digital dark when the 3G signal is switched off next year, estimates that well over 2 million people are still using 3G handsets across all of the UK’s mobile networks. The company intends to encourage tech-savvy younger smartphone users to “check in” with family and friends to see if they may need to upgrade their phone. “There are people who aren’t confident with technology,” said Essam. “We want to ensure that everyone is getting the help that they need, so no one is left behind.” A year-long communications campaign includes partnering with organisations including the Good Things Foundation, which aims to achieve digital inclusion across all socio-economic groups, with an announcement on a partner specifically focused on older demographics expected in the coming weeks. “With the move away from 3G, people risk being disconnected, locked out and left behind,” said Helen Milner, group chief executive at Good Things Foundation. Vodafone, which launched its 3G network in the UK in November 2004, said that today less than 4% of data used by customers is carried on the network. As recently as 2016, the 3G network carried 30% of data. “3G has connected so many customers over the last 17 years, but the future is 4G and 5G,” said Essam. Vodafone, which has already switched off 3G networks in Germany and Italy, said that in the long run the switch-off of 3G will benefit the environment as it is built with what is now considered inefficient equipment, with 5G networks 10 times more efficient. Last summer, BT became the first operator to announce it will phase out its 3G network in a staged approach with full switch-off completed by the end of next year. The UK’s other two leading mobile operators, Three and Virgin Media O2, have not announced any plans to switch off their 3G services. Three UK’s parent company, Hutchison, paid £4.4bn for the UK’s first 3G licence in 2000 and launched the first network in March 2003.“Hank has popped up every now and then,” Keith Earls says with a wry smile when I ask if he is still haunted by the dark side of his character. Earls has won 96 caps for Ireland but his fiercest battle as a rugby player has been with bipolar disorder. The 34-year-old, who has played 186 games for Munster since his debut in 2007, calls his destructive alter-ego “Hank”. It echoes the way in which, in Me, Myself &amp; Irene, Jim Carrey played the part of a state trooper who, after a mental breakdown, developed a different personality called Hank. “But I have a lot more good days than bad days,” Earls says at home in Limerick. “A couple of years ago I probably had one good day a month. Bipolar could affect me for weeks but now it’s one or two bad days every few months. But sometimes I get confident and say: ‘Look, I’m better. It’s all OK now.’ I fall into bad habits and all of a sudden your man Hank is back again. “This season I opened a coffee roaster business in Limerick and I don’t like too much going on in my head. It can create havoc. So, setting that up, I found it tough. Now it’s important because the coffee business helps me relax and I know there’s something for me after rugby. But Hank pops up whenever my mind is cluttered or I’m knocked out of my routine.” Earls is open and brave and he admits that “Hank the bastard is still lurking around, always looking to become a lodger in my head again.” That arresting line comes from his compelling autobiography which paints a vivid picture of all the obstacles Earls has overcome. He grew up in Limerick’s close-knit but sometimes dangerous neighbourhood of Moyross. As a working-class man it has taken him years to adjust to rugby’s privileged world. He felt embarrassed by his ignorance of the shallow niceties of etiquette and by a deeper struggle to read and write. Hank preyed on those insecurities as he turned Earls into a deeply negative, depressed and angry person with no self-esteem. Earls had played only twice for Ireland when Ian McGeechan chose him for the Lions tour of South Africa in 2009. McGeechan was smitten by the then 21-year-old’s skill and pace. But no one understood how psychologically unprepared he was for the Lions. He played five games, and scored two tries, but his performances were so error-strewn it took years to rebuild his shattered confidence. He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder four years later, but did he sense the presence of Hank in South Africa? “Hank was always there but he really came out after that tour. Rugby was my thing to get away from life. But after the Lions, particularly that first game [where he was traumatised by self-doubt], Hank started to take over. I got to a stage where I hated rugby. The one thing I enjoyed now made me feel like shit. That Lions tour is the best and worst thing that ever happened to me.” Earls still managed to perform for Munster and Ireland but his mental health plummeted. In 2013, feeling desperate, he finally looked for help. “I spoke with the doctor in the Irish camp because my first daughter, Ella May, was born with a rare heart condition. I went down a deep rabbit hole. My head was gone and I had anxiety about everything. “The doctor sent me to a [psychiatrist] in Cork who said: ‘I think you are bipolar so keep an eye on your emotions and come back in a few weeks.’ But I was so fed up I told him I wasn’t leaving his office until he fixed me – or gave me a pill because I was so sick and tired and exhausted. He decided to start me on tablets. I was delighted with the diagnosis and to know it was more common than I had thought.” Earls was still ravaged by worry and class-driven uncertainty. When he first attended post-match banquets with Ireland he had no idea which cutlery to use. He also remembers being mortified when he misheard his teammates requesting horseradish at their five-star hotel. There were howls of laughter when Earls asked for some of that “horse hummus”. In his 30s, and with over 70 caps to his name, he still felt like a misfit. In 2020 Earls opened up to Andy Farrell, Ireland’s coach who had grown up in working-class Wigan playing rugby league. “We were on a camp in Portugal and Andy had one-on-ones with all of us. He asked what I was going to do after rugby. I said: ‘I don’t know. I obviously like the coffee business but I’m embarrassed. I can’t read that well, I can’t spell, I can’t write well.’ He was brilliant. He knows a lot of people, even himself, who aren’t good spellers. He said learn from predictive text and get into good habits. “A couple of weeks later we were in a Six Nations camp. We do things to have a craic and break up meetings so Simon Easterby decided we’d have a spelling competition, backs against forwards. Get three backs up, three forwards up. I was sitting at the front thinking: ‘Oh God, don’t pick me.’ It went to a tie-break and I was called up. In the rugby world you can’t get away with not doing anything. But I said: ‘I’m not getting up.’ It was getting awkward and then Andy just stood up and said: ‘Earlsy doesn’t do spelling competitions.’ He picked someone else and defused the whole situation. “Simon apologised a few days later. I was like: ‘No. I should have just said I can’t spell.’ I’m not embarrassed now and I’m thinking about getting tested. I think I struggle with dyslexia.” Earls and I had swapped texts before the interview and his spelling had been perfect. Dyslexia has nothing to do with intelligence. “Exactly,” he says. “I keep working on it but it’s tough when your 10-year-old daughter is asking you to spell stuff for homework and I can’t do it. But I’ll keep working on it and, as you said, there are different forms of intelligence. Some of the least educated people can do lots of things and then you have the most intelligent people who don’t get on so well in real life. You need to be comfortable with yourself and not be frightened to ask for help.” He recently won Ireland’s Sports Book of the Year, and, while much is down to the skill of his ghostwriter, Tommy Conlan, Earls’s vision and emotion shaped his autobiography. “I had sleepless nights before the book came out. I exposed a lot but I’m quite a private person. Even though the book has been a success I still sometimes think: ‘Jeez, we shouldn’t tell anyone about this.’ But the response has been unbelievable. It’s reached men, women, kids of all ages in different countries. I’m proud of that.” Earls was concerned most about the reaction of people in Moyross. “It’s been phenomenal,” he says. “My parents are still on that side of the city and so many people have said to them they’re proud of me and Moyross. I wanted to tell the truth that it was a dangerous place and some turn to crime and drugs. But 95% of people there are of fine integrity and have great families.” He and his wife, Edel, have been together for 21 years, since they were 13-year-old schoolkids. “One of the Moyross lads who I used to hang around set myself and Edel up. When you’re young and shy it’s hard to ask a girl for a date so he did that for me and that’s where it all started for me and Edel. When we had Ella May in 2012 we walked out of a restaurant in Limerick and this same lad was sitting outside [begging]. He had gone down one route and I went down another. He’d experimented with heroin and had a rough time. It showed how close the two roads are.” Earls and his wife talked to their old friend and gave him some money. He says now: “Thankfully, I saw him a few weeks ago and he was strolling along with a kid in a buggy. He looked fresh and so much better. I know he does relapse sometimes as heroin is highly addictive. But he looks in a good position now.” The Munster wing also feels in a good position after he solved a worrying physical problem which meant that, from 2017 to 2020, his lungs operated at only 50% of their usual capacity. “I’d be training, playing matches and going into spasm. I couldn’t breathe. Sometimes, after a 10-second workout, I’d be knackered. It nearly drove me to retirement. In the [2020] Autumn Nations Cup against Wales, I was on the bench but, warming up, I said: ‘For fuck’s sake, I can’t breathe.’ “We played England the following week and Andy picked me to start. I was like: ‘There’s no way I can play.’ But Phil Glasgow, the physio, knew some respiratory specialists in London. We landed in London, got straight into a taxi and went to a hospital to get special MRIs and see a breathing specialist. They came to the conclusion my liver was floating up into my chest cavity and pressing on my diaphragm which was sending everything into spasm. He came up with a simple solution of trying to tape my liver down. I went out two days later and played 80 minutes for the first time in 10 weeks and felt amazing. I haven’t looked back.” Does he tape up his torso before every game? “Yes. It’s like wearing a corset, everything held in place.” This season has been difficult as Covid and postponements mean that Earls has played less than usual. But he started three of Munster’s four European games and only missed Sunday’s victory over Wasps following a late withdrawal owing to a strain. Munster are now in the last 16 of the European Champions Cup and last week he was included in Ireland’s Six Nations squad. Has he allowed himself to imagine winning his 100th cap? “Yes. It would be great. I’m happy with 96, it’s a big number, but everyone’s saying: ‘You have to get to a hundred.’ If I am fit and well I don’t doubt that 100 caps would come. But if it doesn’t, so be it.” That philosophical approach has calmed Earls. It has taken him many years but, with the help of “behavioural therapy”, writing a journal and talking openly, Earls keeps Hank at bay. He smiles as, in the room next door, his three daughters kick up a happy racket. Hank won’t like it – but Earls looks at peace. “I definitely am getting there. I spent a lot of years not being myself because I was embarrassed. I always thought other people were better than me and I’d try and be like them. But I’ve finally become comfortable with who I am. I understand what I stand for as a person and a rugby player. I definitely have the right balance in my life now.” Fight or Flight by Keith Earls is published by ReachAt the beginning of our relationship my husband was not faithful. He had secret affairs and flirtations that I was suspicious about, but if I brought it up, I was called crazy and accused of sabotaging our relationship. It wasn’t until our first child was born, after four years of marriage, that he felt extreme guilt and remained faithful. Shortly after baby number two was born three years later, he told me that he was polyamorous and has a crush at work. There are times when he emotionally pulls away and this is when I think he desires more than just me. When I told him I was ready to break up, he claimed he would do anything not to lose me. We started dating again but, after two weeks, he asked me to consider having a threesome. I feel I have reached a point where I am ready to settle down and that is why I married him. But it appears to me that he does not feel the same way. I cannot understand why – if he loves me like he says he does – I am not enough? Some people find monogamy impossible. They are just wired that way. In fact, monogamy is difficult for most people. I understand that trust is very important to you, yet right from the beginning you knew your husband was rarely just with you. You have stayed with him and had children, and there is clearly deep love between you so I am wondering why have you now reached a point where his non-monogamous lifestyle is insufferable? In reality, he is not going to change. Your choices are to separate, or stay with him and make the most of what is good between you – despite the torture. You would do well to consider what it is about you that binds you to this constant state of disappointment and longing. After you understand that, you may make the healthier choice. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Taylor Swift has called out Damon Albarn, lead singer of Blur and later of Gorillaz, on Twitter after the British musician told the LA Times she “doesn’t write her own songs”. “I was such a big fan of yours until I saw this,” the American singer, 32, tweeted at Albarn. “I write ALL of my own songs. Your hot take is completely false and SO damaging. You don’t have to like my songs but it’s really fucked up to try and discredit my writing. WOW.” Albarn had used Swift, in a promotional interview for a concert in Los Angeles, as an example of modern artists who hide behind “sound and attitude”. When the interviewer pointed out that Swift writes or co-writes all of her songs, Albarn responded: “That doesn’t count. I know what co-writing is. Co-writing is very different to writing. I’m not hating on anybody, I’m just saying there’s a big difference between a songwriter and a songwriter who co-writes.” He also compared Swift unfavourably to the dark-pop phenom Billie Eilish, whom he called “exceptional”. Eilish co-writes her songs with her brother, producer Finneas. Albarn later apologised, writing to Swift on Twitter: “I totally agree with you. I had a conversation about songwriting and sadly it was reduced to clickbait. I apologise unreservedly and unconditionally. The last thing I would want to do is discredit your songwriting. I hope you understand.” Producer Jack Antonoff, who has worked with Swift since her 2014 album 1989, also weighed in on Twitter on Monday afternoon: “i’ve never met damon albarn and he’s never been to my studio but apparently he knows more than the rest of us about all those songs taylor writes and brings in. herb.” “[I]f you were there … cool … go off. if not … maybe …. shut the fuck up?” he added in a separate tweet. The National’s Aaron Dessner, who has become a frequent Swift collaborator since her 2020 albums Folklore and Evermore, also came to her defence. “Not sure why you @Damonalbarn would try to discredit Taylor’s brilliant songwriting but as someone who has gotten to press record around her ...your statements couldn’t be further from the truth...you’re obviously completely clueless as to her actual writing and work process”. This is not the first time Swift has taken to social media to address indirect slights. In March 2021, she posted on Twitter to express dissatisfaction with a joke made on the Netflix show Ginny &amp; Georgia, in which a character said another goes “through men faster than Taylor Swift”. “Hey Ginny &amp; Georgia, 2010 called and it wants its lazy, deeply sexist joke back,” she tweeted. “How about we stop degrading hard working women by defining this horse shit as FuNnY.” Albarn, for his part, once publicly feuded with Adele, after he told an interviewer she was “insecure”, called her 2015 album “very middle of the road”, and speculated that music they had worked on together would not end up on the record. Adele responded in a Rolling Stone cover story shortly before the release of 25: “He said I was insecure, when I’m the least insecure person I know. I was asking his opinion about my fears, about coming back with a child involved – because he has a child – and then he calls me insecure? “It ended up being one of those ‘don’t meet your idol’ moments,” she added. “And the saddest thing was that I was such a big Blur fan growing up. But it was sad, and I regret hanging out with him.”Marilyn Manson has denied raping the actor Evan Rachel Wood on the set of the music video for his 2007 single Heart-Shaped Glasses (When the Heart Guides the Hand). In Phoenix Rising, a new documentary about Wood’s life and career which premiered at the 2022 Sundance film festival, Wood said that during a previously discussed “simulated sex scene”, Manson, born Brian Warner, “started penetrating me for real” once the cameras were rolling. “I had never agreed to that,” she said. She said she was fed absinthe on the set of the video, in which she plays a character styled as Lolita, and was barely conscious to object to Manson’s alleged actions. Manson’s lawyer Howard King denied Wood’s claims in a statement to the Guardian: “Of all the false claims that Evan Rachel Wood has made about Brian Warner, her imaginative retelling of the making of the Heart-Shaped Glasses music video 15 years ago is the most brazen and easiest to disprove, because there were multiple witnesses. “Evan was not only fully coherent and engaged during the three-day shoot but also heavily involved in weeks of pre-production planning and days of post-production editing of the final cut. The simulated sex scene took several hours to shoot with multiple takes using different angles and several long breaks in between camera setups. “Brian did not have sex with Evan on that set, and she knows that is the truth.” Wood said that she had “never been on a set that unprofessional in my life up until this day. It was complete chaos and I did not feel safe. No one was looking after me.” She said she didn’t know how to advocate for herself or say no “because I had been conditioned and trained to never talk back – to just soldier through” and claimed that the crew “was very uncomfortable and nobody knew what to do”. She said the alleged incident made her feel “disgusting and like I had done something shameful”. “I was coerced into a commercial sex act under false pretences. That’s when the first crime was committed against me and I was essentially raped on camera.” She said that Manson, born Brian Warner, gave her “really clear” instructions on how she should describe the video to journalists. “I was supposed to tell people we had this great, romantic time and none of that was the truth,” she says. “But I was scared to do anything that would upset Brian in any way. The video was just the beginning of the violence that would keep escalating over the course of the relationship.” Manson, however, teased the media with the notion that there was truth to the video’s apparent “realism”. Wood previously accused Manson, with whom she was in a relationship from 2007 to 2010, of grooming her when she was a teenager and said he “horrifically abused me for years. I was brainwashed and manipulated into submission.” Wood met Manson in 2006. She was 18, he was 38. She is among a number of women, including Game of Thrones actor Esmé Bianco, who have accused Manson of sexual and physical violence involving torture. Manson has denied the charges made against him, calling them “horrible distortions of reality … my intimate relationships have always been entirely consensual”. He is facing up to four lawsuits accusing him of sexual assault, battery and harassment as well as an investigation into allegations of domestic violence incidents by the Los Angeles County sheriff’s department, which raided his home in November 2021. After Vanity Fair published an article detailing the first of these allegations in February 2021, Manson was dropped by his record label, Loma Vista. Manson has received support from the rapper Kanye West, who brought him out at a livestream event for his album Donda, on which Manson appears, and at one of his Sunday Service events. Manson shares in the Grammy nominations for Donda, which is up for album of the year and best rap song for Jail, on which Manson appears. Following controversy over his recognition, Recording Academy president and CEO Harvey Mason Jr said that personal and legal matters would not affect artists’ eligibility. Phoenix Rising, a film by Oscar-nominated director Amy Berg, will air on HBO in the US in March. It also follows the creation of the Phoenix Act, legislation led by Wood that extends the statute of limitations for survivors of domestic violence to pursue charges against their abusers, which was signed into law in October 2019.Anthony Albanese has said Labor “will always be better” on health and education than the Coalition, in a signal the opposition will outbid the Morrison government on health funding leading into the 2022 federal election. The Labor leader made the comments at the National Press Club on Tuesday after a speech committing to a “strong, properly funded public health system, with Medicare as its backbone”. Scott Morrison has urged Australians to “push through” the Omicron wave, but with a surge of cases over summer and new records set for hospitalisations and deaths, health has emerged as a weak spot for the Coalition despite lower Covid mortality in Australia than internationally. In October the Morrison government rejected a united call from all states and territories for an immediate funding boost to help them manage the “unrelenting strain” on health and hospital systems from the pandemic, labelling it “shakedown politics”. On Tuesday Albanese argued that the greatest lesson from the Covid-19 pandemic was “what a grave mistake it would be to take our public health system and Medicare for granted”. “Right now, our health workers are paying the price for some of the most serious public policy failures our country has seen,” he said. “They are overworked. They are exhausted.” Albanese said Australians “owe it to them to study what the pandemic has revealed about the vulnerabilities of our public health system – and strengthen it for the future”. “Right now, we could strengthen both the safety net and our sense that we are all in this together by making rapid antigen tests available free to every Australian through Medicare.” “Labor will always strengthen Medicare … a Labor government will deal with the damage inflicted by nine long years of neglect from this Liberal government. “Protecting the health of Australians will be a defining issue in the upcoming election. And a critical choice will be this: who do you trust to keep Medicare safe?” The comments raise the spectre of another election fought on trust over health funding, after Labor’s controversial claim the Coalition intended to privatise Medicare helped achieve an against-the-odds swing to the opposition. The Coalition labelled the claim a “cold-blooded lie”. Asked if Labor will provide more funding to hospitals, Albanese said: “Labor will always be better on health and education than our opponent. “We’ve already announced a range of policies out there. And there will be more to come.” Albanese said Labor saw the need for “an assessment” of the Covid response, but it would be appropriate to determine its form after “the heat of the pandemic” had passed. “Whether that be a royal commission or some form of inquiry, that will need to happen.” Albanese suggested another priority, if elected, would be “federation reform,” but declined to give specifics because “you can’t say that you want to work with the states and territories and then impose things from the commonwealth”. “We need a clearer delineation of who is responsible for what,” he said, arguing that despite funding and regulating aged care, the commonwealth still sought to blame states for outcomes in aged care. Although no progress has been made at national cabinet since the commonwealth rejected the hospital funding call, states including Victoria and Queensland will continue to press the issue. Stephen Duckett, director of the health and aged care program at the Grattan Institute, recommended a new long-term hospital funding agreement with state governments. He decried what he called “patch-up jobs” of short-term funding arrangements in recent years under the Coalition, saying the health system needed certainty into the future. “The Covid partnership agreement for 50% funding was a time-limited, narrowly defined agreement,” Duckett told Guardian Australia. “It doesn’t apply to 2022, when there will be a care deficit to deal with: of people who had their care deferred, elective procedures cancelled, or not fronted up to a GP because of Covid. “The underlying problems we’re seeing in front of us are the states don’t think the commonwealth is being fair to them. They’re having to shoulder more of the burden and think it should be 50-50.” Tim Woodruff, chair of the Australian Health Care Reform Alliance, called the previous funding arrangement “grossly inadequate” and suggested the 50-50 funding split be maintained. “[The hospital system] was struggling before Covid hit. We had long waiting lists if you had Medicare, and short waiting lists if you had private health insurance. The pressure with Covid has become immense,” he said. But Duckett warned that Labor “needs to be really careful” about their promises because “anything in hospitals, it costs a lot of money”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While states will push for more hospital funding, federal Labor is expected to announce measures to reduce out-of-pocket costs to attend the GP. Labor MP and paediatrician Mike Freelander told Guardian Australia he “strongly believes” the three areas of greatest priority are poor access and long wait lists for dental care, the gap costs of specialist care, and “making sure people can access GPs at a reasonable cost”. “People are losing their access to affordable care in outer metropolitan areas of Sydney, Brisbane, and Melbourne, and rural and regional areas,” he said. Freelander noted increased access to GPs would take pressure off hospitals, while more funding for hospital outpatient clinics would help reduce costs of specialist care.Sue Gray is unlikely to produce the conclusion that many are hoping for. She should not be expected to do so. Her task is to discover the facts, not pronounce a verdict. The first issue on which she is asked to pronounce is whether the Downing Street parties broke either government guidance or the law, an offence for which many were fined. That, however, should not be a matter for her but for the police. The Met gave two feeble excuses for not investigating. The first was that the parties were held long ago: as if a crime committed 18 months ago is exempt from investigation – good news for criminals who can cover their tracks. The second excuse was insufficient evidence. But where it seems that an offence has been committed, it is the Met’s job to search for evidence, which indeed was right in front of their eyes since police are present in Downing Street at all times and will have seen people coming and going. Gray, by contrast, has no professional qualifications as a detective or powers to compel the production of evidence, and so must rely on what is said to her, as Lord Geidt had to do in his inquiry into the furnishing of the Downing Street flat. In any case, Gray may be impartial but she is not independent. A former second secretary in the Cabinet Office, she is now a permanent secretary. She reports to the prime minister, who might well not look favourably on her promotion prospects if the report condemns him and he remains in office. Her boss is Simon Case, the cabinet secretary and head of the civil service, one of whose responsibilities is to evaluate her performance. It is, moreover, never right to rely upon one investigator, however eminent. A stronger constitutional check is needed on ministers and the prime minister – a permanent investigatory panel of three wholly independent people from outside the civil service, at least one of whom should be legally qualified. If the report turns out to be unfair to the prime minister, he has redress in parliament. Officials criticised in the report have no such redress. They cannot defend themselves in public and their careers and reputations could be severely damaged, if not ruined. The second issue on which Gray is to pronounce is whether Johnson deliberately deceived parliament. The ministerial code decrees that any minister guilty of this offence must offer their resignation to the prime minister. There is, however, no mechanism to enforce this rule against ministers, still less against the prime minister, and a non-elected official such as Gray is unlikely to take it upon herself to tell an elected prime minister that he must go. In theory, the prime minister could be prosecuted for the old common law offence of misconduct in public office. But there appears to have been no such prosecution of a politician since the early 19th century, and the courts would hardly intervene in what is, in the last resort, a political issue. For similar reasons, the weapon of impeachment has long fallen into a state of disuse. Johnson would not have been the first occupant of No 10 to have intentionally misled parliament. There is the case of Anthony Eden who, with his foreign secretary, Selwyn Lloyd, misled the Commons by denying collusion with Israel in the Suez invasion in 1956. They believed that otherwise the lives of British residents in Arab countries might be endangered. That the house did not hold it against them is shown by the fact that Lloyd was elected Speaker in 1971. In the days of fixed exchange rates, chancellors were regularly excused for not announcing that a government had decided to devalue the pound. John Profumo, however, was not forgiven in 1963 for misleading the house concerning his relationship with Christine Keeler. There is, then, no fail-safe mechanism to enforce the constitutional convention embodied in the ministerial code. It could in theory be enforced by a Commons vote of no confidence. More likely, however, is a vote of no confidence by Conservative MPs in a secret ballot. In normal times, ministers can rely on a solid phalanx of parliamentary support; but these may not be normal times. Scottish Conservative MPs appear to be particularly opposed to the prime minister, and there appears to be a growing rift between them and English Conservatives, a rift that could endanger the very union Conservatives are pledged to defend. But constitutional conventions depend in the last resort upon public feeling. Voters may conclude that the parties are of no real significance; or they may feel deep and long-lasting anger against those in authority who broke rules they themselves made and which the public observed, often at the cost of great stress and anguish. In that case they will tell Conservative MPs that Boris Johnson must go. It is not Sue Gray, or even Conservative MPs, who will decide the prime minister’s fate, but we the people. Vernon Bogdanor is professor of government, King’s College London. His books include Beyond Brexit: Towards a British ConstitutionIn 1996, the US women’s basketball team won Olympic gold in Atlanta, providing a solid foundation for two professional leagues. The WNBA, which had the backing of the NBA and better marketing, outlasted the ABL and continues to this day. After their victory on home soil at the 1999 World Cup, the US women’s soccer team seized the spotlight and parlayed that attention into a professional league. That league collapsed, but waves of publicity over the next decade have yielded a solid fanbase determined to keep professional women’s soccer running. So when will women’s ice hockey get its moment? Since the sport joined the Olympic program in 1998, North American rivals Canada and the US have dominated to an extent that makes Scottish soccer’s Rangers-Celtic lockdown on the top spots pale in comparison. Only once in the Olympics and only once in the world championships have the Big Two not faced each other in the final. Total solar eclipses happen more often than losses by either team to someone other than each other. With the two dominant countries in the sport sharing a border and already collaborating on the world’s top men’s league, the NHL, why have we not seen a viable fully professional women’s league? Why isn’t seven-time world champion and 2018 gold medalist Meghan Duggan, who now works for the NHL’s New Jersey Devils, as easily recognizable as Megan Rapinoe? When will women’s hockey have a professional league final with TV ratings to match the average of 548,000 for the 2021 WNBA finals or the 653,000 who watched the 2020 NWSL Challenge Cup final Professional hockey salaries briefly edged up to $25,000 for one year but immediately dropped back to the low five figures and below. For comparison’s sake, the NWSL (National Women’s Soccer League) has a minimum salary that has risen from four figures to $22,000, a number sure to go up with upcoming collective bargaining. The average salary in the WNBA is more than $120,000. Without living wages in the pro game, the US women turned instead to USA Hockey, earning a mammoth raise from $6,000 a year to $70,000 plus bonuses after a boycott threat in 2017. That’s still less than the $100,000 given to core US women’s soccer players on top of more than $70,000 in NWSL pay that, until next year, has been provided by US Soccer. In short, women’s hockey is now where women’s soccer was in the mid-2000s, with no full-fledged pro league and players depending on a national federation for money. Women’s soccer players can make living wages even if they’re not in the national team picture; women’s hockey players only get living wages if they’re in the select few. The US women’s soccer team will have increasing competition for places as players can stay in the game through their 20s; women’s hockey players have to scrounge to keep playing after college if they’re not already firmly established as international players. It’s not that no one’s trying. At the turn of the century, the National Women’s Hockey League emerged from Ontario and slowly spread across Canada, and its teams signed most of the Canadian women’s team members who weren’t still in college. By 2005, though, women’s hockey entered its phase of in-fighting and alphabet-soup leagues, a phenomenon all too familiar to those who’ve followed North American pro soccer. The NWHL’s western teams split to form the WWHL (Western Women’s Hockey League). A 2006 reunification didn’t stick, and the NWHL’s management problems culminated in a farcical game in Montreal that ended with 2:04 remaining because the home team had failed to book sufficient time for the game, forcing top-tier hockey players to clear the ice so the general public could skate. The WWHL boasted stars like Canadian Hayley Wickenheiser and US player Angela Ruggiero, both of whom were featured in the NHL13 video game, along with a US presence in the Minnesota Whitecaps. But it dwindled to three teams by 2009 and fizzled out. Back east, the CWHL (Canadian Women’s Hockey League) launched in 2007 and remained the de facto top-tier league despite its amateur status. In 2015, the NWHL name was revived south of the border, with four American teams competing and actual salaries on offer, ranging from $10,000 to $25,000. The next year, those salaries were cut in half, while the CWHL announced it would start paying players in the $2,000 to $10,000 range. Meanwhile, the CWHL expanded halfway around the world, bringing in two teams (later one) from China, where authorities were willing to shell out some money to develop the sport in time for the 2022 Olympics on home ice. With calls for a merger with the NWHL growing, the CWHL rendered the question academic by folding in 2019. (One Chinese team, the Shenzhen KRS Vanke Rays, continues to play in Russia’s Zhenskaya Hockey League and won the 2020 championship with the help of US national team players Alex Carpenter and Megan Bozek.) The drop to one North American league united the players, but that unity didn’t come in the NWHL. More than 200 players announced they would not play club hockey at all “until we get the resources that professional hockey demands and deserves,” they said in a sharply worded statement. So once again, we have two entities. One isn’t a league, per se. The PWHPA (Professional Women’s Hockey Players’ Association) puts together showcase events and exhibition games. In early 2021, national team players were involved, but this year, the US and Canada have residency programs. The NWHL has continued but had to cancel its 2020 championship between Boston and Minnesota due to Covid-19. The league attempted to play a two-week 2021 season in a bubble at Lake Placid, home of the 1980 Winter Olympics, but a rash of positive Covid tests forced an abrupt reformatting, and the playoffs moved to March in Massachusetts. Coincidentally, Boston and Minnesota again advanced to the final, with Boston winning 4-3. The league rebranded to the PHF (Premier Hockey Federation) in September and is playing a full 2021-22 season, albeit with the same Covid-related rescheduling that other sports leagues are facing. Signs of progress are emerging. Before rebranding, the PHF doubled salaries to an average of about $15,000. But is slow, incremental change enough to build the sport? Or does women’s hockey need that moment like the 1999 Women’s World Cup in soccer, and if so, how can that happen?The Gosling Girl Jacqueline Roy Simon &amp; Schuster, £14.99, pp400 Michelle Cameron isn’t Michelle Cameron any more. The crime she was incarcerated for, committed when she was 10, was so heinous, so shocking, that her identity has been changed for her own safety. But as she puts it: “What’s the point of being safe if everything has been taken from you?” Michelle is trying to make a new life for herself as Samantha when an old friend of hers is murdered and her identity as the mixed-race murderer of a little white girl is leaked to the press, enraging the public. “She remembers the judge saying she’d shown no remorse. What’s remorse? she’d said, but no one had heard her. No one is hearing her now.” The Gosling Girl is one of the saddest, most moving thrillers I’ve read for some time. There is, it turns out, someone on Michelle’s side, black detective constable Natalie Tyler. Assigned to Michelle’s case and protection, she finds herself drawn to this desperately lonely girl and starts to ask questions about the past. Why did Michelle do it, and why was she the only one prosecuted, when there was someone else there too? Roy powerfully explores the repercussions of a childhood crime, exposing the racism that put Michelle in prison and which is still dogging Tyler today, forcing her into situations where she has to listen to people tell her: “I expect you think she got some kind of raw deal because she was black, that the trial was racist or some such thing. I know how you all stick together.” The Tally Stick Carl Nixon World Editions, £12.99, pp288 The Tally Stick starts with a genuine cliffhanger: John Chamberlain is driving his sleeping family – four children and his wife – along a wet road on New Zealand’s south island. It’s the middle of the night in April 1978 and the English family are exploring their new home before John starts his new job. Then their car skids off the road and ends up in a river, leaving the parents dead and the badly injured children at the mercy of the elements. They are not found until more than 30 years later, when the remains of eldest son, Maurice, are discovered, showing he had lived for four years after the family disappeared. A tally stick – a piece of scored wood – is found beside him. Nixon tells of what happened to the children after the crash – how they survived in this remote corner of the world and who found them. An atmospheric thriller, this is the Kiwi version of outback noir and I couldn’t put it down. All Was Lost Steven Maxwell Pushkin Vertigo, £8.99, pp208 Orla McCabe has no money and a small baby. When she finds a case of money at a crime scene in the middle of the northern moors, she takes it, oblivious to the world of hurt that lies ahead but desperate to escape her current situation. She flees, along with her husband and baby daughter, followed by a terrifying and depraved crew of hitmen, with detectives Lynch and Carlin not far behind. The pair, men with troubles of their own, are investigating a human trafficking deal that went wrong. All Was Lost is an exploration of what happens when a mother is pushed to the limits and how easily an ordinary person can turn to crime. “She’d been humiliated before and she’d been pushed… now with a gun and a purpose, she saw no reason not to push back. She was surprised by the sudden tempering of her spine.” Fast paced and shocking. The Couple at the Table Sophie Hannah Hodder &amp; Stoughton, £16.99, pp368 I’ve followed the adventures of Sophie Hannah’s perennially gloomy pair of detectives, Simon Waterhouse and Charlie Zailer, from the start. In The Couple at the Table, they’re trying to get away from it all at a luxury, couples-only resort when they find themselves – surprise, surprise – investigating a murder. Jane, one of the guests, has received an anonymous note, warning her to “beware of the couple at the table nearest to yours”. But the alert is nonsense: of the five other couples present, no one’s table is closer or further away. Later that night, Jane, who, it turns out, is a nasty piece of work, is murdered. Despite the closed-room nature of the killing – no one has entered or left the resort and everyone has an alibi – months later the murderer still hasn’t been found. Simon, obviously, isn’t giving up, but it’s affecting the rest of his work. “You’re making this one failure – rare for you – last an unseasonably long time,” his awful boss, Proust, tells him. “Dipping into it over and over again, every day, like a slice of stale toast endlessly probing a rotten egg yolk.” But Simon presses on doggedly, as does Lucy, the woman whose husband left her for Jane, who just happened to be holidaying in the same resort. As much head-scratching fun as ever. • To order The Gosling Girl, The Tally Stick, All Was Lost and The Couple at the Table click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe head of Queensland’s Crime and Corruption Commission, Alan MacSporran, has resigned seven weeks after a parliamentary committee found he failed in his duty to ensure the watchdog “acted independently and impartially”. Criticisms of the CCC and its priorities have increased in recent months following a series of failed prosecutions. The Queensland government had been considering whether to push ahead with a commission of inquiry into the organisation. Other concerns about the CCC include the watchdog’s decision-making and the extent to which it focuses on high-level criminal investigations rather than institutional corruption. In December, the parliamentary crime and corruption committee (PCCC) recommended a commission of inquiry – with the powers of a royal commission – into the CCC following the failed prosecution of eight Logan city councillors last year. The councillors were charged with fraud in 2019 relating to former council chief executive Sharon Kelsey’s dismissal. The charges were discontinued in a Brisbane court last year. The parliamentary committee investigating the Logan affair stopped short of calling for MacSporran’s resignation – though it was proposed by counsel assisting during the committee hearings. The committee found the commission breached its duty to remain independent and impartial. It also found MacSporran’s failures to ensure the CCC acted impartially and independently were “serious” and reflected “poorly” on the commission. In a surprise statement on Tuesday, MacSporran said he would resign as the CCC chair. “Many people have urged me to continue in this important role, despite the recent finding contained in the report of the parliamentary crime and corruption committee,” he said. “However, I find myself in a position where, despite a career spanning in excess of 40 years, where my honesty and integrity have never been questioned, it is clear to me that the relationship between myself and the PCCC has broken down irretrievably. This saddens me deeply. “The Queensland community rightly expects the CCC to do its statutory job, and that ultimately involves making very complex, tough and independent decisions as an investigative agency. As chairperson, I was willing to make, and support my staff making, those independent decisions.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning MacSporran’s decision to quit comes just days after the Queensland integrity commissioner, Nicola Stepanov, resigned over concerns about interference with her office by the public services commission. The CCC suffered another embarrassment last week after charges of misconduct in public office against the former Moreton Bay mayor Allan Sutherland were dropped by prosecutors without him being committed for trial. Sutherland had denied any wrongdoing and claimed outside court the CCC was “out of control”. The failed prosecutions have emboldened critics of the CCC and damaged public faith in an institution charged with protecting the Fitzgerald Inquiry’s legacy in Queensland. In recent years, calls have increased for the CCC’s major crime and corruption functions to be separated. The watchdog investigates very few of the corruption complaints it receives – in more than 95% of cases it refers these back to various government departments. The police union and civil liberties campaigners have said the state needs a corruption watchdog that does not also investigate major and organised crime. The clerk of the Queensland parliament, Neil Laurie, said last year the CCC must “stop the drift” towards serious crime investigations and away from corruption matters. Questions have also been raised about the CCC’s apparent priorities. Last year, it finalised a two-year investigation into Queensland police hiring practices which it found discriminated against men. The investigation was criticised by the Queensland human rights commissioner, Scott McDougall, who said the finding appeared to be based on an “incorrect” understanding of discrimination law, and that the CCC had in the process “(undermined) the legitimacy and lawfulness of equal opportunity measures”.Boris Johnson’s gathering with birthday cake in the cabinet room was not a party, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, has said, denying the prime minister had organised the event. “The prime minister clearly didn’t organise to be given a cake,” Shapps told Sky News after the latest revelations about lockdown breaches in Downing Street. “Some people came forward and thought it would be appropriate for on his birthday.” But he suggested it was “unwise” for the prime minister have been given a cake at the gathering of staff. He told BBC Radio 4 Today that he shares “the sense of unease about all of this”. Asked if, at the time, he would have advised someone at a Downing Street press conference that the gathering as described would be allowed, Shapps said: “I think it’s clearly unwise to do those things…. This is in a workplace with a bunch of people who were working together all of the time, who decide to give the prime minister a birthday cake on his birthday. Unwise, I’m sure, given the circumstances as we know them.” Shapps confirmed that the event on 19 June 2020 would be considered by the official inquiry into the breaches by Sue Gray, saying she was “already aware of this particular incident, so she will be using that in her report and we’ll wait to see what she says”. He said the gathering revealed by ITV News, which was attended by the prime minister’s wife, Carrie, and interior designer, Lulu Lyttle, was with staff the prime minister had been “working with all day long, and will have been many a time in the same room with them working on the response to coronavirus … They come in, give him a cake, I understand I think it lasted for 10 minutes and that was it.” It came as the former prime minister Gordon Brown said Johnson’s apparent lockdown breaches were a “moral issue”, which resonated because people had not been able to spend time or say goodbye to people they love. “I could not go to the funeral of a very close relative last year at the same time,” he told Good Morning Britain. “I couldn’t visit a dying friend in hospital, and there are thousands and thousands of families who were in that position. “Therefore, this is not a political issue. This is a moral issue about whether the standards you ask people to follow are standards you are prepared to follow yourself.” Shapps said he still had confidence in Johnson, who is facing renewed anger from Tory colleagues and a possible vote of no confidence. He said the prime minister had “achieved remarkable things” but added “no one is perfect”. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, tweeted in support of Johnson on Monday night, saying: “So, when people in an office buy a cake in the middle of the afternoon for someone else they are working in the office with and stop for 10 minutes to sing happy birthday and then go back to their desks, this is now called a party?” The shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, said the behaviour of staff in Downing Street stood in contrast to how others had spent their birthdays. “Why should the Queen forgo her birthday party?” Lammy told the Today programme. The human rights lawyer Adam Wagner, an expert on Covid regulations, said on Twitter he “can’t see how it could have been lawful” if the reporting was accurate. “It’s obviously not within the rules and nobody from the government at the time would have said for a moment it was,” he said. Wagner told Sky News: “There are two questions you should ask, two thought experiments, first one is if the police had come across a gathering like this, with cake and food on the tables, and obviously social and arranged before in a particular room in a workplace but no one doing any work – what would they have done? I think the answer is they would have given everyone fixed-penalty notices. “And the other question to ask is if you had asked the PM or Matt Hancock or any of the officials that stood up at those regular briefings, we want to have a birthday gathering, a party, really, let’s call it what it is, in a work room, we’re going to pre-arrange it, we’re going to have cake and food, we’re going to stay there for half an hour, there will be 30 people indoors, at the time they would have said ‘absolutely not, that’s not within the rules’. And they would have been right”. Mark Drakeford, the first minister of Wales, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the PM had no “moral authority” to lead the UK. Asked about the latest party allegations, he said: “I have reacted with a combination of despair and disgust really.” Drakeford said the singing had particularly resonated with him. “Amongst the hardest letters I had to read in the whole pandemic were from people telling me they had to attend a funeral where only eight people were able to be there, where it didn’t last 10 minutes, where you weren’t able to sing,” he said. “In Wales, a funeral without being able to sing is a really difficult experience. And yet those people stuck to the rules. It was hard but they did it.”In another party allegation, No 10 has admitted that Carrie Johnson held a party for the prime minister and up to 30 staff on 19 June 2020 as part of a surprise lockdown birthday party. At the time, Covid rules banned indoor social gatherings and outdoor ones were limited to groups of six. We would like to know what your birthday celebrations were like during the first lockdown in 2020. Did you or members of your family miss a significant one? How did you celebrate it within the restrictions at the time? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Gini Wijnaldum: nice guy, very handsome and not half bad at association football. But things haven’t gone well for the Dutchman since his move to PSG, where just 11 league starts under Mauricio Pochettino mean Wijnaldum is suddenly quite interested in his current manager’s old stomping ground: Tottenham Hotspur. Antonio Conte is so desperate for signings that he recently played Matt Doherty as a right winger as some form of dirty protest. Wijnaldum is a potential option, but a lot depends on whether PSG and Tottenham can arrange some sort of elaborate swap deal, which could involve any one of Tanguy Ndombele, Dele Alli and Julian Draxler. A Rumour Mill legend, Draxler has been threatening to come to the Premier League for nearly a decade now; could this be his time? Ndombele, Spurs’ record £55m signing in 2019, is keen on a return to France and the idea of actual silverware. Newcastle’s transfer gurus have set their sights on the outline of Brighton’s Yves Bissouma, which while expensive, would be an entirely sensible signing. The Seagulls would reportedly be willing to do business at £50m, the same fee they demanded for Ben White, which would be a club record for Newcastle. Whether Bissouma would want to swap life in the top half of the table for a relegation battle is another matter. Speaking of club records, Arsenal are considering breaking theirs once more. Nicolas Pépé hasn’t exactly set the Premier League alight since his whopping £72m move from Lille, but with the Gunners in desperate need of a new frontman, the £75m release clause of Real Sociedad’s Alexander Isak is suddenly looking a little more appealing. This is also due to the fact that Dusan Vlahovic looks like he’s off to Juventus, Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is woefully out of form and favour, and Alexandre Lacazette currently can’t hit a barn door. Aubameyang is back in London after his Afcon tribulations and posted on Instagram that “my heart is absolutely fine and I’m completely healthy” in an apparent come-and-get-me plea to anyone that is willing to listen. Barcelona have sent a lovely hamper round to César Azpilicueta’s house in an attempt to convince the Spaniard to sign on a free transfer this summer. Azpilicueta’s contract at Chelsea is up in the summer and he has yet to tell the club of his decision. ‘Dave’ is not the only Blues defender that could make the switch to Catalonia, with Xavi also interested in Andreas Christensen. In slightly less continental news, Tottenham will win the race to sign Lewes teenager Ollie Tanner, who has been in sensational form for the non-league side this season. A former Arsenal academy player, the 19-year-old has been scoring free-kicks for fun and looked set to sign for Brighton (and be loaned back to Lewes) before interest from Spurs developed.I can’t imagine you aren’t across it, but in case you missed what the outgoing Australian of the Year Grace Tame did on Tuesday, let me run you through it. Tame went to the Lodge as part of the annual pre-Australia Day festivities. Naturally, her arrival was captured by waiting cameras. The prime minister extended his hand and congratulated the sexual assault survivor on her recent engagement to partner Max. Tame shook Scott Morrison’s hand without meeting his gaze. Tame was stony-faced, and seemed to take a very close interest in a spot on the ground away from Morrison. The prime minister piled more wattage into his smile, correcting for the lack of warmth adjacent to him, rendering the tableau even more unbalanced. Jenny Morrison, always gracious, also smiled at Tame, seeking to hold her gaze momentarily, and the young woman smiled back. Having traversed the grip and grin pleasantries in memorable and didactic fashion, a short session of steely side-eye ensued. In an era when everything is recorded, and everything is polarised, Tame’s decision to eviscerate Morrison with her body language was always going to be #AMoment™. And so it was. Social media exploded with feelings. Grace Tame is my spirit animal. That Grace Tame is a very rude young woman. James McGrath (a Liberal senator very few people will have ever heard of outside his home state of Queensland) took to Facebook to characterise Tame’s behaviour as “partisan, political and childish”. Striking a fresh blow in the outrage economy, and bringing more eyeballs to his page, McGrath declared: “If she didn’t like being Australian of the Year she should hand back the honour.” Hmm, yes. It is tempting at this juncture to observe that men can be so emotional. If you are an admirer of Tame, McGrath’s critique sounds very much like a tantrum. The Liberal senator’s rebuke was the sound of a door slamming as an irate teenager returned to his room. But depending on your point of view is the operative observation in that sentence. If Tame’s Lodge entrance was pointedly didactic, McGrath’s rebuke was performative. McGrath knows precisely who he’s offending with his Facebook #FU to #GT, and who in the community will tut-tut along sympathetically with his sentiments. That’s the problem with young people today. No manners. Peter van Onselen, political editor at Network 10, was also sufficiently moved to bash out a quick column for the Australian. Very enterprising of him – carving out an unexpected side hustle as the national broadsheet’s Lodge etiquette editor. Van Onselen felt Tame was “ungracious, rude and childish … refusing to smile for the cameras, barely acknowledging [Morrison’s] existence when standing next to him”. Brave, this righteous parsing of Tame’s manners, when you consider Van Onselen is a journalist who believes he’s entitled to be rude to the prime minister any time he believes rudeness is warranted. Political commentators like Van Onselen, like myself, like many of our peers, routinely deploy rudeness in order to nail a point that needs nailing. Rude is in fact part of the arsenal when you seek to serve truth. So I’m not sure why one Australian of the Year, nearing time on her tenure and determined not to waste her public platform, has different rules of engagement. That all seems pretty arbitrary. This point of view begs a lot of questions: who decides who can be rude and the circumstances in which rudeness is permissible? Who appointed the rude police? Can we appeal their rulings? In any case, I’ll keep my closing observations simple lest I irritate blokes who continue to lose their minds when women won’t stop talking. Tame’s finale, her Australian of the Year coda, was entirely as you’d expect. This recipient has shown absolutely no interest, at any point, in being transactional about her honour. She doesn’t seem to want a shiny badge in return for a head pat. Having been silenced in the most harrowing of circumstances, this woman wants to speak, on her own terms, and if she gets that opportunity, she will not waste it. I don’t know Grace Tame. I imagine she’s just as complex and flawed and difficult as the rest of us. But this much can be safely observed: the woman I’ve watched over the past year has zero interest in cooption, no people-pleasing compulsion to be grateful, no instinct to genuflect before smug, self-satisfied systems or conventions. She exhibits some of the defining qualities of her generation. I know a lot of young women like Grace Tame – women who have not been socialised to shut up when an authority figure (generally a man) is talking. She is very recognisable to me. She resonates because she feels like progress. This ornery quality Tame has, the absence of forelock tugging, the element of kinetic unpredictability, can make other people uncomfortable, not because she is wrong or her cause unjust, but because Australians love rules. Rules keep everything comfortable and nice. Rules minimise the element of surprise. Australians like to think of ourselves as rebels – plain speakers, never standing on ceremony, devoid of stiffness. Culturally we are informal, but actually we love rules and we aren’t always kind to rule breakers. Convention is our refuge. So what we learned on Tuesday was Grace Tame has managed to end her tenure as Australian of the Year continuing to teach us about ourselves. What an achievement that is.I have spent large portions of my life in virtual worlds. I’ve played video games since I was six; as a millennial, I’ve lived online since adolescence; and I’ve been reporting on games and gaming culture for 16 years. I have been to Iceland for an annual gathering of the players of EVE Online, an online spaceship game whose virtual politics, friendships and rivalries are as real as anything that exists outside its digital universe. I’ve seen companies make millions, then billions from selling virtual clothes and items to players eager to decorate their virtual selves. I’ve encountered people who met in digital worlds and got married in the real one, who have formed some of their most significant relationships and had meaningful life experiences in, well … people used to call it cyberspace, but the current buzzword is “the metaverse”. Ask 50 people what the metaverse means, right now, and you’ll get 50 different answers. If a metaverse is where the real and virtual worlds collide, then Instagram is a metaverse: you create an avatar, curate your image, and use it to interact with other people. What everyone seems to agree on, however, is that it’s worth money. Epic Games and the recently rebranded Facebook are investing billions a year in this idea. When Microsoft bought video game publisher Activision for $70bn last week, it was described as “a bet on the metaverse”. The tech world seems to be leaning towards some kind of early 00s conception of wearing a VR headset and haptic suit and driving a flying car towards your perfect pretend mansion in a soothingly sanitised alternate reality, where you can have anything you want as long as you can pay for it. Look at Mark Zuckerberg’s now-infamous presentation of the future of his company, with its bland cartoonish avatars and emptily pleasant environments. It is the future as envisioned by someone with precious little imagination. I do not deny that some people want this vision. Ready Player One was a runaway hit. But the metaverse as envisioned by the people currently investing in it – by tech billionaires such as Zuckerberg and Activision CEO Bobby Kotick, by techbro hucksters selling astonishingly ugly generative-art NFTs and using words like “cryptoverse” – can only be described as spiritually bereft. It holds no interest for me. Virtual worlds can be incredibly liberating. The promise of cyberspace, right back to its inception, has been that it makes us all equal, allowing us to be judged not by our physical presentation or limitations, but by what’s inside our heads, by how we want to be seen. The dream is of a virtual place where the hierarchies and limitations of the real world fall away, where the nerdy dweeb can be the hero, where the impoverished and bored can get away from their reality and live somewhere more exciting, more rewarding. Anyone who is marginalised in the real world, though, knows that this is not how things go down. Virtual worlds are not inherently any better than the real one. Worker exploitation exists in them – look at World of Warcraft, in which Venezuelans farm currency to sell to first-world players, or Roblox, in which young game developers have put in long hours on unregulated projects for little reward. Misogyny and homophobia exist in them, too – ask anyone who’s ever had the misfortune to sound female on voice chat while playing a multiplayer shooter, or be non-gender-conforming on Twitch. As for racism, well – it is alive and well, and seemingly emboldened, in the digital world. The idea that a metaverse will magically solve any of these problems is a total fantasy. All that they really do is reflect the people that make them and spend time in them. Unfortunately, nothing I have experienced in any virtual world makes me feel good about the idea of the metaverse – because it is being constructed by people to whom the problems of the real world are mostly invisible. Unless companies put immense efforts into dismantling prejudices and unconscious biases, they are thoughtlessly replicated in whatever they create. Nobody has yet found a way to effectively moderate anywhere online to keep it free from abuse and toxicity and manipulation by bad actors. Given what’s happened with Facebook, do you trust Meta with this responsibility? Do you trust Microsoft with it? And what will the metaverse look like? Who gets to decide? Outside the sanitised aesthetic of the Zuckerverse (and old virtual-world standby Second Life), the main artistic references we currently have are either the gaudiness of Fortnite or Roblox or the no-holds-barred neon anime nightmare that is VRChat. Then there are the seemingly endless runs of vapid NFT art, many of which are tied to their own promised metaverses, drawing in their buyers with the promise of community. Every time I see a newly minted set of images (well, links to images) go up for sale I’m like, really? ANOTHER series of rad skulls? It is all just so powerfully adolescent, and yet apparently, they continually sell out. These are currently the people determining what the future might look like. It is depressing. I would feel better about the idea of the metaverse if it wasn’t currently dominated by companies and disaster capitalists trying to figure out a way to make more money as the real world’s resources are dwindling. The metaverse as envisioned by these people, by the tech giants, is not some promising new frontier for humanity. It is another place to spend money on things, except in this place the empty promise that buying stuff will make you happy is left even more exposed by the fact that the things in question do not physically exist. As far as I can work out, the idea is to take the principle of artificial scarcity to an absurdist extreme – to make you want things you absolutely don’t need. The problem is not that I think this won’t work. The problem is that I think it will. The current NFT gold rush proves that people will pay tens of thousands of dollars for links to jpegs of monkeys generated by a computer, and honestly it is eroding my faith in humanity. What gaping deficiency are we living with that makes us feel the need to spend serious money on tokens that prove ownership of a procedurally generated image, just to feel part of something? This is all happening, of course, while the Earth continues to heat up, and at enormous environmental cost. I can’t help but wonder if these giant companies are so intent on selling us and the markets on the idea of a virtual future in order to distract us all from what they are doing to the real one. I have seen what virtual worlds can do for people. I have spent my entire adult life reporting on them, and what people do in them and the meaning that they find there. So the fact that I’m now the one standing here saying that we don’t want this, feels significant. Meta has patented technology that could track what you look at and how your body moves in virtual reality in order to target ads at you. Is that the future of video games and all the other virtual places where we spend time – to have our attention continually tracked and monetised, even more so than it is in real life? The virtual worlds of games and the early internet used to be an escape from the inequalities and injustices of the real one. To see the tendrils of big tech and social media extending towards the places that have been a refuge for me and millions of others is disturbing. I don’t trust these people with the future. The more I hear about the metaverse, the less I want to do with it.Dylan Alcott – the tennis champion, Paralympian and disability advocate – has been named the 2022 Australian of the Year. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, made the announcement at an event in Canberra on Tuesday night after Alcott qualified for the Australian Open final where he’ll try to win his eighth title. It is the first time in the annual awards program’s 62-year history that a person with a visible disability has been named Australian of the Year, according to the award administrators. The Victorian, 31, has won 15 grand slam quad singles titles and another eight in doubles. In 2021 he became the first man in history to achieve a golden slam: all four major singles titles as well as gold at the Paralympics. A wheelchair user, Alcott has been open about his experiences of bullying and discrimination regarding his disability, particularly in his youth. He was born with a tumour wrapped around his spinal cord, which was successfully removed when he was three weeks old but left him a paraplegic. In 2017, he founded disability and accessibility training start-up, Get Skilled Access. He is also the founder of the Dylan Alcott Foundation, which provides scholarships and grant funding to Australians with a disability. Alongside his sporting achievements, Alcott has a storied media career, having written an autobiography, Able; hosted a show on youth broadcaster Triple J; and appeared in numerous commentator and presenter roles across television, radio and podcasting. In 2009, at the age of 18, Alcott was awarded the medal of the Order of Australia. “Standing ovations are one of the most ironic things in the world, by the way, but I’ll take them, without a doubt,” Alcott said when accepting his award on Tuesday night. In a moving speech, Alcott described how he had known nothing but life with a disability, which racked him with self-loathing until he began to see people like himself in the broader community and learned from the those closest to him “that I was worthy and that I was allowed to be loved”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He urged non-disabled people to “challenge your unconscious biases, your negative perceptions and lift your expectation of what you think people with disability can do”. Cracking jokes – he said “I also stand on the shoulders of giants, not literally, still can’t stand” – Alcott paid tribute to the disability activists who came before him including Kurt Fearnley and Stella Young. “It’s because of them and everybody in my life that I sit here as a proud man with a disability tonight. I love my disability. It is the best thing that ever happened to me.” Over the next 12 months, Alcott said he would focus on full NDIS funding and the prioritisation of people with a disability for rapid antigen testing and vaccination, as well as employment opportunities for disabled people. “As we start opening up from this pandemic, which is awesome, we’ve got to think about and prioritise people with disability,” he said. “We’ve got to get them the vaccines and the tests and whatever else they need so they can get out there and start living their life.” Alcott announced last year that he plans to retire from tennis after this year’s Australian Open. The awards for Senior Australian of the Year, Young Australian of the Year, and Australia’s Local Hero were also announced on Tuesday night. The St John Ambulance volunteer Valmai Dempsey, 71, from Canberra, was named Senior Australian of the Year. She has volunteered with St John Ambulance for more than 50 years, including during the black summer bushfires. Young Australian of the Year was awarded to Daniel Nour, 26, from New South Wales, a doctor who founded Street Side Medics, a not-for-profit delivering a free mobile medical service to people experiencing homelessness. Shanna Whan, 47, from Narrabri in NSW, was named Australia’s Local Hero. Whan is the founder and chief executive of Sober in the Country, a charity that offers peer support for those who are giving up alcohol, as well as education and advocacy around the harms of alcohol, particularly for rural communities. The chair of the National Australia Day Council, Danielle Roche, said Alcott was an “inspirational Australian on and off the tennis court” whose foundation was giving young disadvantaged Australians “the promise of a better future”. “Dylan Alcott is a champion who has risen to the top of the world rankings through sheer grit and determination. His golden slam is an incredible feat, the first for any male tennis player,” Roche said. Alcott takes the Australian of the Year baton from Grace Tame – a sexual assault survivor, activist, and critic of the Australian government, particularly its handling of the rape allegation made by the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins which is now the subject of criminal proceedings. A meeting between Tame and the prime minister at the Lodge for Australian of the Year celebrations on Tuesday went viral after pictures were captured of Tame looking unimpressed. Alcott also paid tribute to Tame on Tuesday night, saying she’d had “an absolutely incredible year”. “Tame, you are fierce and I love it,” Alcott said. “And you have done so much for your cause and if I could be one-eighth of the Australian of the Year that you were, I think I’ve done my job.” Alcott, who attended the ceremony in Canberra on Tuesday night, will return to Melbourne immediately to continue with his last ever pro tennis match – the Australian Open quad wheelchair singles final on Thursday.Nick Kyrgios clapped a hand over his mouth. Kyrgios is not easily shocked, but shocked he was. The poor kid he had accidentally cleaned up with a smash travelling around 200kmh was pretty stunned too. The young boy, sat a few rows from the front, winced. The umpire took the unusual step of climbing down from her chair and asking his mother if he was OK. No one really knew what to do, which was astonishing in itself given the raucous scenes at this doubles match and every other Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis have played at this Australian Open. Eventually Kyrgios shook himself conscious and jogged over to his bag, pulled out a fresh racket and ran it over to the boy. He smiled. Everyone else in Kia Arena wanted to get hit with a ball and go home with a souvenir. This was always going to be a headline from this latest chapter of the Special Ks chronicles – well, until Kokkinakis told the crowd, on live TV, to “sink piss and come here” – but it fails to properly account for the rest of the show. And it was wild. Ticket-holders had snaked around the arena hoping to snag a seat to watch the Special Ks win a quarter-final most would not have even predicted them to be playing. The all-Australian wildcard pairing had already dumped top seeds Mate Pavić and Nikola Mektić out in straight sets. Now they set about unpicking this duo of New Zealander Michael Venus and German Tim Pütz in a to-and-fro contest that finished 7-5, 3-6, 6-3. It happened in front of what was, in every sense, an Australian crowd. Singleted, boisterous, irreverent and, frankly, histrionic. The cheers, chants and whistles could be heard from well outside the stadium. If Craig Tiley had been worried about ‘Where is Peng Shuai?’ T-shirt wearers adopting a mob mentality he needed look no further than this cacophony. Quite what their semi-final opponents, Marcel Granollers of Spain and Horacio Zeballos of Argentina, have made of all of it is anyone’s guess. “Unreal scenes,” Kyrgios said afterwards, before adding: “I’m not finished, I wanna win this.” The dreaded siuuus were audible but mixed with a fair bit of the more traditional “Aussie, Aussie, Aussie, oi, oi, oi” interspersed with Seven Nation Army and “Yeah the Kokk”. Flags were everywhere. Many were Australian. One was Greek. Home support can do many things for athletes. It had Kyrgios and Kokkinakis full of beans, riffing off each other, bumping chests and egging on the crowd. Every time they wanted more they got it. An ace elicited a standing ovation. A no-look drop shot brought four men in the front row to their knees in genuflection. Such ardent support can also affect the opponent. They were cheered, but only when they lost points. Venus had the misfortune of an errant ball toss, which meant his serve was sometimes accompanied by a wobbly “wayyyyyyyy”. By the end of the second set he was clearly irritated and complaining to the umpire about Kyrgios, who on his own serve tossed the ball up several times in jest before completing the full motion. Heated exchanges between the quartet ensued, but with every point the locals won the crowd offered the same immediate, euphoric reception. Australia might well have won the World Cup 30 times over within two hours and 16 minutes. Not since the Woodies has the doubles scene been this big. TV ratings have been off the hook, up there with the tournament’s main singles drawcards. The match was not initially given a slot on one the Nine Network’s main channels. Midway through the match the host broadcaster bumped Rafael Nadal v Denis Shapovalov off to make way. Kyrgios said that was “unexpected” but reasoned “the level of entertainment is different, I think”. Kokkinakis felt it was down to being able to “feed off each other – we can just talk rubbish in between points”. “I feel like we are just relatable,” Kyrgios continued. “I think that’s what’s the best thing about it. They go out and get behind their mates. Most of the guys in the crowd are our mates. We’ve got our team members that have been through injuries. “In Thanasi’s case and me, [we] have been around in some dark times. I guess tennis has always had personalities, and they have just really struggled to understand that there are different ways to go about it. You’ve got Roger Federer and these guys that are just once-in-a-generation athletes. I can’t be like that. We’re not like that. I feel it has to be people that are, I guess a little bit more relatable.” The pair have not planned past this tournament. As Kokkinakis pointed out, “we’re not doubles specialists”. Nothing about this was by design, and they may never be a team again. For now, though, they are rolling with it. “When we walk through that tunnel there’s no feeling like it,” Kokkinakis said. “We’re seeing these stands packed … we don’t want anything else, this is perfect. I haven’t played in a doubles match or even a singles match with an atmosphere like this. Hopefully Craig [Tiley] is watching and keeps us on this court. The rowdier the better from everyone, honestly. Sink piss and come here.” • This article was amended on 26 January 2022 to correct the match result.About 1,100 coalminers in Alabama have entered 2022 still on strike, more than 10 months since they walked out back in April last year, making it the longest strike in the US since the Covid-19 pandemic began and the longest in Alabama’s history. Workers started the unfair labor practice strike over claims of bad faith bargaining by Warrior Met Coal over a new union contract. In the previous contract settled in 2016, miners accepted several concessions, including a $6-an-hour pay cut and reductions in health insurance and other benefits as the mines switched employers in the wake of a bankruptcy. The miners on strike have received support from US politicians such as Senators Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, Tammy Baldwin and Sherrod Brown, and received donations to their strike fund from dozens of labor unions across the US. Over the past 10 months they have held rallies and extended protests to the Alabama state capitol to criticize the use of public resources for state troopers escorting strikebreaking replacement workers to the mines throughout the strike. Miners have also held rallies in New York City outside the offices of BlackRock Investment Group, the largest shareholder of Warrior Met Coal. As of 2 November, the strike has cost the company $6.9m. “Most of us are working other jobs and receiving strike pay but some have crossed the line,” said Rily Hughlett, a miner at Warrior Met Coal, who has worked as a roof bolter in the mines for 13 years and believes that workers will win the strike. “We’re not going anywhere. The scabs and the bosses are all humored but he who laughs last laughs loudest.” Since Warrior Met Coal took over the mines, the company has reported billions of dollars in revenue. A tentative agreement was reached in the first week of the strike, but overwhelmingly rejected by workers, and a new agreement has yet to be reached. “What they’ve said openly in negotiations is that they’re just going to starve us out. They’ve said … and this on record, that ‘we have the money to pay what you’re asking, we do not have the desire to.’ That’s the kind of company these guys have been working for,” said Haeden Wright, president of the United Mine Workers of America auxiliary for two of the striking locals and the wife of a striking miner. “Through the journey, most of us are still holding out and trying to hold on, but it is hard.” The unions’ auxiliary has focused on receiving and distributing weekly groceries to miners and their families throughout the strike and assisting families with needs such as bills. It recently organized a Christmas gift drive for miners’ families to ensure their children were taken care of over the holidays. “For it to last this long and to have state troopers and to watch your tax dollars escort scabs into your job, that’s a hard pill to swallow,” added Wright. “That’s hard to watch and not be able to do anything about.” Wright says that the strike has been hard but it has forced union members to strengthen their support systems with one another, and they have been able to spend a lot more time with their children and families after working 12-hour days, six or seven days a week in the mines. Those long and demanding work schedules are one point of contention for workers in a new union contract. Wright’s husband, Braxton, has taken a temporary job during the strike at Amazon in Bessemer, Alabama, where he has become involved in supporting the unionization efforts at the warehouse. A new union election ordered by the National Labor Relations Board is scheduled to begin next month. Warrior Met Coal has filed several court injunctions throughout the strike to severely limit or prevent striking miners from picketing outside the mines. Several union members and supporters have reported incidents where vehicles have hit or nearly missed individuals on the picket lines. The injunctions have been characterized as a rare move, an attempt by Warrior Met Coal to circumventthe NLRB and instead seek rulings from favorable local courts. “We’re still negotiating with them. We still have not reached an agreement but we’re hopeful that we can get something pretty soon here,” said Larry Spencer, the District 20 field representative for the UMWA in Alabama. He said the surge in Omicron cases during the pandemic and the holidays have made it more difficult to schedule negotiations on both sides, and the unions have paused picket lines temporarily to figure out how to comply with the court injunctions while ensuring members are kept safe. “Workers have fought really hard to try to stay united and keep solidarity out there. We have a rally once a week and we’ve had a good showing of members and their families come out,” added Spencer. “The key is the membership. They are the ones pulling together and really fighting hard to make sure they get what they deserve through this company and get back to work as soon as possible.” The US Department of Labor did not comment on whether its secretary, Marty Walsh, intended to intervene to assist in negotiations as he did with the 10-month-long nurses strike at St Vincent hospital in Worcester, Massachusetts, which ended with an agreement on 3 January. A spokesperson for the labor department said: “Workers with unions have the power to advocate collectively for the working conditions they deserve, like fair wages and safety on the job. Workplaces are safer and more productive when workers have a seat at the table. We encourage businesses and unions to come together and work toward solutions in good faith.” Warrior Met Coal has disputed claims that specific terms of previous contracts would be restored during the 2016 contract negotiations, and have rejected claims from workers and the union throughout the strike, but said it continued to negotiate in pursuit of a resolution.Here is a stylised and self-aware serial killer drama in black-and-white, broken down into nine “nights”. A young woman called Nada (Nour Hajri) picks up men in bars, playing on their protective gallantry or predatory instinct for weakness, by pretending to be vocally impaired and needing a voice app on her phone to speak. She goes home with them after a few drinks and horror ensues. But Nada finds herself vulnerable in falling for a young woman at her workplace, Noura (Rym Hayouni), who herself begins to realise what is happening in Nada’s after-hours existence. Black Medusa comes from first-time Tunisian film-makers Youssef Chebbi and Ismaël, who may conceivably be fans of Ana Lily Amirpour’s cult monochrome vampire film A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night. There is a scene when Nada is walking one of her victims back to his apartment and a couple of cats wander into view that reminded me of Amirpour’s very cat-friendly movie. And Nada’s deadpan and implacable avenger might put you in mind of Carey Mulligan’s assailant in Promising Young Woman. The noir mood of menace and emotional deadness in Black Medusa has been very carefully contrived and curated. Perhaps the ultimate irony is that it is Nada who has been turned to stone. I wasn’t sure quite how far the procedural aspect of serial-killing takes us in this film, however – either as commentary on the macho culture of north Africa (or anywhere) or as a drama on its own terms. The approach is cool, blank, as if the film does not want to risk investing too much in what is happening. And I wasn’t sure how much was waiting for us at the end of the garden path along which we are being led. There are some very sharp moments, particularly one victim who starts sharing about how romance died between him and his long-term partner when they decided to get married: “We stopped being in love on our wedding day.” • Black Medusa is on Mubi from 28 January.Elaine Simons, a 61-year-old substitute art teacher in the Seattle, Washington area, was on a 10-month contract and hoping to settle into a more permanent role at the school where she was teaching when the Covid-19 pandemic hit the US in March 2020. Her school shut down for the remainder of the school year, with Simons having to pack up her classroom and learn to navigate the technology necessary to teach remotely. In June 2020, Simons was informed her teaching contract would not be renewed. Some 5.7 million workers ages 55 or older lost their jobs in the US in March and April 2020, 15% of workers in an age demographic that has also experienced the vast majority of Covid-19 deaths. The unemployment rate for workers ages 65 and older hit a record rate of 7.5% in 2020. Simons was able to find a summer teaching position but had to file for unemployment assistance before the fall 2020 school year began. Since then, she has switched back and forth between taking periods of substitute teaching jobs whenever they’re available, and reverting to unemployment during periods where she’s been unable to find work. She found, despite claims of substitute teacher shortages, that longer term substitute contract positions weren’t being offered, and older workers at higher risk for Covid-19 like herself aren’t willing to take substitute gigs day by day, at various different schools without any compensation for quarantine if they catch or are exposed to Covid-19. Simons is fully vaccinated and boosted, but still worried about catching Covid-19 and exposing her elderly mother, whom she helps care for. “Some like myself are too young to retire, so I’m still looking for that dream job, I want my permanent job. I want to be fully set for my pension and my social security,” said Simons, who cannot afford to retire early because the social security benefits would be far too low to live on. Even with unemployment, Simons has had to rely on food banks, food donations, and mutual aid with neighbors. She has tried to get ahead on bills in anticipation of receiving no income if her unemployment benefits expire and she’s unable to obtain a new substitute contracting position, which has been more difficult as many employment resources offered to the unemployed, such as job counseling and training, have been limited during the pandemic. “I’m sad that at almost 62 years old, I don’t see the likelihood of getting employment at this point,” added Simons. “It’s really hard for people in my age bracket. I think that we’re feeling undervalued. We’re feeling missed. Nobody seems to care that we’re also part of the high risk community.” The unemployment rate has tumbled dramatically since the height of the pandemic but older workers are still struggling to find work despite all the reports of worker shortages. Jerry Jenkins, 63, of Lehigh Acres, Florida, lost his job at a manufacturing plant in 2021, where he had worked for seven years. With Florida’s maximum unemployment benefits among the lowest in the US, at $275 a week, Jenkins was forced to cash in part of his retirement savings as he is still trying to find another job. “I’m losing my retirement because no one will hire me. I can’t even get anybody to answer my resumes,” said Jenkins. “I’ve even tried to go back to some of the jobs I’ve had in my past to get rehired, but no one seems to be interested because I only have two or three years before retirement.” He expressed frustrations with the touting of falling unemployment rates, given he and millions of other workers aren’t classified as '“in the labor force” in part due to expired unemployment benefits. A June 2021 analysis by economists at the Schwartz Center for Economic Policy Analysis at The New School found at least 1.7 million more older workers than expected retired due to the pandemic. The analysis encouraged policy solutions such as expanding Medicare eligibility to the age of 50, expanding social security benefits, and creating a department dedicated to older workers at the US Department of Labor. Monique Morrisey, an economist at the Economic Policy Institute, explained there are differences among affected older workers, with 55 to 64 year olds who are not eligible for Medicare and in most cases are not yet receiving social security, and workers 65 and older who left the workforce. The issues facing late middle age workers are more worrisome, given their economic demographics. “Among this younger group, the job losses are concentrated among non-college educated workers in lower paid jobs and are disproportionately also jobs that have high contact with the public,” said Morrissey. “It’s a lot harder to get another job when you’re an older worker.” A survey published by AARP in May 2021 found 78% of workers ages 40 to 65 reported either seeing or experiencing age discrimination in the workplace, the highest level found by AARP since they began surveying the question in 2003. More than half of jobseekers over the age of 55 were classified as unemployed for longer than 27 weeks in early 2021. As of October 2021, older workers were the furthest behind in employment recovery among age demographics. Beverly Matozzo of Deptford, New Jersey, worked about 12 hours a week at a school cafeteria for seven years, but was laid off once the school year ended last summer and she hasn’t been able to return as she is recovering from a knee injury and from Covid-19. Matozzo, 73, filed for unemployment, but has yet to receive any compensation because the office that assisted in filing her claim made an error with her working dates and she hasn’t been able to get the state unemployment agency to fix the problem and get her claim paid out. She has also been locked out of her account and still trying to resolve that issue. “I have been told a thousand different things. All I want is my 17 weeks of unemployment, which is what I am owed,” said Matozzo. “I’ve had to have three shots in my knee, walked with crutches for several weeks, and now I’ve just gotten over Covid. I just want to be with people. I enjoyed being around the kids, they make you feel alive and fun, so as soon as I can, I’m going back.” 57-year-old Dawn Leeson of Springhill, Florida, ran a nonprofit after-school program before Covid-19 forced her to shut down the program in March 2020, and she contracted Covid around the same time as her son was hospitalized in New Orleans. She receives social security disability benefits, which aren’t enough to survive on, and limits her options for new work. “My job is still not available. I’ve looked a little bit even though I’m not ready to go into the workforce because of my fears of Covid. I’m high risk and so is my partner,” said Leeson. “I know at this point I don’t have a lot of options. Who is going to want someone who is disabled and 57?” Leeson’s unemployment benefits were cut off in September 2021 when federal extended unemployment benefits ended without any further extensions, after it took her months to start receiving benefits due to long delays and backlogs. She has gone from having zero debt to accumulating about $10,000 in credit card debt in order to make ends meet over the past several months. “I barely leave my home, so I don’t have gas and car expenses. We eat cheaply. I’ve lost 5lbs mainly by eating just a sandwich for dinner most nights,” added Leeson. “I made it through the holidays, but I’m really scared about what comes next.” This article was written with the support of a journalism fellowship from the Gerontological Society of America, the Journalists Network on Generations and the RRF Foundation for Aging.Since the pandemic began almost two years ago, the monster that is Covid-19 has visited every corner of Earth, killing more than 5.5 million people. But we have fought back with astounding speed and vigour, and the situation today is very different from that in early 2020. Ten billion vaccine doses will have been administered worldwide by early February. The Covax scheme has delivered 1bn vaccines to lower-income countries. As a result, global daily deaths from the virus are at their lowest point in more than a year. So, is the monster slain? No. Covid-19 will not just disappear. Only one human infectious disease has been eradicated from the planet – smallpox – and that took nearly 200 years. Polio is near to extinction, but it has taken a 70-year campaign. Covid-19 may be even more troublesome. Unlike those viruses, Covid-19 has been able to easily adapt to find its way around human immunity (whether from infection or vaccination) so that it can survive. Omicron, or its progeny, will probably be with us for decades to come. We don’t yet know exactly how the future of Covid-19 will manifest. Perhaps Covid-19 will decline and then return in regular seasonal waves, as with RSV and influenza. It is also possible that outbreaks at other times of year will continue, but get less spiky due to higher levels of immunity in the population. Have we learned how to fight back? Yes. What has changed most dramatically over the past 12 months is not the virus, but us. Immunity is the armour that means we can now walk the streets again. Vaccines have changed the world. But we must accept that protection against infection is, and will continue to be, incomplete. Over time, as the armour wears thinner, infections will occur again. But protection against severe disease will be largely maintained. We should not expect to return to the vulnerable situation we were in before the vaccines were first made, where we had to hide behind closed doors. (At least, not until the next pandemic, with a new disease, for which we must be better prepared.) This is why the next phase of the battle against Covid-19 must involve making vaccination available everywhere during 2022. With the huge increase in global capacity since the first doses were give 13 months ago, there really is no excuse for failure. However, we shouldn’t be overconfident about the universality of vaccine protection. There are still those without adequate immunity, either because they weren’t vaccinated (through choice or access) or because their bodies could not respond to vaccines, and there are also those with other frailties that make them vulnerable still, and on whom the virus will prey. Meanwhile, for those who remain vulnerable it is critical that we continue to develop and use new treatments for the virus, and to build resilience in our health systems to better cope with our Covid-19 future. Improving capacity in beds and staff will take time, but it is now life-savingly obvious that we must take this action to provide resilience in the face of pandemic threats, and even to cope with a normal year. Here in the UK, the strain on the NHS in normal times is distressing for those of us working on the inside, but has been laid bare for all to see during the pandemic. While it is unlikely to be necessary, financially viable or desirable to deliver booster vaccines to whole populations regularly, it seems very possible that some vulnerable individuals could benefit from them. We now need detailed analysis of infected patients arriving in hospitals in order to better assess who remains at risk and to decide whether and when to deploy such booster doses for vulnerable individuals. If future variants come and go as rapidly as appears to be the case with Omicron, it will be difficult to make modified vaccines quickly enough, and existing vaccines may have to be deployed. However, if a predictable coronavirus season is eventually established, as with flu, an annual update vaccine is absolutely feasible. We know how to hone the armour that is needed to defend the world from the harm caused by Covid-19. Vigilance, caution and the tools forged by science are our only route forward. Prof Sir Andrew Pollard is director of the Oxford Vaccine Group, University of Oxford. He was the chief investigator for the clinical trials of the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccineRising temperatures caused by the escalating climate crisis mean future Winter Olympics will struggle to find host cities with enough snow and ice, according to a study. Only one of 21 previous Winter Olympics locations would be able to reliably host the Games in future if global greenhouse gas emissions remain on their current trajectory, the report says. The findings, which come as the world’s top winter sports athletes prepare to compete on artificial snow at the Beijing Games in February, show that cities such as Vancouver, Turin and PyeongChang may become unsuitable locations for the Winter Olympics by the end of the century, with global heating leading to increasingly unsafe and unfair competition conditions. In the Alps – home to many Winter Olympics, including the first one in 1924 – even if greenhouse gas emissions are dramatically reduced, only Albertville, at 2,100m above sea level, would remain a reliable host for the Games by mid-century, the study by the University of Waterloo found. Researchers used a survey completed by 339 elite-level athletes and coaches to devise four climatic indicators that predict fair and safe conditions for snow sport competitions: unacceptably high or low temperatures, rain, wet snow, and poor snow coverage. They found the frequency of unfair and unsafe conditions had increased over the past 50 years in locations where the Winter Olympics were previously held, and that this trend was likely to continue. “No sport can escape the impacts of a changing climate. Achieving the Paris agreement targets is critical to save snow sports as we know it and ensure there are places across the world to host the Winter Olympics,” said Daniel Scott, a researcher at the University of Surrey and lead author of the study, which is published in the journal Current Issues in Tourism. The impact of poor conditions was illustrated by the Alpine Ski World Cup in Zagreb in January. A lack of snow and high temperatures forced organisers to cancel the men’s slalom event after only 19 racers, but not before the French Olympic bronze medalist Victor Muffat-Jeandet crashed and injured his ankle. Similarly bad conditions at the women’s slalom event were thought to provide a significant advantage to those starting first, because the condition of the course deteriorated with each competitor. Petra Vlhová, who started first, won the event, and only 22 of 60 competitors finished the race. Temperatures at the Games have been increasing steadily – from an average of 0.4C in the 1920s-50s, to 3.1°C during the 60s-90s, and 6.3°C in the 21st century – leading host cities to take ever more drastic measures to ensure competitions can take place. In 2010, Vancouver resorted to transporting snow by helicopter during the Games, and in 2014 in Sochi, the warmest city to host the Winter Olympics, organisers stored tonnes of snow from the previous winter for use in emergencies. The current Winter Olympics, in Beijing, faces growing concern over its environmental impact. With the ski slopes set in an area that recorded just 2cm of snowfall between January and March last year, it will rely almost entirely on artificial snow, using an estimated 49m gallons of water. Athletes are concerned about the impact a warming climate will have on snow sport competitions for future generations. Lesley McKenna, the three-time Olympic snowboarder for Team GB, has seen huge changes in ski resort snowpack and glacier cover in the past 30 years. “The changes are really concerning on many levels,” she said. “The weather and snow are way less consistent now than they were at the start of my career. Plans have to be very flexible if a team is to make it to the best training locations. Everything then becomes more exclusive and more resource heavy and this doesn’t help anyone, or the climate either.” Sören Ronge, a campaigner at Protect Our Winters Europe, said: “If no action is taken to reduce climate change, many regions will have to say goodbye to winter sports in the long run. Resorts at lower altitudes will feel this first and many have already been forced to close.” Ronge points out that many mountain communities are also dependent on summer tourism but the knock-on effects of unreliable snowfall have, in part, led to more droughts and wildfires, making summer recreation impossible too. “Governments must prioritise reducing emissions through cleaner energy and transportation solutions, or there will be no more winter sports to celebrate at Olympic Winter Games, no more family trips to the mountains and the myriad impacts downstream as a result of the loss of reliable snowpack. Without consistent snowfall and snowpack, not being able to ski will be very the least of our problems.”Whenever the Six Nations looms out of the wintry murk it is important to give a respectful nod to the gladiators of yesteryear. On Sunday, as it happens, one of the unsung heroes of English rugby celebrated his 80th birthday in deepest Dorset, a suitable milestone for a man who coached his country to a grand slam in 1980, their first championship clean sweep since 1957. Mike Davis has been battling Parkinson’s of late but can still occasionally be found practising a few wedge shots on the playing fields adjoining his home in Sherborne. Even in his coaching days – he also won 16 caps as an England lock – it was never about him, whether he was teaching clumsy kids like us the rudiments of basketball or tutoring the country’s best rugby players. Only the snug purple tracksuit bearing a red rose offered a clue to his ‘other’ sporting life. That all-conquering 1980 side, captained by Bill Beaumont, was deservedly feted – not least for allowing England to escape with some dignity from the 1970s when, at one point, they collected three wooden spoons in a row. Once again, though, the curtain was to fall with a dull thud. By the start of the 1990s, the 1980 triumph under Davis’s unselfish guidance was still only the second grand slam England had managed since 1928. Which is why, 30 years on, it feels equally appropriate to remember the other great England side of the late 20th century who completed back-to-back grand slams in 1991 and 1992. In between they managed to lose a World Cup final but, in some respects, that adds a further dimension to their achievement. To place it into context, only one other men’s side in the past 98 years – France (1997 and 1998) – have captured the northern hemisphere holy grail twice in succession. The double grand slam remains a remarkable feat – even the greatest Welsh sides of the seventies never managed it. Not only did England re-enter the winners’ circle in 1992, they did so convincingly. Under Will Carling and Geoff Cooke, they established a record for most tries in the Five Nations (15) and conceded four, having kicked things off by beating Scotland 25-7 at Murrayfield in their opening match. Three decades later – and with Scotland awaiting England on Saturday week – it is that game, rather than the explosive fixture at the Parc des Princes (of which more later) that Simon Halliday chooses as his most satisfying. Part of it was down to his own display – “I had one of those games when everything seemed to go my way” – and partly it was the psychological baggage finally jettisoned. “In 1986 we were thumped by 30 points at Murrayfield, 1988 was a kicking match on and off the field, then there was the grand slam that never was for us in 1990. I had real history with that venue.” Ireland were subsequently thumped 38-9 – Halliday recalls it as “one of the best Twickenham performances I can remember being part of” – and a fortnight later England set out for Paris. On paper they had every physical base covered – a pack consisting of Dean Richards, Peter Winterbottom, Mick Skinner, Wade Dooley, Martin Bayfield, Jeff Probyn, Brian Moore and Jason Leonard was always going to be forthright. Outside the half-back pairing of Dewi Morris and Rob Andrew also lurked more top operators with loads of big-match experience: Carling, Jeremy Guscott, Rory Underwood, the in-form Jonathan Webb and Halliday on the right wing. As Richards has subsequently recalled in the splendid, recently re-published paperback edition of Behind the Rose, staying cool and gently riling the French was a big part of the plan. “The policy was that if they hit you, you smiled and then gave them a wink to wind them up even more.” Moore had already irritated his hosts by publicly predicting “a boxing match” before kick-off. Sure enough, it all kicked off in earnest in the second half when two of France’s front-row, Grégoire Lascubé and Vincent Moscato, were sent off for stamping and a head-butt, respectively. The home crowd went similarly wild, causing the referee, Stephen Hilditch, to be given a police escort off the field at the end. Halliday was as grateful as anyone to the Irish official following an incident five minutes after Moscato’s departure. “I slightly involuntarily body-checked their left winger and that entire side of the Parc des Princes tried to get me sent off. I remember saying to Hilditch: ‘I haven’t head-butted anyone, I haven’t stamped on anyone’s head, you can’t send me off for that.’” Once the dust had finally settled, though, England had scored four tries in Paris for the first time since the war and won 31-13. The final act, by comparison, was relatively comfortable. Wales were beaten 24-0 at Twickenham, with Carling scoring a try in the opening minute, after which Halliday reverted to his day job as a stockbroker. Carling has since said that his England side “were at the height of their powers” and history would appear to bear him out. Will anyone repeat the feat in this increasingly chien-eat-dog professional era? Maybe one day but England, says Halliday, would currently be better off focusing on more immediate priorities. “This English team are going to have to play out of their socks to beat Scotland. Don’t listen to the people who say ‘It’s just another day at the office’. Scotland have a team that shouldn’t fear anyone.” As Davis, Halliday and every other old warrior can testify, the warm glow of past victories does not indefinitely protect against the chill blast of modern-day reality. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly rugby union email, The Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Royal Mail announced plans to lay off 700 managers and lowered its profit outlook after a tough Christmas when deliveries were disrupted by high sickness levels caused by the spread of Omicron. The company said it had started consulting unions on the cuts, which were designed to “streamline operational management to improve focus on performance at a local level”. It has frequently been at loggerheads with unions over changes, and stressed that the cuts would be made “through natural turnover, redeployment and voluntary redundancy, wherever possible”. Royal Mail employs 140,000 people, and the 700 management cuts are out of a total of 8,000 managers. Unite said it would fight the plans after the company handed £400m to key shareholders in November. The union, which represents thousands of Royal Mail managers, said the announcement could impact up to 900 of its members overall in the delivery division. Royal Mail said 900 roles would be affected, but that it hoped to redeploy about 200 people. Unite’s general secretary, Sharon Graham, said: “Coming on top of a record turnaround in the company’s fortunes, which resulted in the board handing over a £400m giveaway to certain shareholders, this is cold comfort for those long months when postal employees were being badly hit by coronavirus at its worst. “Unite will be giving maximum support to our members in fighting these unjust job cuts and this includes the possibility of an industrial action ballot. Now is the time for the top executives to reconsider their proposals.” Royal Mail said the job cuts would save £40m a year, but result in a one-off charge of £70m. This means its full-year adjusted operating profit will miss its previous £500m estimate and come in at £430m. The latest job losses come on top of 2,000 reductions outlined in June 2020 – one in five management roles – in areas including IT, finance, marketing and sales. Russ Mould, the investment director at the stockbroker AJ Bell, said: “In streamlining the business, Royal Mail needs to ensure it doesn’t go too far and diminish its operational capability or spark widespread industrial action, the threat of which has hung over the business in the past.” Thanks to a surge in parcel delivery driven by the online spending boom, Royal Mail made a £311m pretax profit in its first half after barely scraping a profit a year earlier. Royal Mail said it handled 439m parcels in the three months to December, and said it was confident that a “structural shift” had occurred in parcel volumes since the start of the pandemic. Domestic parcel revenues increased by nearly 44% compared with 2019 levels, and fell by 4.9% year on year. Covid test kits made up a mid-single digit percentage of total parcel volumes in the first nine months of the year. Overall revenues dropped 2.4% year on year to £3.5bn in the quarter, but were up 17.1% compared with 2019 levels. As the Omicron variant spread, 15,000 Royal Mail staff were off sick or isolating in early January, leading to slower deliveries in some parts of the country. The company said absence levels were now improving. Complaints from customers have also jumped to a decade high, as Royal Mail received more than 1m last year. Keith Williams, the chair, said: “We delivered a solid performance over the Christmas period in particularly challenging circumstances operationally … We expected some decline in parcel volumes given most retail stores were open during the period, unlike last year. However, the trend towards customers wanting more parcels remains, and responding to that change efficiently is key. “Our domestic parcels business in the UK has seen demand increase by around a third over two years, as has our GLS business across its markets.” GLS is Royal Mail’s international parcel business, based in Amsterdam. He stressed the importance of Royal Mail’s modernisation plans in light of the fast-paced change and ongoing inflationary pressures. Mould said: “For a few years Royal Mail was delivering like the worst postie in the depot, parcels marked fragile launched over hedges, letters delivered to the wrong houses and so on, as it really struggled to modernise the business. “Now, helped by the massive growth in parcels being sent during the pandemic, it finally seems to be getting its act together.”A sexual assault survivor who sparked a national conversation about the treatment of women and sexual assault in Australia has found herself at the centre of another fiery debate over expectations on women to smile in public. Grace Tame won last year’s Australian of the year prize after her advocacy was instrumental in overturning a Tasmanian law preventing survivors from speaking publicly about their assault. She later said that in the minutes after delivering her impassioned acceptance speech, Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, leaned over to her and whispered: “Gee, I bet it felt good to get that out.” The revelation forced Morrison to defend himself, telling parliament he did not mean it to sound patronising. “That was a very brave statement, that is exactly what I meant when I said that to her on that occasion,” he said. On Tuesday morning the 27-year-old met Morrison and his wife, Jenny, as she arrived at a get-together for the 2022 Australian of the year finalists in Canberra. The Morrisons grinned broadly for media while Tame and her fiance, Max Heerey, appeared impassive. The photo opportunity quickly went viral on social media, where Tame drew praise from high-profile women and condemnation from the Murdoch media and some conservative senators. The political commentator Peter Van Onselen wrote in the Australian that Tame had been “ungracious, rude and childish”. “If your disdain for the man is so great [understandable perhaps] that you can’t even muster basic and common courtesy, then just don’t go,” he wrote. “But acting like a child displaying a lack of basic manners when coming face-to-face with him in a meet and greet was unbecoming and unnecessary. To look as forlorn as she did in response, rudely and deliberately looking away from the photographer, was an act of juvenile dissent.” Many women on social media defended Tame. The author and activist Sally Rugg said every man scolding Tame for not smiling enough was “telling on themselves”. “We see you,” she wrote on Twitter. “Women do not have to smile for the camera beside men we do not like.” Several politicians from Morrison’s centre-right Liberal party joined Van Onselen in denouncing Tame. The New South Wales senator Hollie Hughes labelled her “immature” and Queensland senator James McGrath called her behaviour “childish”. “It is a pity her behaviour and attacks on our prime minister are so partisan, political and childish,” he wrote on Facebook. “If she didn’t like being Australian of the year she should hand back the honour.” Tame has also used her platform to criticise the government’s handling of rape allegations within Parliament House made by former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, which are now the subject of criminal proceedings. In an address in March, Tame was asked what she thought of the prime minister’s handling of the issue after Morrison said he spoke to his wife, who helped him understand the seriousness of the allegations. “Jenny and I spoke last night and she said to me: ‘You have to think about this as a father. What would you want to happen if it were our girls?’” Morrison had said. “Jenny has a way of clarifying things. Always has. And so, I’ve reflected on that overnight and listened to Brittany and what she had to say.” Tame said it shouldn’t take anyone to have children to have a conscience. “And actually, on top of that, having children doesn’t guarantee a conscience,” she said at the time.Clear winter skies and the promise of a recent evening’s beautiful sunset led photographer Simone Engels to a nearby park on Vancouver Island. But as she trained her lens on the pinkish hue of the landscape of the Pacific coast, she was shocked to see a large, iceberg-like shape on the horizon. “It was this huge, shiny, three-dimensional tubular structure,” she said. “It looked so real.” Engels, who previously studied geography, cycled through possible explanations, including that a large piece of ice had improbably drifted down from Alaska, miraculously passing through narrow straits and dodging archipelagos. But if an iceberg was in the area – especially one of that size – it would surely have made local news, she told herself. “I was trying to pin this together in my head, and I really couldn’t come up with an explanation,” she said. “It just looked so odd and I was nearly convinced that it really was an iceberg I was staring at.” With no one else around to confirm the mysterious sighting, she snapped an image and for nearly half an hour, watched the hulking white shape on the horizon before it disappeared from sight. Engels shared the image online, hoping to get an explanation. The photograph initially stumped locals – including a friend who specializes in ice geomorphology. The image soon went viral and Engels learned that the mysterious iceberg was really a mirage. She was actually viewing the Cheam mountain range on the mainland of British Columbia, nearly 200km (124 miles) away – and beyond the horizon from where Engels was standing. The illusion was caused by what is known as a “superior mirage” which is caused during a temperature inversion, when a band of warm air rests on a layer of cold air, bending light rays downwards. Light from the setting sun was reflecting off the range and bending down, placing the range on the horizon. At a distance, the snow-covered peaks looked eerily similar to a towering iceberg. Engels has seen previous mirages in the area, but nothing as crisp and stable as the mountain range that January evening. “We live in some challenging times right now with a pandemic and it’s really important for people to realize that there are natural wonders out there to be discovered,” she said of the experience, which left her in awe. ‘You can find natural wonders in your own backyard when you get out there and explore.”There seems to be no end to Dylan Alcott’s achievements. A multi-talented athlete, disability advocate, storyteller and media personality, he’s got 29 grand slam titles under his belt (and is taking a shot at a 30th this week). Alongside Paralympic gold and silver medals in tennis and basketball, he was awarded a medal of the Order of Australia in 2009 when he was just 18. And on Tuesday he was awarded the title of Australian of the Year – yet another huge accolade for the now 31-year-old. Alcott has made headlines for all kinds of reasons throughout his career – here’s a quick primer on some highlights. 1. He drank a tinnie from his Golden Slam trophy Don’t let the beer Alcott downed from his champion’s trophy at the US Open last year distract you from the achievement it was celebrating: Alcott had just won a Golden Slam – that is, he won four grand slam tennis titles plus a gold medal in the same calendar year. He’s the first male player to have achieved this, in any form of tennis – prior to 2021, only Steffi Graf had done it. “Thanks for making the dreams of a young fat disabled kid with a really bad haircut come true because I can’t believe I just did it!” he told the crowd after his win. “I just can’t believe I just won the golden slam!” Later, he said: “There was no chance I wasn’t going to scull that beer.” 2. He started Australia’s only fully accessible music festival Alongside his sporting career, Alcott is an avid music fan – Triple J listeners may know him as a presenter on Weekend Arvos, and a regular guest on Triple J breakfast. Alcott is a wheelchair user, after an operation to remove a tumour on his spine when he was three weeks old left him a paraplegic. His love of music and passionate advocacy for disability led to the creation in 2018 of AbilityFest, which aims to “use music as an inclusive platform to normalise disability”. AbilityFest is just the tip of the iceberg, though. Part of what the festival does is raise money for Alcott’s foundation, which uses the funds to help young Australians with disabilities fulfil their potential – whether that’s in sport, music, business or anything else they show aptitude for. Supporting young disabled people to get where they want to go is Alcott’s bag. He’s also the founder of Get Skilled Access, an organisation which states its purpose is to “create a new generation of disability inclusion that is equitable for all.” Alcott has apparently also crowdsurfed in his wheelchair – and says he’s only fallen out once. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning 3. He’s not afraid to call out discrimination As Emma Kemp wrote in Guardian Australia today: “If he has to protest, he will. In 2020, during the first wave of the pandemic he accused the US Open of ‘disgusting discrimination’ over its decision to drop the wheelchair event. When the tournament backflipped and had it reinstated, he praised them wholeheartedly.” Alcott has been open throughout his career about how his disability – and sport – has affected his life and his mental health, not least in his autobiography, Able. “I hated my disability, I didn’t even want to be here any more and then I found tennis and it changed and saved my life,” he said in New York last year. “The reason I get out of bed every day is to change perceptions,” he once told former ABC News Breakfast presenter Fran Kelly. “People [with disability] can live normal lives. They deserve opportunities in education, employment, in their personal lives, in eating, travelling, dating.” 4. He recently announced his retirement from tennis “The time has come, I feel redundant, I feel old, washed up,” he said in November. In a moving speech – after which he popped a bottle of champagne and, of course, necked it – he explained how proud he was of the work he’d done on the court, and what he hoped to do off it. “Being a good tennis player is not the priority of my life. Being a good person is. Being a good advocate and changing perceptions for people like me so they can live lives they deserve to live and get the opportunities I have had. I am so lucky,” he said. “It’s the next generation’s turn to dominate and get the recognition they deserve,” he said. “I’ve known this day was coming for a while. It’s been an incredible ride and I think the time has come to move onto other things that I do. In saying that, I’m going to train my arse off for the next two months and try and go out on a high.” 5. He may be about to win his eighth Australian Open championship – in his last ever pro tennis match “There’s no way I could finish my career a few weeks ago because the US Open was not my home,” Alcott said in November. “This is my home and the Australian Open changed my life. What better way to finish than in my home in front of crowds?” Perhaps with an eighth title win? Stay tuned.The Manchester City midfielder Jill Scott has joined Aston Villa on loan until the end of the season. The 34-year-old, who has more than 150 caps for England, is expected to make her debut against Chelsea on Saturday and the Villa manager, Carla Ward, described the decision as a “no-brainer”. Scott’s move comes as City close on signing the midfielder Julie Blakstad from Rosenborg. A fee for the 20-year-old Norway international has been agreed and final details are due to be settled on Tuesday. Ward, explaining the move for Scott, said: “When we heard of Jill’s availability it was a no-brainer. To have the chance to acquire one of England’s most decorated footballers is a chance we couldn’t turn down. “Jill will bring so much to this group, not only on the pitch but I see her having a huge impact off it, too. We have some hugely exciting young talents coming through, so for them to learn from someone of Jill’s stature will be massive.” Scott, who has been with City since 2014, winning the WSL title in 2016, spent the second part of last season on loan at Everton. She becomes Villa’s second January signing following the arrival of Anna Patten from Arsenal. Villa are ninth in the WSL after a late – and crucial – victory over Leicester at the weekend.Bob Dylan has sold his entire back catalogue of recorded music to Sony Music Entertainment, as well as the rights to multiple future releases, in a deal rumoured to be worth between $150m and $200m (£111m–£148m), Variety reports. The deal covers all Dylan recordings dating from 1962, including his self-titled debut album, which celebrates its 60th anniversary in March, and future releases and reissues in Dylan’s celebrated Bootleg Series. Dylan signed to Columbia in October 1961. Rob Stringer, chairman of Sony Music Group, said they were “tremendously proud and excited to be continuing to grow and evolve our ongoing 60-year partnership. Bob is one of music’s great icons and an artist of unrivalled genius.” The sale would also address “new ways to make his music available to his many fans today and to future generations”, said Stringer. Dylan said in a statement: “Columbia Records and Rob Stringer have been nothing but good to me for many, many years and a whole lot of records. I’m glad that all my recordings can stay where they belong.” In January, Music Business Worldwide analysed new figures from MRC Data to find that catalogue music (defined as older than 18 months) claimed 73.1% of the US music consumption market in the second half of 2021, and 69.8% of total album consumption. The deal continues a concerted period of estate management for the 80-year-old songwriter. In 2020, Dylan sold his song catalogue to Universal Music Publishing for a rumoured $400m and donated his personal archives to the Bob Dylan Center in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Dylan is currently facing a lawsuit from an anonymous woman who alleges that the musician groomed, inebriated and sexually abused her when she was 12 years old. He has formally denied the allegations, calling the lawsuit “a brazen shakedown … false, malicious, reckless and defamatory” and the woman’s alleged timeline of events a “chronological impossibility”.Australia’s richest person, mining magnate Gina Rinehart, has picked up an Australia Day gong as has media mogul Rupert Murdoch’s former Australian chief. Rinehart’s appointment as an Officer of the Order of Australia (AO) “for distinguished service to the mining sector, to the community through philanthropic initiatives, and to sport as a patron” is likely to spark controversy. The honours, which include the awards in the Order of Australia, were handed out to over 700 recipients, including a record number of women. Hancock Prospecting’s executive chair has been criticised for declaring climate change education programs “propaganda”. Shortly after that, she declared herself in favour of renewable energy, but warned (without foundation) that a rush to reduce emissions would cost taxpayers billions. According to reports from May she is Australia’s biggest landholder. Rinehart supports a range of charities including the Royal Flying Doctor Service and the Georgina Hope Foundation, which she chairs. Australians would be more aware of her support for the Olympics. She ran prime-time advertisements at last year’s Tokyo games, and supports swimming, volleyball and rowing athletes. According to her website, she is one of Australia’s biggest Olympics fans, contributing $10m annually. Another article on her website says her personal investment in athletes has been a “game-changer”. Australians are appointed an AO “for distinguished service of a high degree to Australia or to humanity at large”, according to the governor general’s office. Last year tennis great and Pentecostal minister Margaret Court, a vocal opponent of same-sex marriage, was made a companion of the Order of Australia. Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, an advocate of same-sex marriage, said there was “no shortage of irony” that he received the same honour. Broadcaster Kerry O’Brien rejected his own honour in protest at Court’s appointment. The year before, controversy again marred the awards protest. The Council of the Order of Australia reviewed the honours for sex therapist Bettina Arndt and writer Mike Carlton after separate public outcries. The council ultimately decided they could retain their awards. More recently, Turnbull has joined another former prime minister, Kevin Rudd, to condemn the Murdoch media empire, and its executives have been grilled in a Senate inquiry that is due to report in March. John Hartigan, who left Murdoch’s employ a decade ago, has also been appointed an officer in the Order of Australia for “distinguished service to the media industry, to Indigenous welfare, and to sport”. As with many media executives, Hartigan had various run-ins with politicians – he once told Rudd to “pull his head in” after Rudd called Murdoch outlets a “cancer”. Hartigan, now 74, started out as a copyboy. He spent more than 40 years at News Limited, including for NewsCorp UK and NewsCorp US. He worked his way up to CEO in 2000 and chair in 2005. He carried both roles until he resigned in 2011. (News Limited became News Corp Australia in 2013.) Commonly known as “Harto”, he has been an Australian Paralympic Committee director since 2014 and a trustee of the Sydney Cricket and Sports Ground Trust since 2011. Hartigan said he was “humbled” that the citation was not just for doing his job but for “being able to assist in a couple of areas that are important to me”. He lists those as the Indigenous Marathon Project, the Australian Indigenous Education Foundation, as well as his position on the board of Anindilyakwa Land Council. “(They’re) the things I’m most proud of, although I haven’t achieved anything close to how many people I admire [have],” he said. “I just regret that our kids aren’t taught more about both Indigenous languages and Indigenous history in our schools. “It’s so wrong we don’t have a more fundamental understanding. “We can’t even get an Indigenous voice in parliament up and running. I’m far from being a handwringer or bleeding heart, I think I’m pragmatic in recognising that.” Hartigan said he regretted many things about his career, such as missed opportunities as the newspaper industry was transformed by digital products. There are “so many things” he could have done better, he said, including while struggling to start his own one-man newspaper in the 80s. But he said throughout his media career there was not a day when it wasn’t the “best job in the world”, from being a copy boy to being the chairman. “It was a lot of fun,” he said. “I felt more like the CEO of organising parties than the CEO of something commercial.” Guardian Australia contacted Hancock Prospecting for comment.Former New South Wales Rural Fire Service commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons, wheelchair tennis champion Dylan Alcott, swimming Olympic gold medallist Emma McKeon and chef Maggie Beer are among the recipients of Australia Day honours this year. The honours, which include the awards in the Order of Australia, were handed out to over 700 recipients, including a record number of women. Almost half – 47% – of the honours list recipients were women, the highest ever percentage, with 45% for service to local communities. Fitzsimmons, who currently serves as commissioner of Resilience NSW, was honoured as an Officer of the Order of Australia for his work in leading NSW RFS during the Black Summer bushfires of 2019/20. “I’m very humbled and grateful that someone would take the time to nominate me,” he said. “Our lives were changed forever by that fire season, and I’m forever grateful and in awe at the remarkable effort of volunteers and members of partner agencies to save and protect as many people as possible.” “It was an awful time, but when we are at our worst, we see the very best in people.” Over 6% of NSW, or around 5.5m hectares of land, was burned during the crisis, with over 2,500 firefighters deployed at its peak. Fitzsimmons said receiving the honour had led him to reflect on the second anniversary of the fires, having attended memorial events last week. “Going to the memorial brings up so many raw emotions, and connecting with people and catching up with people, it’s had a profound effect on so many of us.” Fitzsimmons says he continues to remember the 26 people, particularly the seven volunteer firefighters, who lost their lives during the bushfires. “These are things that will stay with me forever,” he said, adding he was accepting the honour on behalf of everyone involved in the rescue efforts. Other recipients of the award include two-time world champion netballer Catherine Cox, who told Guardian Australia she was honoured to be recognised as a Member of the Order of Australia. “I won’t lie to you, I shed a tear when I found out,” she said. “Because it is such a big deal and the people I know that already have one are exceptional people in their field, so to be considered in the same sort of league is mind-blowing.” Cox has won 108 caps with the Diamonds since her debut in 1997, and was part of the Australian team that won the world championship in 2007 and 2011, as well as Commonwealth Games gold in 2002. Although she retired six years ago, Cox said the honour had made her think back on her career, achievements and an early change of home. “It’s certainly brought me back to a stage of reflection, it’s nice to take a moment just to think about everything that’s happened.” “My mum actually reminded me the other day that I was actually born in New Zealand. We moved here when I was six, but she said, ‘isn’t it amazing, a little Kiwi girl that’s come to Australia is now being recognised with one of its highest honours.’” “I thought it was pretty cool as well.” Principal medical geneticist and medical director at the Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Prof Leslie Burnett, was also appointed a Member of the Order of Australia, and said it was a great surprise to see his work honoured. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It was very gratifying. You do your best and try and make accommodations to make the world a better place. And then to see your contributions noticed, to see that it was what the target community wanted, it’s very pleasing and exciting. “It’s a way of knowing that everything you’ve been striving for has been worthwhile.” Burnett’s work focused on two key areas: safety and quality at laboratories, and introducing genetic testing and screening in Australia. “I’ve spent a large part of my life pursuing safety and quality in medicine, and trying to develop laboratories that reach new and previously unattainable standards of excellence. “If it’s not better than it’s ever been, it’s not good enough for me.”Nearly a decade ago, the then prime minister, David Cameron, suspended Nadine Dorries, then party whip, after she appeared on I’m a Celebrity. And it seems the wound never healed, as the culture secretary tweeted a photo of Cameron joking that he looked like “a ticket tout”. The tweet, showing a picture of Cameron wearing a baseball cap and a lumberjack shirt at Cocklebarrow Races, near Cheltenham, was captioned: “Whether it’s a major music festival, sporting event or concert, it’s important that people pay a fair price to see the events they love. Please remain vigilant when considering to buy from ticket touts. Guidance is available if you are unsure.” Cameron suspended the whip from Dorries when she appeared on I’m a Celebrity in 2012, after failing to disclose her absence to film the show. The whip was later returned to her in 2013. The tweet spawned a number of imitators, including one who posted a photo of a bookmakers with the image of Cameron in his casual outdoor outfit waiting outside, appearing to naturally fit into the scene. Another said he looked like he was in the market for some livestock, while one person said he resembled an extra from The Full Monty. Dorries was not the only person with the same idea. A tweet posted several hours before her used the same image and captioned it: “Big Dave, buying and selling tickets outside Royal Ascot.” This is not the first time that Dorries has sought to exact revenge for her treatment by Cameron. Speaking to BBC Two’s Daily Politics in 2012, Dorries said: “Unfortunately, I think that not only are Cameron and [chancellor George] Osborne two posh boys who don’t know the price of milk, but they are two arrogant posh boys who show no remorse, no contrition and no passion to want to understand the lives of others – and that is their real crime.” • This article was amended shortly after publication on 25 January 2022 to indicate that comments attributed to a “Sir Michael Take” came from the “spoof” Twitter account of a fictional former MP. The paragraph was removed entirely later the same day.A “knob-throwing” event has been cancelled because the size has become too much to handle for the organisers. The Dorset knob-throwing contest involves competitors hurling a traditional Dorset knob – a hard biscuit – as far as they can. The record throw of 29.4 metres (96 ft) was set in 2012. This is now the third year in a row the organisers have been forced to cancel; in 2020 there was no venue available and in 2021 Covid put an end to the festivities. But this year organisers have admitted that the event, due to be held on 1 May in Cattistock alongside the Frome Valley food festival, has become too popular for the organisers to manage. Other events on the day include knob-eating, knob-painting, a knob and spoon race, guess the weight of the big knob, knob darts and a knob pyramid. A statement on Facebook from the Dorset knob-throwing committee said: “It is with great sadness that the Dorset Knob Throwing and Frome Valley food festival is unable to go ahead on 1 May 2022. “We had over 8,000 people attend the 2019 event, meaning it has reached such a size that it simply cannot be run by a small village committee. We’ve looked at various options but sadly couldn’t make any of them work for this year for many reasons. “We also sadly lost the support of our event management team late in 2021 and agreements with Moores Biscuits to provide the biscuits for the event’s games also took much longer than anticipated. “We hope the event can return in years to come.” The Dorset knob started life sometime before 1860 when the Moores family began baking in West Dorset, according to Moores biscuit-maker. After the day’s bread baking was finished it was the custom to make Dorset knobs by adding butter and sugar to the leftover dough and hand rolling them in small buttons. They were then baked in the dying heat of the bread oven to dry them out like rusks. The Dorset knob was originally named after hand-sewn Dorset Knob buttons that were still being made in the last revival of the once-thriving cottage industry. Knob rules According to the Dorset knob-throwing committee, the rules for the contest are as follows: Three Dorset knobs per go, furthest knob thrown is measured; Use only Dorset Knobs provided; Standing throw from marked standing point; Underarm throwing only; One foot must remain on the ground during throwing; Distance of the furthest knob only measured within the designated throwing zone, which is 5 metres wide x 32 metres long, marked in 2 metre zones, with use of measure in between marks to determine distance thrown; Dorset knob measured at final resting place; If Dorset knob breaks upon landing it will be the umpire’s decision of final resting place.Good morning. Joe Biden has said there was “total” unity among western powers after crisis talks with European leaders on how to deter Russia from an attack against Ukraine, as 8,500 US troops are put on high alert. “I had a very, very, very good meeting – total unanimity with all the European leaders,” the president told reporters shortly after a one hour and 20-minute video conference on Monday with allied leaders from Europe and Nato. In London, Boris Johnson’s office also said “the leaders agreed on the importance of international unity in the face of growing Russian hostility”. The UK prime minister had warned of “unprecedented sanctions” against Moscow should an invasion take place amid growing tensions over Ukraine. Who else was on the call? The leaders of Germany, France, Italy, Poland and the EU also took part in the crisis talks. UN data reveals ‘nearly insurmountable’ scale of lost schooling due to Covid The scale of the number of children who have lost out on their schooling during the pandemic is “nearly insurmountable”, according to UN data. Up to 70% of 10-year-olds in low- and middle-income countries cannot read or understand a simple text, up from 53% pre-Covid, the research suggests. Classroom closures continue to affect more than 635 million children globally, with younger and more marginalised children facing the greatest loss in learning after almost two years of Covid, according to the UN children’s agency, Unicef, which called for intensive support to help students recover. Across the world, children have lost basic literacy and numeracy skills and their mental and physical health has suffered. In South Africa, schoolchildren are between 75% and a whole school year behind where they should be. What has the impact been like in the US? Learning losses have been seen in the US, including in California, Colorado, Tennessee, North Carolina, Ohio, Virginia and Maryland. Can you give an example of this? Yes. In Texas, two-thirds of children in grade 3 (age eight to nine) tested below their grade level in math in 2021, compared with half of children in 2019. Too young to retire but at risk for Covid, older Americans struggle to find work The unemployment rate has tumbled dramatically since the height of the pandemic but older workers are still struggling to find work despite all the reports of worker shortages. About 5.7 million workers ages 55 or older lost their jobs in the US in March and April 2020, 15% of workers in an age demographic that has also experienced the vast majority of Covid-19 deaths. The unemployment rate for workers aged 65 and older hit a record rate of 7.5% in 2020. A June 2021 analysis by economists at the Schwartz Center for Economic Policy Analysis at The New School found at least 1.7 million more older workers than expected retired due to the pandemic. The analysis encouraged policy solutions such as expanding Medicare eligibility to the age of 50, expanding social security benefits, and creating a department dedicated to older workers at the US Department of Labor. Monique Morrissey, an economist at the Economic Policy Institute, explained there are differences among affected older workers. She said: “Job losses are concentrated among non-college-educated workers in lower-paid jobs and are disproportionately also jobs that have high contact with the public.” In other news … Taylor Swift has criticised Damon Albarn, the lead singer of Blur and later of Gorillaz, on Twitter after the British musician told the LA Times she “doesn’t write her own songs”. Swift said she wrote all of her songs and his “hot take is completely false and SO damaging”. Albarn later apologised. Marilyn Manson has denied raping the actor Evan Rachel Wood on the set of the music video for Heart-Shaped Glasses (When the Heart Guides the Hand). In a new documentary, Wood said during a “simulated sex scene”, Manson, born Brian Warner, “started penetrating me for real”. The Jeopardy! contestant Amy Schneider has broken yet another record this week. The engineering manager from Oakland, California, scored her 39th win on last night’s episode, giving her the second-longest winning streak of any contestant. The fate of more than 700 boys and teenage detainees has become central to the siege of a Kurdish-run prison in Syria that was overrun on Friday by jihadists, who are accused of using the boys as human shields. There have reportedly been multiple deaths and injuries among the child prisoners. Don’t miss this: Two pioneering overdose prevention centers in New York are saving lives The stress, anxiety and isolation of the Covid-19 crisis, combined with widespread contamination in the illicit drug market from the synthetic opioid fentanyl, has worsened the overdose epidemic in the US. More than 100,000 Americans died of an accidental overdose in the year ending April 2021, a sharp increase compared with the previous year. The country’s first two sanctioned overdose prevention centers (OPCs) opened in New York on 30 November and are already saving lives. … or this: how the US stitched up the Honduras garment industry By scouring the world for cheap labour, US clothing brands are not merely opportunistic, they are also sometimes actively parasitic. Honduras is a case study: one in which US corporations and the US state department have worked together for decades to bring cheap garments to American consumers, framing job creation as a blessing for the Honduran economy while simultaneously engaging in political interventions that keep citizens poor. Climate check: how plastic pellets ravaged a Sri Lankan paradise The sinking of the X-Press Pearl cargo ship off Sri Lanka’s west coast last May caused wave upon wave of nurdles, the tiny pellets that are the raw material of the plastics industry, to wash ashore. Millions – or even billions – of them have turned the country’s golden beaches black. A UN report called the incident in May 2021 the “single largest plastic spill” in history, with about 1,680 tonnes of nurdles released into the ocean. Most of them were partly burnt and contaminated with chemicals and debris from the ship spill, posing even more of a threat to marine life – and the local community. Last Thing: Michigan woman checks spam folder and learns she won the lottery A woman in Michigan checked her spam email folder – and found out she had won a $3m lottery prize. Laura Spears, 55, from Oakland county, said she bought a ticket and a few days later was looking for a missing email from someone and checked her spam folder. “That’s when I saw an email from the lottery saying I had won a prize. I couldn’t believe what I was reading, so I logged in to my lottery account to confirm the message in the email. It’s all still so shocking to me that I really won $3m.” Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comHe has played a wizard, a supervillain and the great Shakespearean leads – twice starring as Hamlet, 50 years apart – but Sir Ian McKellen has declared himself ready for another challenge in his ninth decade: a stage musical. Talking to Mishal Husain on Radio 4’s Today programme on Tuesday, the actor said he had never had a list of parts he wanted to play but he was still working his way through different types of theatre production. “There are a few left – one would be the musical,” he explained. But can he sing, asked Husain. “In the bath, in the shower, in private,” he replied. “I have sung occasionally – I did a pantomime at the Old Vic a few years back.” In that 2004 production of Aladdin he played Widow Twankey and sang “in a fashion” he added. A full-blown musical would be something else. “I can hold a tune but I’m not a proper singer,” he reflected. “I’m available but incompetent.” The star, who turns 83 this year, is no stranger to on-screen musicals – he played Cogsworth, the major-domo who is transformed into an enchanted clock, in Disney’s 2017 film Beauty and the Beast and he played Gus the theatre cat in the 2019 film of Andrew Lloyd Webber’s stage hit Cats. McKellen is about to play a sleuth for the first time – and for one show only – in a fundraising production at the Park theatre in north London. He is one of the surprise guest stars taking on the role of an investigator in a murder mystery spoof. Part of the fun of Whodunnit (Unrehearsed) 2 – the return of a format first used at the Park in 2019 – is that the actor playing the detective each night has not read the script in advance and is fed their lines through an earpiece. Early in his career, McKellen appeared in two Agatha Christie plays at the Belgrade theatre in Coventry – but as a victim and a butler rather than a detective. The actor said it was a playful if disquieting prospect to be cast as an inspector without any rehearsal and without having seen the script. “I don’t feel I’ve got much to prove in my career any more,” he added. “Why not just do the things I enjoy doing?” The Park theatre has assembled an all-star lineup for the show, with one-off appearances as the detective to come from Dame Emma Thompson, Gillian Anderson, Clarke Peters and Suranne Jones. McKellen had his own casting suggestion: Sue Gray, the veteran civil servant conducting the inquiry into Downing Street parties. “I wonder if Sue Gray is going to be free by the time the show opens. She might be a very good solver of problems,” he said with a chuckle.What if I were to tell you that the following trends in American religion were all connected: rising numbers of people who are religiously unaffiliated (“nones”) or identify as “spiritual but not religious”; a spike in positive attention to the “religious left”; the depoliticization of liberal religion; and the purification and radicalization of the religious right? As a sociologist who has studied American religion and politics for many years, I have often struggled to make sense of these dramatic but seemingly disconnected changes. I now believe they all can all be explained, at least in part, as products of a backlash to the religious right. Since the religious right rose to national prominence in the 1980s, the movement’s insertion of religion in public debate and uncompromising style of public discourse has alienated many non-adherents and members of the larger public. As its critics often note, the movement promotes policies – such as bans on same-sex marriage and abortion – that are viewed by growing numbers of Americans as intolerant and radical. In a 2002 article, sociologists Michael Hout and Claude S Fischer argued that a significant trend in American religion – the skyrocketing number of people disaffiliating from religion – could be partly explained as a political backlash against the religious right. In the two decades since this article was published, a wealth of additional evidence has emerged to support its general argument. Sociologists Joseph O Baker and Buster G Smith summarize the sentiment driving this backlash: “If that’s what it means to be religious, then I’m not religious.” While pathbreaking, this research has been relatively narrow in its focus. This is because it has typically started with the puzzle of the rising “nones” and worked backward in search of a cause, landing on backlash against the religious right. I wondered what would happen if we flipped this question around, and started with the rise of the religious right and public concerns about its radicalism. We could then consider the varied ways that backlash against it has manifested, including but not limited to the rise of the “nones”. Backlash, after all, can take many forms. The kind of backlash that has led people to disavow religious affiliation in general is what I call a “broad” form of backlash. In this form, backlash against a radical form of religious expression leads people to distance themselves from all religion, including more moderate religious groups that are viewed as guilty by association with radicals. This is a common pattern within social movements, where moderates often worry that radicals will discredit their movement as a whole. But this is not the only plausible form that backlash can take. One can also imagine a narrower, more targeted, backlash against the religious right itself, in which people do not abandon religion altogether but rather migrate to more moderate or otherwise appealing religious groups. Evidence of this form of backlash abounds. It can be found in rising numbers of people who identity as “spiritual but not religious”. These individuals are not rejecting religion altogether; they are embracing a new category of religiosity, one viewed as unpolluted by its association with radical conservative politics. Similarly, those who associate with the religious left do not discredit religion in general, but promote what they view as a more pluralistic form of public religious expression. Since Donald Trump was elected president with the support of religious conservatives, typically low-profile groups on the religious left received a surge of positive attention as observers saw in them a means of checking the power of the religious right. As a column by Nicholas Kristof put it in the New York Times: “Progressive Christians Arise! Hallelujah!” Finally, new research finds that people who are both religious and politically liberal are intentionally distancing themselves from the religious right by depoliticizing their public religious expression – a development worthy of much more attention. Finally, backlash is not a one-way street – the experience of being the object of political backlash has led to a counter-backlash among the conservative Christians who comprise the religious right. White evangelical Christians believe that they are being illegitimately persecuted and are increasingly invested in the boundary between the perceived morally righteous and their enemies. Religious conservatives not committed to Trump and the Republican party are being pushed out. Those who remain are not only deeply loyal to a shared political project, but less likely to encounter internal checks on radical ideas. Even as this group is shrinking by some measures, recent data suggests that growing numbers of nonreligious and non-Protestant Americans are adopting the label of “evangelical” – not as a statement of their religious identity, but as a statement of their political identity as rightwing Republicans or supporters of Donald Trump. Together, these counter-backlashes seem to be driving this movement toward deeper political radicalism. Backlash against the religious right has had ripple effects far more widespread than previously recognized. These dynamics are effectively reshaping American religion and politics, and show no signs of stopping. Ruth Braunstein is an associate professor of sociology at the University of Connecticut and the director of the Meanings of Democracy Lab. She is the author of Prophets and Patriots: Faith in Democracy Across the Political DivideThe Octoraro reservoir is a lake in south-east Pennsylvania where locals fish, kayak and marvel at bald eagles and owls. It’s a picturesque scene but in the neighbourhoods nearby there are placards that carry warnings. “No to Big Water”, the signs say, and “Save CWA”. The signs show the local opposition to a hostile takeover effort by Aqua Water, one of the country’s biggest private water companies, against the public utility Chester Water Authority (CWA), which owns the reservoir and bordering woodland. The CWA relies on the watershed to provide drinking water to about 200,000 people in Delaware and Chester counties. It’s an award-winning public utility that is financially robust and delivers safe, clean and affordable water. It does not need a bailout. Campaigners say the battle here, which started in 2017, should be a wake-up call for residents around the US, as privatization often means higher bills. “This takeover is about putting money over people’s needs – it’s corporate greed,” said Delaware county resident Santo Mazzeo, 42, a high school maths teacher with three children working two jobs to make ends meet. “Water is the stuff of life, it’s a fundamental human right which should be run by the people for the people, not for profits,” added Mazzeo, who in his spare time delivers the anti-takeover signs to neighbours. But CWA is vulnerable because the sale could help rescue one small city in Delaware county on the brink of bankruptcy. Private companies mostly target financially distressed local governments and utilities looking for cash injections to clear debts, upgrade infrastructure or fund popular public services without raising taxes. Industry friendly laws means this often comes at a cost for residents: nationwide, one in 10 people currently depend on private water companies, whose bills are on average almost 60% higher than those supplied by public utilities. In Pennsylvania, Aqua already owns numerous utilities and its most recent rates proposal would, if approved by the state regulator, lead to almost half a million households paying on average 17% more for their drinking water than they currently pay. Wastewater bills would rise by 33%. CWA warns that the Aqua deal could cost its customers more than $1bn in higher bills over the next 20 years – and threatens public access to the reservoir and its landholdings, 2,000 acres that protects the watershed and wildlife. “We pride ourselves on providing quality water that our residents can afford. We’re not in any trouble, and we’re the best custodians of this precious natural resource because we don’t have to worry about shareholders or dividends,” said Cindy Leitzell, chair of the CWA board. Nationwide, dozens of new privatisation deals are under consideration, according to Global Water Intelligence, with 14 major acquisitions (each worth at least $10m) pending across five states, with a combined value of almost $800m, according to S&amp;P Global Market Intelligence. “For more than a decade, these corporations have waged a successful lobbying campaign to support state laws that facilitate privatisation and ensuing water rate hikes…. the public must be on the guard to protect their essential water services from the corporate vultures trying to exploit fiscal distress,” said Mary Grant, the right to water campaign director at Food and Water Watch (FWW). Analysis by FWW of four of Aqua’s largest Pennsylvania acquisitions found rates increased by an average of 280% – the equivalent of 8% per year – after adjusting for inflation. “Water corporations have become increasingly aggressive and even the best-run water systems like CWA are under attack, which should sound the alarms for communities nationwide,” Grant said. ‘First class operation’ Federal funding for water systems peaked in 1977, and since then municipal utilities have mostly depended on rate hikes and credit to fund infrastructure upgrades, water safety mandates and climate adaptation. As a result, the cost of water and sewage has risen sharply over the past decade or so, making this basic service an increasing burden for many Americans, a Guardian investigation found. Still, the funding shortfall remains gob smacking, which has been further exacerbated by billions of dollars in unpaid bills during the pandemic. According to the Environmental Protection Agency, drinking water, wastewater and stormwater systems need at least $744bn over the next 20 years just to comply with existing federal law. An additional $1tn is required by 2050 to protect water infrastructure from extreme weather events and sea level rise linked to global heating, according to the National Association of Clean Water Agencies. But CWA is not struggling. Its well-planned upgrades – such as building a new pump station on higher ground to avoid flooding and a multimillion dollar state of the art leak detection system – have helped avoid unexpected costs and catastrophes. CWA recently increased its rates for the first time since 2010. “This is a first class operation which is not financially stressed in any shape or form because we’ve always looked ahead and don’t answer to shareholders. Quality and quantity are problems in this industry, but we have both, which makes us a prize that Aqua wants,” said Paul Andriole, CWA’s vice-chair. At its water treatment plant, where a dozen or more awards are displayed in the lobby, 60m gallons of water drawn from the reservoir and Susquehanna river are processed every day. It’s a 24/7 operation with an in-house laboratory to aid compliance with environmental standards. “We meet or exceed EPA standards, we do not have quality or safety violations that could justify our sale. It’s a struggle but we can handle it,” said Anita Martin, chief lab technician. Should CWA save Chester from bankruptcy? CWA was created by the city of Chester – Pennsylvania’s oldest city and a former industrial powerhouse which has experienced significant economic and population decline since the mid 20th century. The majority Black city is an environmental justice hotspot: its 32,000 or so residents are burdened with poor air quality caused by heavy industries including the country’s largest trash incinerator, and have limited access to green spaces and healthy affordable groceries. The city of Chester has been subject to state financial oversight since the mid-1990s due to mounting debts and inflated police pensions, but was pushed to the brink of bankruptcy in 2020 after a major revenue stream, the casino, was closed due to Covid. A large cash injection – along with reducing retiree benefits – is crucial to making the city solvent, according to Michael Doweary, the court-appointed receiver. “This is a difficult situation but CWA is the city’s only asset large enough to generate enough money to meet its debt obligation and reinvest in the city, which for years has been on a shoestring budget.” But, critics say the sale would hurt city residents, about a third of whom live in poverty. Based on Aqua’s proposed statewide rate increase for its existing customers, Chester city residents could be saddled with bills more than double what they pay now, according to a comparison tool devised by CWA. The average water bill burden would be 3.3% of median household income, a level generally deemed unaffordable by the UN. (The mayor has said some of the sale money could be used to offset rate increases for a decade.) Kearni Warren, 45, an energy justice organiser who lives in Chester, said: “We don’t have clean air, green spaces or healthy food options, but affordable clean water is the one healthy thing we do have, and the city wants to sell it off… It will harm residents and thousands of ratepayers outside the city.” Chester city created CWA but the vast majority (81%) of its customers now live outside city boundaries – in the suburbs of Chester and Delaware counties which have separate local governments. Given this, the city’s right to sell CWA has been contested. Last September an appeals court ruled that the fate of CWA rested in the hands of the city, as it created the utility. CWA lodged an appeal to the Pennsylvania supreme court. In an amicus brief supporting the appeal, FWW argues that Aqua’s actions constitute a hostile takeover, and that CWA should be treated as a public trust responsible for managing water supplies for the benefit of the people, not as a commodity. Why do private water customers pay more? In 2016, Pennsylvania became the first state to pass legislation that allows private companies to buy public utilities for more than they are worth – relying on what’s known as fair market value rather than depreciated value. Companies can recoup the over-priced investments by passing on the cost to all their customers through statewide rate hikes, meaning residents pay while shareholders reap the rewards. The law led to a merger frenzy in Pennsylvania and at least 11 states have since passed similar laws, driving up water and wastewater bills, according to the Government Accountability Office. In some states, healthy public utilities – not just those in financial trouble – are eligible for takeover. In Pennsylvania, a third of residents are served by private water companies – triple the national average – and their bills are on average 84% more than those with public providers. In 2017, a year after the fair market law (Act 12) was passed, Aqua made an unsolicited bid to CWA for $320m – which the nine-person board unanimously rejected after concluding there would be no benefit to its residents. As Aqua persisted, in 2019 CWA made a counter offer worth $60m to help bail out the city in exchange for protection from future hostile bids. Aqua filed a lawsuit to stop the deal. There are now three offers on the table, including $410m from Aqua – the second highest but city’s preferred bid, which includes a $12m advance irrespective of the litigation outcome. Michael Doweary, Chester city’s court appointed receiver, said his team is exploring ways to keep the water authority in public hands, but CWA’s $60m bid isn’t enough. (Aqua’s rival, Pennsylvania American Water, has bid $425m.) With more than a dozen pending lawsuits, the case could be tied up in court for years. If sold, it would be up to the court to determine the city’s share of the proceeds. Aqua is now a subsidiary of Essential Utilities, the second largest publicly traded US water and wastewater corporation, currently valued at $12.5bn. It provides drinking water and wastewater to about 3.25 million people (1m households) in eight states, with over half in Pennsylvania, where the company is headquartered and has close ties to the state government. Aqua has at least half a dozen new deals pending regulatory approval in the state. In addition, the Guardian understands that the company has approached Bucks county’s water and sewer authority (BCWSA), another robust public utility, about a possible $1bn offer, which would be among the biggest water privatisation deals in US history, affecting half a million residents. (Aqua said it has not made a bid; the county commissioner office and BCWSA declined to comment.) In a statement, Aqua said its actions related to CWA did not amount to a hostile takeover and that it was committed to keeping the reservoir open to the public. It said that public utilities like CWA are unregulated and typically untransparent about rates and capital investments. “Aqua’s rates reflect its true cost of service, which includes investments necessary to provide high quality service, safe working conditions and protection of the environment. Lower rates often indicate deferred maintenance and old, outdated facilities, which can lead to service interruptions and water quality and wastewater discharge violations.” New Garden Township is a scenic rural area in Chester county with well-to-do families, retirement villages and migrant communities concentrated around multiple mushroom farms. Its wastewater system, which supplies about half the township’s residents, was Aqua’s first in the state after the fair market law changes – in a deal worth $29m. Some of the money was used to build a new police station and offset future tax increases. If Aqua’s rate hike is approved by the regulator, residents will see average wastewater bills rise by approximately 37% later this year – much higher than the rate cap promised during initial negotiations. This has generated anger and mistrust among residents opposed to the takeover. Going forward, residents will probably share the cost of Aqua’s future acquisitions – including CWA, the community’s water provider. Margo Woodacre, 72, a retired social worker and part-time English teacher, said: “It’s the dishonesty and unfairness that’s made me go door to door educating businesses and residents, so they know what’s coming if we lose CWA.”A decision by a leading Dutch university to refuse all further Chinese funding for a controversial study centre has sparked fresh concern about Beijing’s apparent attempts to influence debate at European educational institutions. Amsterdam’s Vrije Universiteit (VU), the fourth largest university in the Netherlands, has said it will accept no further money from the Southwest University of Political Science and Law in Chongqing and repay sums it recently received. The announcement came after an investigation by the Dutch public broadcaster NOS last week revealed VU’s Cross Cultural Human Rights Center (CCHRC) had received between €250,000 (£210,000) and €300,000 annually from Southwest over the past few years. According to NOS, the CCHRC used Southwest’s money to fund a regular newsletter, organise seminars and maintain its website – which has published several posts rejecting western criticism of China’s human rights policy. The CCHRC website was temporarily taken offline on Tuesday. A statement said the centre had concluded not all publications on the site were “compatible with its vision” of human rights. It also wanted to check a “sufficiently clear distinction” was made between statements made on its behalf and “opinions and observations made in a personal capacity”. In October 2020, however, the site noted that academics associated with the CCHRC had recently visited four cities in Xinjiang province and concluded there was “definitely no discrimination of Uyghurs or other minorities in the region”. NOS cited Tom Zwart, a Utrecht University human rights professor and president of the CCHRC, as telling Chinese state TV that human rights in China “must be seen in the context of domestic circumstances, and cannot copy the west”. Another associate of the centre, Peter Peverelli, has also described reports of forced labour camps for Uyghurs as “rumours” and said it is fashionable to criticise China. “Xinjiang is just lovely,” Peverelli said, according to the public broadcaster. “Lovely people, breathtaking nature, great food. And no forced labour, no genocide, or whatever other lies the western media might come up with.” The centre, which counts among its affiliates academics from institutions in the Netherlands, China and other countries, describes itself as an independent research institute aimed at encouraging open cross-cultural debate about human rights concepts and issues. VU said in a statement that “even the appearance of research not being independent is unacceptable”. The university would accept no further funding from China, return last year’s money and launch a full inquiry, the statement said. Zwart told NOS the website was a forum for academic free speech and posts did not necessarily reflect CCHRC’s research findings. The fact that some views on the site aligned with Chinese government positions did not indicate formal support, he said. The Dutch education minister, Robbert Dijkgraaf, said he was “very shocked” by the revelations, adding: “Academic freedom, integrity and independence must be guaranteed and it is important that Dutch institutions remain alert to possible risks of undesired influence by other countries and take adequate measures.” The incident follows multiple other examples of China’s efforts to exercise soft power through European academic institutions, which in November prompted Germany’s then education minister to demand universities review all their links with China. Anja Karliczek said Chinese influence over universities was “unacceptable” amid accusations that about 200 state-funded Confucius institutes at academic institutions in Europe were merely “spreading propaganda for the Chinese Communist party”. Despite fears of “elite capture” and even a threat to national security, Hungary in May announced plans to open a branch of China’s prestigious Shanghai-based Fudan University in Budapest, saying it would raise higher education standards and bring Chinese investment and research to the country. However, the government has since paused the plans and opposition leaders said this month a petition had gathered enough signatures to force a referendum on the issue. Britain’s former higher education minister, Jo Johnson, said in March last year that the risks involved in Beijing’s investment in the UK’s universities was “poorly understood” after a study identified “a significant increase in funding from China and collaboration with Chinese researchers over the past two decades”. “The UK needs to do a better job of measuring, managing and mitigating risks that are at present poorly understood and monitored,” Johnson said. Failure to do so risks real damage to our knowledge economy.” The report found a significant increase over the past 20 years in Chinese funding for university research including in such sensitive areas as automation, materials science and telecommunications, as well as in disciplines where collaboration “may threaten freedom of speech”. • This article was amended on 25 January 2021. Tom Zwart is a professor at Utrecht University, not Leiden University as stated in an earlier version.They begin as they plan to continue, with an exquisite, hypnotic late-night meditation. A gently rippling solo on the kora, the west African harp, gives way to collaboration with cello. Then the cello takes over, with the strings first plucked and then bowed, as the kora now eases back to provide accompaniment to the melody. This is the title track from Chamber Music, the debut album from Ballaké Sissoko and Vincent Ségal, released in 2009 at the start of what has proved to be one of the great African-European partnerships. Seated next to each other on stage they may look an unlikely couple, but they have a similar history. Sissoko, who wears a blue robe, is a griot, and master of the 21-stringed kora. Like his celebrated and equally adventurous cousin Toumani Diabaté he has learned the ancient Mandinka styles, the classical music of west Africa, but is keen to experiment. His last solo album Djourou included a collaboration with a French rapper, and a jaunty reworking of Berlioz. Ségal, who wears a dark suit, is a classically trained cellist who became a celebrity in France improvising with a punk-influenced drummer in Bumcello. Together, they play almost as if by intuition, as kora and cello switch between providing lead and rhythmic backing, constantly changing direction within the same piece. The music is low-key but quietly thrilling, with improvisation that involves virtuoso kora solos, or passages where the cello is strummed like a guitar. Music from their two albums is mixed with tracks from Sissoko’s solo albums, with Ségal switching to castanets as Sissoko launches into his reworking of Asa Branca by the Brazilian accordion player Luiz Gonzaga. For the encore, they are joined by the remarkable British-based South African cellist Abel Selaocoe, who won a deserved standing ovation for his opening solo set, which involved anything from delicate or growled singing worthy of mbaqanga star Mahlathini to a Bach cello suite prelude, with the audience providing drone effects. Joining Sissoko and Ségal for Mako Mady he adds subtle vocals and cello textures – they should record together as a trio.Paul McCartney’s original notes for Hey Jude are being sold, digitally at least, by one of John Lennon’s sons. Julian Lennon has announced details of a Beatles memorabilia sale in which outfits, guitars and the song notes will be sold as non-fungible tokens, or NFTs. Julian Lennon was five when, in 1968, his father left his mother, Cynthia, for Yoko Ono. McCartney went to see Julian at the Lennon family home in Surrey and came up with the tune and germ of the lyrics for Hey Jude in the car. Originally titled Hey Jules, it was meant to comfort young Julian – take a sad song and make it better. “Hey, try and deal with this terrible thing,” McCartney once said. “I knew it was not going to be easy for him. I always feel sorry for kids in divorces … I had the idea [for the song] by the time I got there.” The song was an immediate hit, becoming that year’s top-selling single in the UK and the US. With its infectious four-minute “na, na-na, na-na-na-na, na-na-na-na, hey Jude” refrain it remains, arguably, the Beatles’ biggest crowd pleaser. The notes show McCartney structuring the song into four distinct sections. It starts with “voice and piano” and ends with ‘LONG SLOW FADE’. Bidding for the notes starts at $30,000 (£22,267), with buyers told: “This NFT is a one of one edition of the physical item and does not include the physical item.” It does, however, come with an “exclusive audio narration” by Julian Lennon. Other objects being sold as NFTs are three Gibson guitars and two John Lennon outfits: the Afghan coat he wore in the film Magical Mystery Tour and at the launch party for the album Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band; and a black cape he wore in the film Help! Julian Lennon hoped the sale would be “a unique way to continue Dad’s legacy.” He told Variety: “I’ve been collecting these personal items for about 30 years, and I was getting a bit fed up with them being locked away in a vault, where I’ve had to keep them because I didn’t want them to get damaged.” Part of the proceeds from the auction, taking place on 7 February, will go to Julian Lennon’s philanthropic White Feather Foundation. The idea of NFTs is that buyers become the owner of a unique digital item, rather than the unique physical item. The global market for them appears to be booming, last month estimated at $22bn (£16.5bn). The most valuable NFT sale of 2021 was The First 5000 Days, a digital collage by Beeple, the name used by the American digital artist Mike Winkelmann, that was auctioned for $69.4m in March.Makis Papadimitriou is the actor who gave a great performance in what deserves to be a modern Greek movie classic: Suntan, in which he played a depressed vacation-resort doctor who conceives a Death-In-Venice obsession with one of the beautiful young sunseekers. So it’s good to see him again, but this is a very tiresome and pointless shaggy-dog-story-slash-road-movie that offers no compelling reason for its own existence, and certainly no interesting or satisfying ending. Papadimitriou is Antonis, a middle-aged loser who finds himself single with a Hornbyesque vinyl collection and a sideline in singing with an embarrassing band, along with his mate Christos (Michalis Sarantis). To combat their creeping ennui, our two amigos decide to go on a quest: to track down the (fictional) 90s softcore VHS porn star called Laura Durand with whom they had both become mildly obsessed, because she vanished from the business 20 years ago, becoming the Greta Garbo of Europe’s adult entertainment scene. And so they go on a quest to find Laura, with at one stage a weird Lynchian diversion into black-and-white, and really a lot of zany and quirky encounters, which are written and directed like kids’ TV, and some hallucinatory visions of Laura in which she appears bisected with video scan lines, as in her cheesy erotic movies. In some ways, this reminded me of the various documentaries about the real-life 70s porn star Mary Millington, whose unhappy life and death created a cultish posthumous fanbase. Well, a factual porn star is one thing. But a fictional one who does not shed any real light on female or male sexuality, and who is not a very interesting character, is something else. • In the Strange Pursuit of Laura Durand is released on 31 January on digital platforms.With the world of employment changing like never before, many are increasingly finding that work is wherever you (and a trusty internet connection) are. Indeed, many small businesses are ditching their offices altogether. We asked some owners who’ve been there, done that, for their top tips on making fully remote working work. Make your virtual office feel like a real one “I’ve helped dozens of businesses go fully remote, and my top tip is to schedule team time in – at 11am, put the kettle on and collaborate,” says systems strategist Elle Baldry, of Elle Baldry Consulting. “The teams that work best together use a mixture of communication in the form of scheduled one-on-one meetings to get help with projects, facetime as a team online, and messaging apps which allow for both private and open communication. “The latter supports the building of those relationships which would have happened over the kettle or a shared love of sushi. Some businesses have even gone as far as always having a video meeting link open as a form of staff room, so when you’re making tea at home you can share your break with others. Technology can bring us together, but the culture of a workplace is important.” Equip your staff correctly “My team of eight and I have been fully remote for seven years now, having sold off a previous business that was office-based, so we have plenty of experience in making the switch work,” says Mark Webster, co-founder of website marketing experts Authority Hacker, based in Edinburgh. “Along the way, we’ve made some classic mistakes that remote businesses often make, such as trying to run the business the same way as an office. “What we’ve found is that taking a small fraction of what a physical office costs and putting it into remote infrastructure gives huge returns. Everyone has their own preference for their home office setup, so I recommend paying for whatever IT and office equipment your team wants. “Your video call equipment is crucial, too. Buy everyone a 1080p webcam, a high-quality headset, and an LED light. A fast, stable internet connection is critical, too, as any loss in performance can impact the flow of a video call. When you have a small team, this stuff doesn’t cost very much, but it has a disproportionate impact on productivity.” Use apps to improve connectivity “I launched my business in July 2020, and while there were some challenges around my team of 12 working remotely to begin with, the model now works very well,” says Caroline Marshall, of virtual assistant service Upsource. “In person, you can always grab your boss or colleague to get your burning questions answered, while remotely, you either have to organise a time-consuming call or send an email, which might get lost in a heavy inbox. “This is where project management and communication apps, which can be really important for your team to get work done, come in. My top three recommendations are Slack for keeping in touch and for non work-related chats, a project management tool such as Trello or ClickUp to assign tasks and set deadlines, and time-tracking software such as Toggl or Clockify, to ensure you use the hours clients have paid for.” Keep meetings fresh “Our team of seven live all over the UK, which means we’ve spent an awful lot of our time on Zoom,” says Julie Waddell of Devon-based Moorish Humous. “To keep my staff motivated and engaged, I’ve come up with some creative ways to add fun surprises to our online meetings, including a video message from Jason Manford, a pep talk from Mr Motivator, and a goat joining one of our team meetings. “I also arranged a product swap with a sweets brand, so I could give the team a treat. The team tells me these little surprises keep them entertained and motivated, and remote working really suits our company. It means everyone can be flexible, and we can meet with internal and external stakeholders, anywhere, anytime.” Factor in your team’s health needs “The days where you need a professional-looking office to prove your worth are long gone, and switching to remote working has opened up opportunities for our business and staff,” says Bec Wooderson, managing director of Sage Account Solutions in Suffolk. “But before taking the plunge, you have to consider the physical and mental challenges your staff will face. “I hold Zoom ‘move’ meetings, where I get everyone on their feet to get their blood pumping, and hold dog-walking telephone meetings. Staff have completed detailed health and safety assessments, and we help them tackle specific issues they want to resolve, such as neck strain. I’ve introduced monthly wellness workouts, and actively encourage a daily ‘bring and share’ session where people can discuss work and personal worries. As a result of all these measures, we’ve seen a reduction in non-Covid related staff sickness.” Don’t skip the team-building “We’ve been hosting lots of virtual team-building events for companies such as Google and PwC, as they try to find innovative ways of keeping their teams connected,” says Hannah-Beth Clark, director of The Little Surprises Company. “We’ve hosted everything from interactive comedy sessions to cocktail classes and lunchtime cooking clubs. “Interactions where you’re connecting on matters other than work, and creating space for people to be human in front of each other, are important. They’re tricky to recreate when you aren’t interacting in an office, but you can create a pseudo-experience by organising collective activities such as cooking together and sharing lunch.” Make sure everyone switches off “Although I started out working from a co-working space, I gave that up when I had my daughter in 2017, and since then, my team and I have worked remotely to keep overheads down,” says Imogen Tinkler, co-founder of Kent-based seasonal food brand Bangers and Balls. “I think it’s important to approach this style of working differently, and to make sure my employees feel valued while being productive, we have a few key rules in place. “Switch off when the day finishes. We take an extended break once a week to go foraging. Nature is good for our mental health and productivity, and you miss getting outside when you don’t commute to an office. We’re quite flexible with hours, as we know people might want to run an errand during the day, and we don’t want them clock-watching. We all work best and get the work done when we’re trusted as adults.” Make remote-working work for your business, with a connectivity package that gives you the bandwidth to do what you do best. To find out more about how Volt from Virgin Media and O2 can seamlessly supercharge you and your business, visit virginmediabusiness.co.uk/voltRunning a small business certainly demands a lot of the owner – but with such lean teams nowadays, that’s also the case for the staff. Keeping employees motivated and performing at their best is crucial to getting that extra edge in a competitive world. How do you boost team productivity? We asked eight owners of small businesses for their top tips. Clear the air “We do a daily ‘team clearing’, where everyone has an opportunity to get negativity off their chests,” says Tim Rundle-Wood, founder of natural scents company Twoodle Co. “It’s an idea I adapted from the book Sacred Commerce by Matthew and Terces Engelhart, and my team loves it. It helps us to reframe negative things going on in our lives, and gets the day off to a positive start – like a detox for our minds. “Working in pairs, it takes our team of six 10 minutes to go through a script of questions such as: ‘Name something positive manifesting in your life,’ or, ‘What’s one thing you can do to help the team have a better day?’ It quite often opens up a longer, open conversation and sometimes on to a form of team coaching where we share our own experiences and solutions to issues going on in people’s lives. I’ve found it promotes a culture of openness, and the freedom to share and express emotions in a healthy way.” Practise open book management “I’ve long thought the key to business success was through inspiring your team,” says Adrienne Eiser Treeby, managing director of Crown &amp; Queue Meats. “Reading Setting the Table by Danny Myer, and working with Zingerman’s open book management style, set my ultimate approach.” “Every month, our team of six meets to discuss what the goals of the company are, from more sales to new customer service techniques, and while I guide them, I let my team decide what those goals are. Then, we agree as a team what reward we’d like to earn should we meet those metrics, such as veg or cheese boxes from local small businesses. “Helping your team transparently see how they contribute to a firm’s success, and how their work directly connects to better pay and better conditions, has really boosted our business.” Support team development “I launched Words + Pixels almost two years ago, and in that time, we’ve grown to hire 15 people,” says the PR agency’s founder Nick Braund. “Recruitment has been important to our success, but retention has been essential, so we give everyone personalised, six-weekly objectives. “We provide each team member with tailored, specific advice on what they’re doing well and need to improve, including short- and long-term priorities. Enforcing this has meant everyone knows how they’re performing, and feels their development is being managed and supported at all times. “As a result of these measures, we’ve definitely seen retention improve, and today we have a team that can see the opportunities we have for them to grow personally alongside the agency.” Explore their working style “My two employees and I work remotely, and we use personality trait tools to better work together, to help replace those ‘watercooler’ exchanges you enjoy in an office,” says Sophia Waterfield, editor of Paranting magazine. “When onboarding a new recruit, I ask them to fill in the Manual of Me, which asks questions that communicate working preferences, such as: ‘The best way to give me feedback is …’ and ‘My best working patterns look like …’ I also ask them to complete the 16personalities test, which is based on Myers Briggs. “These tests look at how people like to work, how they like to be managed, and how they work as part of a team – and because of them, my management style is better tailored to each individual. For example, one employee likes to be left alone to get on with their work, so I’ve placed that trust in them, and they’ve come through. “It’s also really helped me to help them to deal with challenges outside work, and given me an insight into what my team likes and how I can reward them.” Offer mental health support “As a small business, it’s important that we keep productivity levels as high as possible, so we’ve recently invested in mental health support,” says Philip Bacon, director of Bacon Marketing. “Our five employees now have online access to therapists whenever they need it. It means when times are harder, staff have somebody external to turn to. “It’s been a big morale booster – during the research phase, I consulted the team and the feedback was very positive when it came to the idea alone. Although it’s early days yet, I see this as a long-term investment. I strongly believe the scheme will pay dividends in terms of productivity.” Be childcare-friendly “To help fellow mums like ourselves hold down a job, we’re as flexible and childcare-friendly as possible,” says Anna Cargan, co-founder of children’s clothing website Build a Bundle. “Between me, my business partner Nathalie and our six employees, we have nine children, and as our team grew, we quickly realised our staff wouldn’t be able to manage their jobs without flexibility. We never wanted our staff to feel torn between work and kids, like we’d so often felt in our past careers, so our staff know they’ll never be refused time off work if their child is unwell, or if school closes. They can also swap their working days, or even bring their child to work if needed. “Far from this approach hurting productivity, we have a loyal, hard-working team of staff, who are happier, too – our orders have more than tripled since March 2020, while staffing hours have only doubled.” Make your staff feel valued “Bumble &amp; Goose was formed out of a feelgood hobby, so we do what we can to ensure our team is happy and enjoys work,” says Lynsey Bleakley, director of the bespoke bakehouse. “We found that little changes make a huge difference in productivity, and give everyone a sense of purpose. We use simple things such as gifting our six staff at birthdays and Christmas, giving out bonuses when we complete a large order, and organising fun team-building days.” Allow for downtime during the day “Wellbeing is at the heart of everything we do, and I believe it’s really important for work not to be all about seeing clients,” says Kristy Lomas of The Ki Retreat. “Employees are encouraged to meditate when they start work, to get them into the right mindset, which includes a ritual where they light candles and burn incense. We also hold journaling sessions. “I make sure staff have plenty of time between clients, rather than booking them back-to-back. That way they’re able to unwind and recharge before their next client – they’ve been known to grab a yoga mat to stretch out, or relax with a drink and a book from our library.” Get the peace of mind you need to boost your business output, with a connectivity package that gives you the capacity to do what you do best. To find out more about how Volt from Virgin Media and O2 can seamlessly supercharge you and your business, visit virginmediabusiness.co.uk/voltWhether it’s balancing the books, designing the next product release, or pitching for finance, entrepreneurs have to be all things to their business at all times. But what happens if they’re at the helm of more than one company? We spoke to three successful multi-business owners about the highs and the lows of bringing multiple visions to fruition and their advice on making the juggle work. ‘I’m like a farmer laying seeds’ After a steady career in marketing and advertising, Chuong Van Dang didn’t expect to start his own business. But while in Malaysia, he had an idea for a social media platform for scuba divers. “We crowdsourced dive logs and reviewed hotels, and we basically thought we would eventually sell it to TripAdvisor,” he says. Although it grew to 10,000 users in 100 countries, Dive Share eventually wound down without making its millions. But it was an experience that marked a turning point for Van Dang. Now based in the UK, he runs a cleaning company for Airbnb with a team of 14, a dim sum and cocktails meal kit business called Yum Seng, and works part-time for the space tech company Magdrive as a marketing consultant. “When it comes to running multiple businesses, it’s important you don’t have all the businesses at the same stage – you can’t have two in startup mode, for example,” Van Dang says. In his case, four operations staff manage the day-to-day running of the Airbnb cleaning business, while he focuses more on Yum Seng, which he founded during lockdown with his wife, Stephanie. They’ve just expanded to deliver nationwide after focusing on south-east London for the first year. “It meant much larger premises, larger warehousing and a much larger commitment,” he says. The team of five has moved into a nearby shared office space with on-site storage, high-speed broadband and lots of creative minds to collaborate with. Technology has also helped him keep everything going in other ways. “I use a lot of Teams, Slack and WhatsApp. I find those are the quickest, simplest ways to communicate. Email isn’t quick enough!” Ten years after starting his first business, he can’t see himself doing anything else. “You never switch off, so not burning out is the biggest challenge. But it’s also about finding the right business partner to work with and trying not to overstretch yourself. I’m like a farmer laying seeds, waiting to see which opportunity really takes off.” ‘I’m better at keeping things in perspective now’ Being diagnosed with cancer in 2019 forced Natasha Ascott to take a step back from running her award-winning children’s outerwear company Muddy Puddles. After months of treatment and being told that she was in remission, Ascott somewhat surprisingly decided to start a second business. “The team did a brilliant job of running Muddy Puddles without me and I had the space and opportunity to decide whether I wanted to jump back in with two feet or do something else after six years of growing the company,” she explains. “I now work with them part-time.” The first Muddy Nursery opened in Buckinghamshire six months ago, with a second due to join the chain in early 2022. Ascott started her career as a teacher and says the diversification aligns well with her passion for education and a customer base she knows well – Muddy Puddles sells to 30,000 families and 300 schools and nurseries every year. But she admits launching a new business hasn’t been easier the second time around. “Some of the biggest challenges include making sure I give the right focus to the right things across both businesses. I try to use the urgent/important matrix to help me prioritise, but can definitely get lost in the weeds. It’s also challenging to communicate and connect well across two different cultures and teams.” Her advice to other entrepreneurs is to get comfortable with juggling. “With two businesses, you’ve got even more hats you need to wear,” she says. Good connectivity is essential too. “I work between a lot of different places and I’m totally dependent on everything being synced up wherever I am. One of the first jobs we prioritised at the nursery was getting everything on to the cloud and making sure everyone could communicate remotely and on-site.” Despite the challenges, she likes the mix of having a product-based and a service-based business and says she feels more resilient this time around. “My dad’s an entrepreneur too and he always says to me: ‘Nothing’s ever as good or as bad as it seems.’ I think I’m better at keeping things in perspective now.” ‘We walk the walk as well as talk the talk’ If you’d told Simon Forster he’d be working with some of the biggest names in fast-moving consumer goods with the design agency he co-founded from his dining room table 12 years ago, he wouldn’t have believed you. “I think my dream at the time was to earn a living and convert my garage into a studio,” he says. Now, he employs a team of 20 at Robot Food and has upgraded his studio to an office in Leeds city centre. Working closely with consumer brands gave Forster the inspiration to start one of his own. Stories &amp; Ink is a skincare brand for tattooed skin, and was stocked by major retailers before pivoting to a direct-to-consumer model. The range has generated £800,000 in sales over the past year and is due to be launched in the US shortly. Forster admits the biggest challenge with running multiple companies has been embracing delegation. “I was involved in everything, and you simply can’t be when your business scales and you have multiple interests,” he says. “You have to find people who are better than you and empower them to succeed. Now, I’m the hype guy, the numbers guy, I set the vision and tone.” He’s been able to do that more efficiently than ever before over the past two years, thanks to embracing flexibility and bolstering connectivity throughout the company. Robot Food projects have been organised via Google Chat rooms, workflows have been redesigned to facilitate remote collaboration, and the team has been given more autonomy to choose when and where they work. “Nine to five in the office doesn’t suit everyone,” Forster says. Moving Stories &amp; Ink away from retail and towards e-commerce has opened up new opportunities, while a new Stories &amp; Ink tattoo studio in Falmouth is giving local talent a platform. Despite straddling very different businesses, Forster says running two companies has its benefits. “Stories &amp; Ink is the perfect case study for Robot Food, because brands come to us knowing that we’re walking the walk, as well as talking the talk,” he says. Do you have flexible business connectivity needs? You need a connectivity package that gives you the adaptability to do what you do best. To find out more about how Volt from Virgin Media and O2 can seamlessly supercharge you and your business, visit virginmediabusiness.co.uk/voltProductivity can be an elusive goal for all professionals, but for small business owners, there never seem to be enough minutes in the day. Whether it’s running reports, answering customer emails, pitching for new business, or dealing with admin, many entrepreneurs are left frustrated that they’re not making enough meaningful progress despite tackling tasks all-day-long. We asked four experts for their top tips on how “Soho” (small office/home office) business owners can boost productivity. Have a routine Business coach and growth specialist Kevin Riley finds that building structure into the working day helps keep entrepreneurs on track. “Humans are creatures of habit and the better our routine, the more productive we are,” he says. “I commute to work, even when I’m working from home, taking a 30-minute walk before my day starts and after logging off in the evening.” Riley also advocates setting 30 minutes aside at the end of the day to tie off loose ends and plan for tomorrow. “That means when I walk into the office at 8 or 9am, I’m ready to go. I’m not thinking, where do I start?” Outsource where you can Even solo entrepreneurs shouldn’t try to do everything themselves, says John McLachlan, organisational psychologist and co-author of Time Mastery: Banish Time Management Forever. “One of the things I spend a lot of time doing with entrepreneurs is encouraging them to do less and think more. Focus on what you’re good at, the skills that have made you successful and spend more time doing that.” Other tasks can be delegated to employees or outsourced to specialists such as accountants, virtual PAs, designers and digital marketing experts, he adds. Build focus like a muscle Experts believe the past two years of pandemic-related uncertainty and stress have had an impact on our attention spans, memory and ability to problem-solve or be creative. The good news is, it’s reversible. Riley aims to build the entrepreneurs he works with up to a 50-minute block of focused work, without any distractions such as emails or social media. Time-management techniques such as the Pomodoro method – which breaks work time into 25-minute intervals, separated by short breaks – or apps that lock social media for 30 minutes at one go can help entrepreneurs break bad habits. Riley also recommends tracking the working week to see where time can be spared, such as scheduling meetings back to back, rather than with short breaks in between (when it’s difficult to get anything meaningful done). “If you work a 40-hour week and can free up 10 minutes a day, that equates to one working week a year,” he adds. Prioritise ‘deep work’ A concept first explored by the US author Cal Newport, “deep work” is the ability to focus without distraction, to quickly master complicated information and produce better results in less time. Alicia Navarro was so inspired by Newport’s theory, she founded the virtual co-working platform Flown to help professionals tap into more focused working. She’s found multitasking business owners particularly receptive to the idea. “Entrepreneurs often live in a very reactive state because there are all these emails to answer and meetings in our diaries, and we try to do deep work in the pockets of time between everything else. That doesn’t work because it takes 25 minutes to get back into a deep work state after you’ve been interrupted,” says Navarro. Instead, schedule two-hour chunks of focused time throughout the week and let “shallow work’’ such as answering emails, chasing invoices or other administrative tasks fit around that. Create accountability One of the challenges for solo entrepreneurs, Navarro says, is the lack of accountability when you work alone. “One of the ingredients for deep work practice is the ritual of accountability,” she says. “At Flown, we set goals for that day’s session in small groups, then work together for two hours silently, before going back to our small group to share how much we’ve achieved.” This idea can also be replicated with a supportive group of other business owners, says neurophysiologist and sleep and energy expert Nerina Ramlakhan: “Surround yourself with people who can inspire you in those moments when you lack confidence. And ask yourself: ‘Why am I doing this? Why is this important to me?’ We’re more likely to be productive if we’re able to connect the task with our value system.” Take a break It might sound counter-intuitive, but resting during the work day is one of the most effective things business owners can do when it comes to optimising productivity. “The ultradian rhythm occurs several times a day, roughly every 90 to 120 minutes and determines the limits of our ability to concentrate,” explains Ramlakhan. Many entrepreneurs are perfectionists and find it hard to switch off, but taking a five-minute break to “eat, move, breathe, or reconnect with nature” each cycle will help to prevent burnout. Even a change of scenery can help boost intuitive thinking – you might work from a cafe for the afternoon, for example, instead of at home. Boost your bandwidth Get your technology right and you can get more done. Speedy broadband, ample data allowance, and reliable infrastructure are key components for a productive office, no matter how small. “One of the biggest frustrations in any workplace is technology,” says Riley. “Making sure connectivity is right is crucial. It’s also a good idea to have someone you can call on (such as a freelance IT support service) if you have any technology issues. People waste so much time Googling how to fix something. Every time you do that, you’re losing money.” Plan for the future Many people wear busyness like a badge of honour, but productivity has to be for a purpose, rather than for its own sake. “If you’re too busy doing tactical day-to-day tasks, you’ll miss the strategic vision,” says McLachlan. “That’s hard in a culture of busyness, because people are frightened to have time to sit and think, because they’ll feel guilty.” Smooth out the peaks and troughs of busy work by building a consistent pipeline of business in advance, he adds. “Otherwise you’re under such high pressure that your performance drops.” Keen to boost your business productivity? You need a connectivity package that gives you the bandwidth to do what you do best. To find out more about how Volt from Virgin Media and O2 can seamlessly supercharge you and your business, visit virginmediabusiness.co.uk/voltThe Metropolitan police are investigating alleged parties at Downing Street and Whitehall where people may have breached Covid laws, the force’s chief, Cressida Dick, has announced in a major intervention. Here we look at what’s happened and what it could mean. What has Dick announced? Speaking at the London Assembly’s police and crime committee on Tuesday, the Met police commissioner said the force was investigating “a number of events” that took place at Downing Street and Whitehall in potential breach of Covid-19 regulations over the past two years. Met officers had looked into several other events in Downing Street and Whitehall, which had been assessed as not reaching the threshold for criminal investigation, Dick said. But she would not say which. In a separate statement, the Met police said: “Where multiple events occurred on a particular date at a location, all the events on that date will initially fall within the remit of the investigation so that the full circumstances can be established. This does not mean that everyone who attended an event will be investigated.” What’s the justification for investigating now and not sooner? Allegations of lockdown parties in Downing Street emerged in December 2021 and have snowballed since. Dick said it would “not normally be” a proportionate use of the force’s resources to investigate historical allegations of Covid breaches. But she told London Assembly members that investigations were carried out for “the most serious and flagrant type of breach” where there was evidence and three criteria were met. “My three factors were and are: there was evidence that those involved knew, or ought to have known that what they were doing was an offence; where not investigating would significantly undermine the legitimacy of the law; and where there was little ambiguity around the absence of any reasonable defence. “So in those cases, where those criteria were met, the guidelines suggested that we should potentially investigate further and end up giving people tickets.” She said specialist detectives had continually considered whether a criminal investigation into any of the Downing Street and Whitehall events was proportionate based on the available information. In recent days, she said, the Cabinet Office had provided outline findings from its inquiry to the Met. This is a reference to the inquiry being led by the senior civil servant Sue Gray. What will this mean for the Gray inquiry? The pivotal inquiry by Gray was expected to be published late this week. But publication will now be delayed until the Met has concluded its investigation, according to sources, which could take weeks. No timeline has been given. Many MPs were awaiting the results of the Gray inquiry before deciding whether to submit letters of no confidence in the prime minister. How serious is this development for the prime minister? Very. The investigation raises the prospect of sanctions for Johnson and his staff if regulations are found to have been breached. Dick raised the prospect of fixed penalty notices being issued for some, but not all, of those attending, depending on the conclusions of the investigation. The launch of a criminal inquiry and delay of the Gray report could create breathing space for Boris Johnson. Some commentators are already arguing the moves will be a form of reprieve for the prime minister, with interest and fury waning by the time the findings are published. But it could also spur MPs to submit their letters now. A total of 54 letters would trigger a no-confidence vote, and the prime minister would be forced to resign if 180 or more MPs vote against him in a secret ballot.Vodafone has announced plans to switch off its ageing 3G network next year to focus on using the freed-up spectrum to expand its 4G and 5G networks. Here we explore what impact the move might have. What is 3G? Launched at the turn of the century, 3G spectrum heralded the start of the transition of the simple mobile phone to the bells-and-whistles smartphones most of the public own today. From video-calling and accessing services such as banking and online shopping to watching Premier League highlights, 3G spectrum ushered in the mobile enabled-era of the wider digital revolution. Mobile operators spent a staggering £22.5bn at the auction of the UK spectrum in 2000, as the promise of billions in new revenues from enhanced usage beyond texts and phone calls fuelled a furious bidding war. The Hutchison-owned Three launched the UK’s first 3G network in 2003. Why is it being switched off? The UK’s 3G networks were state of the art two decades ago, but the technology has been superseded by more powerful and efficient 4G and 5G networks. As most mobile phone users have upgraded to smartphones over the years, 3G is becoming obsolete. Today less than 4% of the data used by Vodafone customers is on its 3G network, and at BT-owned EE it is just 2%, compared with about 30% as recently as 2016. Mobile operators are seeking to retire 3G networks and use the spectrum to bolster 4G and 5G services. Who will be affected? BT, which owns mobile brands including EE and Plusnet, has previously said that there are between 2 million and 3 million people using 3G handsets across all UK mobile networks. Many of these are older phone owners who have preferred to stick with simple-to-use devices rather than be enticed by smartphones. Some have kept a 3G-enabled version as a fallback option in case they lose their main phone. In 2017, there was a resurgence in the popularity of simple phones, with Nokia’s 3310 3G selling 13m handsets worldwide and making it the UK’s third most popular phone brand that year. Will turning off 3G affect mobile phone coverage across the UK? Based on coverage data approximately 2.2% of the UK is only covered by a 3G signal. For the most part this in remote locations such as rural Scotland, parts of North Norfolk, Wales and Cornwall. However, all of these locations still have a basic 2G signal, which enables voice calling but has extremely limited access to internet data, which is not being switched off. However, EE has said it hopes that as coverage of 4G and 5G is rolled out it hopes to be able to switch off 2G networks as soon as 2025.The manager of an exclusive New York City restaurant insisted it was focused on the safety of its guests, after the former Alaska governor and Republican vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin dined there despite not being vaccinated against Covid-19. New York City laws require proof of vaccination for indoor dining. The city government said Palin should “follow the rules just like everyone else”. Palin tested positive repeatedly on Monday, delaying the start of her defamation trial against the New York Times in Manhattan federal court. Palin, who also tested positive in March last year, has said she will not get vaccinated. In December, she told a conservative audience in Phoenix: “It’ll be over my dead body that I’ll have to get a shot. I will not do that. I won’t do it, and they better not touch my kids either.” In a statement, Luca Guaitolini, manager of Elio’s, the restaurant on the Upper East Side, responded to the news Palin was seen eating there on Saturday. “We are taking this isolated incident – and unfortunate oversight – very seriously,” Guaitolini said. “Elio’s adheres to and believes in the vaccine mandate, and all it is doing to protect our staff, regulars and the dining public.” Guaitolini said he was not working on Saturday. He told the Times first-time diners were checked but Palin dined with an unidentified “regular”. “She probably just walked in and strolled over” to the table, Guaitolini said. “We are trying to get to the bottom of this.” In his statement, he said: “My focus right now is on the safety of my staff who worked the floor that night, and on our guests.” The restaurant was contacting diners to let them know of possible exposure, he said. The New York city government said: “The Key to NYC rules were put in place to protect all New Yorkers – including the small businesses that power our city’s economy.” “Ms Palin needs to respect small business workers and follow the rules just like everyone else.” Palin did not comment. On Monday night, she confirmed her Covid test and told Fox News she felt “totally fine”. She also declined to comment on her case against the Times, over a 2017 editorial on her comments about gun violence. The Times said Elio’s, open at East 84th and Second Avenue since 1981, was known for “famous clientele” including Tom Hanks, Joan Didion and Mick Jagger. The paper also cited an obituary for the restaurant’s founder, Elio Guaitolini, which described “an informal clubhouse for Manhattan’s social and media elite”. The founder’s son said Palin was “a controversial person wherever she goes” and wished her “a speedy convalescence”. Among New Yorkers who spotted Palin dining at Elio’s, Shawn McCreesh, a writer for New York magazine, alluded to a famous impression of the politician on a New York City institution, Saturday Night Live. “My mom thought she was Tina Fey,” he tweeted.Cost pressures for Britain’s factories are growing at their fastest pace since 1980 as companies struggle to find workers to meet growing demand, a leading business lobby group has said. The CBI warned that higher manufactured goods prices were inevitable after its monthly healthcheck of industry showed labour shortages at their most acute in almost half a century. The survey of 236 firms found orders picking up over the three months to January, but output growth was limited by bottlenecks. Rain Newton-Smith, the CBI’s chief economist, said: “Global supply-chain challenges are continuing to impact UK firms, with our survey showing intense and escalating cost and price pressures.” According to the CBI’s industrial trends survey: Average costs growth accelerated at the fastest pace since April 1980. Average domestic price growth in the quarter to January was similar to October, which was the highest figure since April 1980 and is anticipated to accelerate over the next three months. Average export prices in the quarter to January grew at their quickest pace since April 1980 and price growth is again expected to pick up over the coming quarter. The share of firms citing skilled labour as a factor likely to limit output next quarter rose to its highest since October 1973. The annual rate of inflation as measured by the consumer prices index hit its highest level in almost 30 years in December, and is set to climb further from 5.4% to at least 6% over the coming months. Newton-Smith said government action was needed to ease cost pressures from spiralling energy bills and to encourage investment. “It’s good to see firms looking to invest more in training and retraining as labour shortages continue to bite. And planned increases in spending on plant and machinery is a welcome sign of much-needed strengthening in business investment. Further fiscal measures to get more firms investing will be needed to set the UK on a long-term path to sustainable growth. “Meanwhile, against the backdrop of rising energy prices, which are adding to inflationary pressures, short-term action is needed from the UK government to find urgent solutions for firms that are struggling.”Brody Dalle has testified that her ex-husband Josh Homme head-butted her so hard she “saw stars”, and told her that he had fantasised about murdering her, on the first day of a trial dealing with conflicting domestic violence restraining orders that each party filed against the other, Rolling Stone reports. Dalle told a Los Angeles courtroom that the Queens of the Stone Age frontman attacked her in October 2019 during a discussion about their respective musical output. “We were talking about touring, and he was thinking about putting a tour right when my record was coming out. I hadn’t released a record in a very, very long time, and I said, ‘I would never do that to you.’ I said, ‘It’s weird and competitive.’ “And he said, ‘Competitive? You think you’re my competition? I want to fucking strangle you right now.’ And he came up to the bed and he got on top of me and screamed, ‘You’re a fucking insane bitch.’ And I had my arms up in a foetal position, and he grabbed my wrist and pulled me out of bed on to the floor. I was terrified.” She claimed that the following month, Homme said he had fantasised about killing her and head-butted her in the right temple so hard that she blacked out. “My head went back, and I was on the ground. He bent down and he said, ‘You fucking faker.’” She said he told her: “‘I’ve been thinking about wanting to kill you, and if I killed you, no one would know, because you’d be dead.’ I was in shock. I couldn’t believe that he would say something like that,” said Dalle, who claimed he was intoxicated during the alleged assault. After the alleged head-butting, Dalle filed for a restraining order and initiated divorce proceedings. The couple married in December 2005. They have a 16-year-old daughter and sons aged 10 and five. She told the court that after Homme attended rehab, they successfully co-parented until Homme allegedly turned violent during a custodial exchange of their sons last June, punching her car window, refusing to let her close her door and verbally assaulting her. Dalle said Homme was upset because their daughter refused to go to his house. In August 2021 Homme filed a restraining order against Dalle, claiming that she “angrily slammed her car door into my body, causing significant bruising”. He said she had also punched him in the face on “several occasions”, thrown objects “such as her handbag and an iron” at him, and called him “derogatory names”. The following month, Dalle unsuccessfully filed for a restraining order against Homme on behalf of her and their children. It accused him of grabbing, flicking and hitting the children, as well as drink driving and making threats against Dalle’s partner. Homme denied the charges. Their daughter, however, was granted her own temporary restraining order against Homme, ordering him to remain 100 yards away from her and stipulating no contact. Homme was granted 15-minute FaceTime calls with his sons every other day. This week’s hearing is the latest development in a complex case. In November, Homme successfully sought criminal contempt charges against Dalle for violating a court order when she refused to hand over their five-year-old son on 3 September 2021. She was sentenced to 60 hours of community service and a $1,000 (£742) fine. That judge found that the couple’s older children had resisted seeing Homme of their own accord owing to concerns about his sobriety and alleged threats against Dalle and her partner Gunner Foxx. Homme filed for a civil harassment restraining order against Foxx on 12 November, claiming that he was intentionally interfering in his relationships and custodial time with his sons. In January, Foxx was granted an emergency stay-away order by a judge after Homme allegedly threatened and injured him during a confrontation at a shopping mall on Christmas eve, Rolling Stone reports. In November, Homme told the judge he was “willing to take responsibility for things that I do” but wanted “justice” and “one set of rules for both sides”. • In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org.Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. Well. There’s only one thing I was going to be talking about in this week’s Pushing Buttons, isn’t there? Since Microsoft very inconsiderately announced the biggest acquisition in gaming history just after last week’s edition went out, the entire games industry has been in a flap. The $69bn deal to buy Call of Duty, World of Warcraft and Overwatch publisher Activision Blizzard absolutely dwarfs the $7.5bn that the house of Xbox paid for Zenimax/Bethesda in 2020, which already had me feeling slightly uneasy about the amount of cash being thrown around by giant corporations (see also Tencent, whose run of acquisitions shows no sign of slowing down.) This is more money than either of Microsoft’s competitors in gaming – Sony and Nintendo – could dream of shelling out. The acquisition instantly wiped $20bn off Sony’s share price, which gives some indication of the sheer force of this power play. But as I wrote in an analysis of the deal last week, this is about much more than games consoles: Microsoft wants to control as much of the gaming market as possible in future, and it’s doing this through investing in content rather than hardware. The bet is that we’ll mostly be playing games via streaming subscription services in the not too distant future, and if you have to pay £15 a month or however much to play Call of Duty via Game Pass, that future will certainly arrive sooner. Here’s what’s rankling me about this deal though, now that the dust is settling (and assuming that it gets past US regulators, who are supposedly cracking down on big tech companies and their drive to monopolise). Activision Blizzard has, of course, been at the centre of a string of scandals stretching back nearly a year – including allegations implicating its CEO Bobby Kotick, who, alleges the WSJ, knew about sexual misconduct allegations at Activision studios and failed to do anything about them. Kotick denies the allegations. Bloomberg reports that Kotick is expected to leave once this deal goes through, but instead of resigning after employees walked out and demanded his removal, one of the highest-paid execs in the world is now looking at the biggest paycheck of his life. Can we just remember for a second that Microsoft’s Xbox chief Phil Spencer said he was “disturbed and deeply troubled by the horrific events and actions” at Activision Blizzard in an email to staff last November, when this deal would have been in the works? No doubt that’s true, but the deal is still going ahead, isn’t it. As ever with these scandals, the actual consequences for those in power seem to be minimal. Even in the days before the deal broke, there were reports that Kotick had held back reports on the scale of layoffs related to workplace misconduct. The Activision Blizzard King Worker’s Alliance – some of whom recently succeeded in forming a union, albeit one comprising just a few dozen of its nearly 10,000 employees – have said that they will not halt their efforts to organise and advocate for themselves. Many of these people have been working under tight deadlines on annualised franchises such as Call of Duty for a long, long time, for a boss who considered anything less than a billion-dollar success to be a failure. Under Microsoft, with its much bigger portfolio of games, that approach may well be different. Whatever my reservations about the shape of the games industry in years to come as a result of this deal, I hope it brings with it meaningful, positive change for the people who actually make games, along with the inevitable payday for shareholders and executives. What to play Uncharted: Legacy of Thieves Collection is out on PlayStation 5 later this week and reminds us why developer Naughty Dog is regarded as the master of narrative action games. This is 2016’s Uncharted 4 – which in its first few hours has surely the cutest relationship scene in video games – packaged with its actually-more-interesting female buddy-movie spin-off Lost Legacy, alongside some visual upgrades (not that either of these games really needed them). They are sumptuously good-looking, well-performed globetrotting adventures, and though I always get annoyed at how little influence you actually have over what happens, they are always a fun ride. The Last of Us remains my favourite Naughty Dog series, but it’s also really serious and intense, proper horrors-of-humanity stuff. Uncharted is good clean Indiana Jones-style capers – it might have the high body count typical of all action games, but it doesn’t try to make you feel bad about it. Available on: PlayStation 5 from 28 January Approximate playtime: 15-20 hours for Uncharted 4, 7-10 for Lost Legacy What to read Just to keep the good vibes going, Polygon has a report on claims of extensive crunch – that’s unpaid overtime, still rife in games despite increasing pushback from, well, everyone – at British Lego games developer Traveller’s Tales. In response, the company told Polygon Traveller’s Tales is “committed to creating a respectful, fair and inclusive workplace for every employee”. Also on Polygon, here’s an actually-good-vibes story about the entertainingly persistent French developers who brought back Windjammers, a little-known but intensely loved sports game from 1990. Played Pokémon Snap last year, the Pokémon photography safari game? Heard of Pupperazzi, the dog-snapping game that is essentially a meme fleshed out in code? You may enjoy this Eurogamer feature on the photography-games trend, which speaks to the people behind some lesser-known stars of the genre – such as TOEM, a chill, surreal, black-and-white small-town adventure. What to click Will Microsoft’s acquisition of Activision Blizzard finally bring scrutiny on the video game industry? I’ve seen the metaverse – and I don’t want it Rainbow Six Extraction review – Call of Duty’s zombie mode crossed with XCOM’s alien invaders Question block Reader Martin Shore provides today’s question, which I couldn’t resist answering myself: Is there a video game remaster or remake you’d love to see that’s not already been announced? I’m lucky in that I grew up with Nintendo, which means that many of the landmark games of my childhood have been remastered. Some still haven’t, though. I’d love to see a proper remake of Super Mario 64 or – especially – Zelda: Majora’s Mask, though I’m not sure its creepy angular art style would have the same eerie effect outside the polygonal confines of the N64. (Playing the Link’s Awakening remake on my Switch made me long for a similar treatment for A Link To The Past, incidentally, though you could argue that the 3DS’ Zelda: A Link Between Worlds was kinda that.) My ultimate unlikely remake request would have been Demon’s Souls, but that actually happened, and it was amazing. Here’s another, though: 1997’s original post-apocalyptic RPG, Fallout 1. It is an absolute mess to look at these days but the game is darkly brilliant and the dialogue and writing are better than any of the modern Fallouts. I’d settle for a visual refresh, but imagine a 3D remake … If you’ve got a question for Question block or anything to say about the newsletter, email us on pushingbuttons@guardian.co.uk.Game of Thrones actor Peter Dinklage has taken aim at Disney for what he called its “fucking backwards” forthcoming live action adaptation of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. Dinklage, who stars in Joe Wright’s new film, Cyrano, accused the studio of double standards by attending to racial diversity in its cast but falling back on other damaging stereotypes. “I was a little taken aback by [the fact] they were very proud to cast a Latina actress as Snow White,” Dinklage told podcaster Marc Maron, “but you’re still telling the story of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs”. Dinklage, who has a form of dwarfism called achondroplasia, continued by saying Disney should have stepped back and reassessed the project. “You’re progressive in one way but you’re still making that fucking backward story of seven dwarves living in the cave. What the fuck are you doing, man? Have I done nothing to advance the cause from my soapbox? I guess I’m not loud enough. “They were so proud of that, and all love and respect to the actress and the people who thought they were doing the right thing but I’m just like, ‘What are you doing?’” Dinklage added that had a “cool, progressive spin” been put on the fairytale, he would have been “all in”. Disney has since responded in a statement. “To avoid reinforcing stereotypes from the original animated film, we are taking a different approach with these seven characters and have been consulting with members of the dwarfism community. We look forward to sharing more as the film heads into production after a lengthy development period.” The remake stars Rachel Zegler, fresh from her acclaimed debut in West Side Story, with Gal Gadot as the Evil Queen. Directed by Marc Webb, the film is said to be an adaptation and an extension of the 1937 Disney animated classic – itself taken from a Brothers Grimm story. An updated version, Snow White and the Huntsman, starring Kristen Stewart, met with a backlash on release a decade ago after the dwarves were played by actors of average height – including Bob Hoskins and Ian McShane – whose faces were digitally transmuted on to small bodies. Aside from central roles, casting on the new Disney film, including that of the dwarves, has not yet been announced. • This article was amended on 26 January 2022 to remove a paragraph that contained incorrect information about reaction to Snow White and the Huntsman.‘His songs remind me of my mum’ My parents had just split up, and my mum, caring for two young daughters, took us to Bournemouth for a few days to get away. It was the year Jurassic Park came out and she would have been about 36, a few years older than I am now. She found a tape of Bat Out of Hell in a bargain bin at a service station on the drive there and the second she put it into the tape player in the car and heard the opening track, she was hooked. As kids, we loved it too – it was so fun, theatrical and a bit naughty. We played that tape over and over on our car journeys. I saw how his music empowered my mum and made her feel good at a very vulnerable and painful time. He has brought her pure joy since she found that tape and his songs remind me of the close bond my mum, sister and I share. Vicky, 33, editor, London ‘Bat Out of Hell is a Watson family staple’ My grandfather David Watson, or “Papa” as I knew him, passed away on 13 January 2022 at the age of 84. He was dearly loved by us all and will be forever missed. He was also a huge Meat Loaf fan. At every family gathering Papa would call insistently for someone to play [Paradise By the] Dashboard Light or Dead Ringer for Love over and over again until we were sick of it. He went to a Meat Loaf concert in Glasgow’s SEC Centre with his wife, my late gran Ria Watson, in around 2013, when he was already well into his 70s. Almost every time I visited him, he would eagerly play Meat Loaf’s music videos from his iPad to the television for us to watch. Papa and his Meat Loaf songs became a running joke in the family, but it rubbed off on us all; my dad played Bat Out of Hell so often growing up that me and my two brothers, now all in our 20s, could probably recite the whole album backwards. We were stunned by the news that Meat Loaf passed away just one week after our beloved Papa. Bat Out of Hell is my favourite album of all time and a Watson family staple, and although we were saddened by the loss of the man, the myth, the legend himself, it was unbelievable to us that his death followed that of his biggest fan by just one week. I will always think fondly of Meat Loaf, not only due to the prevalence of his music in my childhood, but how my memories of it are intertwined with my Papa. Emma Watson, 26, recent graduate, Lesmahagow, Scotland ‘My mum sang along while she did the housework’ Bat Out of Hell remains my favourite rock album and gets airplay often, but the greatest joy was in finding out that my mum used to put it on my hi-fi when I was at work and sing along while she did the housework. That secret only came out many years after I left home. I can see her in my mind’s eye head-banging to Bat Out of Hell while pushing the vacuum around. Pat Condon, procurement professional, Blackpool ‘Meat Loaf’s music never took itself too seriously’ My first boyfriend introduced me to Meat Loaf in the early 2000s, and “our song” was Heaven Can Wait. The relationship didn’t last, but I’ve loved the music ever since. When I married my husband, Dead Ringer for Love played at the end of the ceremony. (We joked about having Paradise by the Dashboard Light, complete with baseball commentary, as our first dance.) When I phone him, his ringtone is You Took the Words Right Out of My Mouth. Meat Loaf’s music may have been overblown and rather silly but it never took itself too seriously, and sometimes you need that in life. Anna, 36, charity fundraiser, West Midlands ‘I haven’t stopped listening since I was eight’ I got into my hero Meat Loaf as an eight-year-old boy when a friend of my parents’ brought a tape to a party. I couldn’t stop listening to it and I haven’t stopped listening to Meat Loaf since. I was lucky enough to meet him four times and see him live many more. He will live on through his music for decades to come. Let’s just hope he’s rocking with Jim Steinman, wherever they may be. Eric Dickson, 35, East Lothian ‘Meat Loaf’s music was the soundtrack to our relationship’ I discovered Meat Loaf when I was about 15 and Modern Girl played on the radio. I was hooked. I listened constantly on my cutting-edge Sony Walkman cassette player, especially on my way to and from school. I saw him perform live about 15 times, the first in 1986, in Wembley Arena. I went with a group of school friends. We missed the last train home after the concert and spent the night in the waiting room at Shenfield railway station, our ears ringing with the music and the incredible performance. There was no sleep that night, just singing his songs and discussing our amazing experience until the first train home at 5am. When I met my partner, Lore, at the age of 18, it was Meat Loaf’s music that provided the soundtrack to our dates and relationship. We are still together today, sharing the enjoyment and memories of his music. Meat Loaf was by my side musically for almost 37 years and he will remain so until the day I also have to accept that Heaven Can No Longer Wait. Frank, 52, Walton-on-the-Naze, Essex ‘His music was my way of communicating with a world I felt closed out from’ I was first introduced to Meat Loaf at age seven. My dad had an old cassette and I remember constantly listening to Two Out of Three Ain’t Bad. Having been diagnosed with autism at a very young age, Meat Loaf was my way of communicating with a world I felt closed out from. In 2010, I bought my first Meat Loaf album, Hang Cool Teddy Bear. It was at this point my life totally changed. As a devoted fan, I became a member of the Mad About Meatloaf fan club, where I eventually worked my way to becoming a moderator. In September 2021, I had the opportunity to sit down with Meat Loaf in Concord, North Carolina, and spent almost 45 minutes one-to-one with him. The stories and the wisdom he shared with me were priceless. I told him I wanted to be a published author, and he replied it does not matter what the readers may think – as long as I write a book that I’m passionate about and am proud of, I will find my true audience. Before our meeting came to a close, Meat Loaf gave me a huge hug and thanked me for all I do for his fan club. His passing has definitely left not only a huge hole in my life, but many fans around the world as well. He has been a true inspiration in my life and will be truly missed. Sammy Mosteller, 25, Lincolnton, North Carolina, USA ‘He threw away his microphone and sang without it’ Meat Loaf’s Bat Out of Hell show in the summer of 1978 was the first rock concert I ever attended, and in my memory it is still one of the best I’ve seen. At the end of the show, he threw away his microphone and sang without it! That became my benchmark for future rock concerts, which unfortunately was never reached again. Wolfgang Schindler, 59, Hamburg, Germany ‘Who can forget his performance in Fight Club?’ When I was seven, I spent a year wearing a leg brace to help treat a condition called Perthes disease that affected my hip. I spent most of that year being pushed around in a wheelchair while listening to cassettes through my headphones. When the news of Meat Loaf’s death broke, I was reminded of a cassette that soundtracked that year: a compilation album of Meat Loaf and Bonnie Tyler tracks. I’m still not entirely sure how that compilation came to exist or even how a copy of it came in to my ownership. I’m very glad that it did, as I credit that year as being one of the reasons I developed such a love of music, where Meat Loaf was front and centre. And who can forget his performance in Fight Club? He will be missed by many. Lee, 32, music industry worker, London ‘I still listen at full volume’ I still have my Meat Loaf ticket from Newcastle City Hall, 27 November 1984. From the moment I heard the Bat Out of Hell album in the late 70s, I’ve been a fan and I listen to his music still, at full volume. While Meat Loaf is inextricably linked with Steinman’s lyrics, one of my favourites is his cover of Dylan’s Forever Young. That’s how his music makes me feel. Sue Nicholson, retired, TynesideWhy are Derby in such financial trouble? Had Derby beaten Aston Villa in the 2019 Championship play-off final, the outlook would surely be different. Mel Morris, a local businessman, bet the ranch and lost in his attempt to return Derby to the Premier League for the first time since 2008. They have spent 125 days in administration and are in a race against time to secure a preferred bidder who can fund the club until the end of the season and complete a takeover. The English Football League’s findings over the former chairman’s valuations of players led to a total 21-point deduction this season. “I’m most unhappy with Mel Morris – he is why we’re in this situation,” the manager, Wayne Rooney, said on Friday. How likely are they to finish the season? Derby do not have cash to cover bills beyond the January payroll and the EFL has asked them to provide proof of funds to fulfil their remaining fixtures by next Tuesday or risk expulsion. The cost of running the club is about £1.5m a month. The ideal solution is for the administrator, Quantuma, to identify a preferred bidder and move to complete a takeover, but it could also secure additional lending or – and this is seen as the last resort – sell players. Rooney has been reassured that no player will leave without his say-so. The captain, Tom Lawrence, and academy graduates Festy Ebosele and Louie Sibley are attracting firm interest. Derby are unable to make signings or offer contract extensions, which led to Phil Jagielka joining Stoke when his deal expired. The 18-year-old scholar Dylan Williams was sold to Chelsea for what is understood to be a six-figure fee. Derby were unable to offer a professional contract. Are they going to find a buyer? The administrator remains confident of an agreement, with at least three parties still at the table. Last week the Binnie family, founders of the investment firm Carlisle Capital, submitted a bid worth about £28m, which they believe to be the asking price, and that could trigger the former Derby chairman Andrew Appleby or former Newcastle owner Mike Ashley into bidding. Crucially, the club are thought to have had positive conversations with the preferential creditor, HMRC, over an agreement to pay significantly less than the £29.3m they owe. The Binnies are understood to accept any liabilities relating to lawsuits the club face from Middlesbrough and Wycombe, both of whom believe Derby knowingly skirted EFL rules to gain an advantage at their expense, but the bid does not cover Derby’s Pride Park stadium, which is owned by Morris, or training ground, which is leased from the Locko Estate. Under EFL rules, any buyer must pay football creditors – such as Arsenal, whom Derby owe for Krystian Bielik – 100% of what they are owed and unsecured creditors – such as small businesses – at least 25% of what they are owed, or the club would face a 15-point penalty next season. What are the administrators saying? Some fans are concerned at what they perceive to be slow progress but this may be the most complex football administration ever. “We are working tirelessly to achieve a successful outcome and still believe this is possible,” Quantuma said last week. “We understand the frustrations of the supporters.” What is going on with Middlesbrough and Wycombe? The clubs’ claims for compensation have proved a major obstacle, leading to a blame game. Middlesbrough started their claim more than 12 months ago and Wycombe last year after relegation to League One. It is unclear whether the clubs would be deemed football creditors if they succeed in their claims, which Derby consider spurious. Boro, whose owner, Steve Gibson, has branded Derby cheats, are seeking about £45m after being pipped to a Championship play-off place by Derby in 2019, and Wycombe at least £6m because Derby stayed up by a point at their expense after breaking league rules. Last week the Wycombe owner, Rob Couhig, told BBC Radio Derby his club were wrongly painted as “the bad guys”, saying Derby were guilty of “getting their hand caught in the cookie jar”. He added: “We are willing to meet and talk with people and make a reasonable commercial compromise.” What is the EFL saying? On Monday the EFL said a meeting between league officials, local MPs and councillors was postponed “to allow additional progress to be made by the administrators”. It alluded to “positive developments” last weekend and expects to hold talks with Quantuma on Tuesday to seek clarity regarding a preferred bidder. Last week the league said it “has no vendetta against” the club and wants “to work proactively with the administrators and relevant stakeholders to find a process which will give clarity quickly”. How has Rooney given them a chance of staying up? Rooney has shown his players a league table minus the points deduction, which has Derby mid-table, to motivate his squad and he has given his number to the supporters’ trust to strengthen the bond with fans. Supporter groups have appealed to fans to buy tickets for Sunday’s home game against Birmingham, expected to attract their biggest crowd of the season, and they discussed selling “virtual tickets” at a meeting with the administrator. The trust has highlighted the human impact on fans, some of who have raised mental health concerns, with many sharing their #MyDerbyStory on social media.Tom Brady says his family will play a crucial factor in deciding whether he returns to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers next season. The 44-year-old has an impending decision whether he will retire or return for a 23rd overall and third season with Tampa Bay, whose bid to repeat as Super Bowl champs ended with a 30-27 loss to Los Angeles Rams in the playoffs on Sunday. Brady has one year remaining on his contract and has said in the past he’d like to play until he’s at least 45. “I think as I’ve gotten older, I think the best part is, is football is extremely important in my life, and it means a lot to me, and I care a lot about what we’re trying to accomplish as a team and I care a lot about my teammates,” Brady said on his Let’s Go! podcast with Jim Gray. “The biggest difference now that I’m older is I have kids now, too, you know, and I care about them a lot as well. They’ve been my biggest supporters. My wife is my biggest supporter. It pains her to see me get hit out there. And she deserves what she needs from me as a husband, and my kids deserve what they need from me as a dad.” Tampa head coach Bruce Arians said on Monday that no date has been set for Brady to make his decision, and the quarterback himself said he was in no rush to decide his future. “Every year I just have to make sure that I have the ability to commit to what the team really needs, and that’s really important to me,” Brady said. “The team doesn’t deserve anything less than my best. And if I feel like I’m not committed to that, or I can’t play at a championship level, then you gotta give someone else a chance to play. And, you know, we’ll see. There’s a long time between now and the start of next football season.” Brady is aware of one important point as he takes time to ponder his future: the Buccaneers roster next season is likely to look a lot different with or without the seven-time Super Bowl winner. Unlike last spring when the Bucs defied the odds by retaining every starter from a star-laden lineup that won the franchise’s second NFL championship, general manager Jason Licht and coach Bruce Arians are not in a position to replicate that. Nearly half the roster is eligible for free agency, including wide receiver Chris Godwin; tights ends Rob Gronkowski and OJ Howard; running backs Leonard Fournette, Ronald Jones and Giovani Bernard; linebacker Jason Pierre-Paul; cornerback Carlton Davis; safety Jordan Whitehead; defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh; offensive linemen Ryan Jenson and Alex Cappa; and defensive lineman William Gholston. Arians said the goal as usual is to “reload” rather than rebuild, with an emphasis on re-signing as many of their own free agents as possible. “We’ll see how many we can get back and then build the team from there. ... Each year is so different and so new,” the coach said. “Last year, to get everybody back was amazing. Doubt we can do it all again this year, but we’re sure going to give it our best.” Meanwhile, an offseason of unknowns has begun at the home of another star quarterback. The Green Bay Packers are unsure of future hall of famer Aaron Rodgers will remain with the team next season, seek another team or retire. As opposed to the controversial offseason of a year ago when a disgruntled Rodgers and his only professional team seemed destined for a split, Packers head coach Matt LaFleur made it very clear on Monday that the team want their 17-year veteran to return for 2022. “Every conversation that I’ve been involved in with Gutey [general manager Brian Gutekunst] and Russ [director of football operations Russ Ball] and Mark [president Mark Murphy], we’re all on the same page there,” LaFleur said on Monday. “There’s no debate.” Speaking to the media on the heels of Green Bay’s 13-10 upset loss Saturday against the San Francisco 49ers, LaFleur said he met with his quarterback on Monday and while a decision was far off, there was no question the Packers organization hopes for a return. “I sat down and talked to Aaron today for quite some time,” LaFleur said. “I think we’re all a little numb to the situation right now and, so, I would say that what we talked about, I’m definitely gonna keep between him and myself, but we’re hopeful that he’ll be back next year, obviously.” The 38-year-old Rodgers did not disappoint this season, tossing up elite numbers (4,115 passing yards, 37 touchdown passes, four interceptions) for what may turn out to be the fourth MVP season of his career. But he admitted after an unspectacular performance on Saturday against the Niners (20-for-29, 225 yards) that while he will not drag out a decision about his future past the start of free agency on 16 March, he also doesn’t plan to stick around if the team decides to start from scratch. “I don’t want to be part of a rebuild if I’m going to keep playing,” Rodgers said of the Packers. The Packers are projected to be $44.8m over the 2022 salary cap. Wide receiver Davante Adams has said publicly he wants to be the NFL’s highest-paid wide receiver and said last year there will be no hometown discount to stay in Green Bay. To keep Rodgers, the Packers would need to sign him to a long-term extension. His cap charge in 2022 is $46m, negotiated intentionally by Rodgers last offseason when his disdain for the front office came to light. The mood has since shifted. If it’s up to his head coach, there is no decision from the Green Bay standpoint as LaFleur said he wants the Packers to do “everything in our power to try to get him back here and making sure he’s comfortable with the direction of our football team.” “There’s no plan for a rebuild,” said LaFleur. “You get this close, obviously win a lot of football games, and we know in order for there not to be that, he’s gotta be a part of this thing. I don’t think that’s anybody’s intention.”The best outfit in which to weather a pandemic? Try a bouclé suit, two-tone kitten heels and a chain-strap handbag with a double C logo. In defiance of all business forecasts, Chanel is emerging from two challenging years for retail virtually unscathed. Revenues at the luxury brand grew by double digits in the first six months of 2021, the most recent period for which earnings have been published, and the house expects soon to return to 2019 levels of profitability. Strong demand has led to eye-watering price hikes, with some classic handbag styles now priced at 40% more than in the first months of 2020. In anxious times, it seems a Chanel handbag is the gold bullion of fashion. The late Karl Lagerfeld, who adored a grand party and featured rocket launches and surprise concerts in his shows, would surely have made the first Chanel catwalk of the year a showstopper, with enough action sequences and inside-joke Easter eggs to fill a Marvel movie. But Virginie Viard, who took over at Chanel three years ago, designs fashion rather than fashion shows. The elegant, minimalist show set was created by the French artist Xavier Veilhan using plywood walkways and inflatable bench seating. A raked-sand catwalk nodded to racecourses while the uneven hillocks for spectators were, a Chanel spokesperson said, inspired by minigolf courses. A few graphic metal sculptures silently rotated, like wagon wheels or stately spindles. Guests were required to show proof of vaccination and a negative antigen result on entry, with N95 masks a mandatory dress code, and social distancing observed on the benches. The show began with Chanel ambassador Charlotte Casiraghi making a lap of the room on horseback, marking the second time that Viard has featured a horse in one of her shows. Viard is quietly moving her Chanel closer to the spare elegance of Coco, albeit with a dose of Lagerfeld’s 1980s pomp thrown in for fun. Not only was Coco Chanel a keen equestrian who owned a racehorse, Romantica, she was also a pioneer in liberating female riders from cumbersome riding skirts. In the 1920s Chanel designed her own breeches, based on those worn by men but adjusted to flatter her shape. She styled her breeches and riding boots with a white shirt and tailored wool vest for a modern, elegant look which helped set a new trend. These nuggets of Coco Chanel’s spirit and energy are to Viard’s Chanel shows what showbiz set-pieces were to Lagerfeld’s. When the models emerged, the first six outfits featured trousers, rather than the traditional skirts. A simple navy tweed trouser suit came first, followed by a dressier take on the same look, with silver edging and balloon shaped trousers. Each look was slightly fancier than the last, but in subtle gradations. There was a jazzy caramel tweed, followed by a jacket worn with feathered trousers, and then a lavender jacket paired with white culottes with laser embroidery. Two-tone Mary Jane shoes and simple dancing dresses with wide-set straps brought a 1920s feel to evening wear. Even the bride who closed the show as per haute couture tradition looked casual, in a loose dress and no veil. Viard highlighted as a key piece a long gown entirely embroidered by the venerated Lesage atelier with “constructivist camellias” in black, white and coral beads, which she described as “references [which] also belong to Gabrielle Chanel, of course. It’s like a conversation that crosses time.”Free online anti-racism training is to be made available for the first time for the 250,000 governors and trustees who control recruitment of senior staff across maintained schools, academies and multi-academy trusts in England. The move comes amid concerns about a stark lack of racial diversity among headteachers. Only 7.3% of headteachers in state-funded schools in England come from minority-ethnic backgrounds, compared with 21.5% of the working-age population. The National Governance Association (NGA) has entered into partnership with the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL) to provide the training. It is the first time the bodies have launched a joint enterprise or provided free training. “Our action shows how seriously concerned we are by the lack of racial diversity among school leaders,” said Emma Knights, the chief executive of the NGA. “We need to get governors and leaders to think about what they personally might be doing to create these widespread inequalities, and how they each have to change.” The move comes as headteachers of colour talk to the Guardian with unprecedented candour about their experience of widespread and often devastating racial discrimination throughout their careers. The ASCL and the NGA made the decision to fund the free training after giving up hope that the government would provide training. Knights said she hoped it would “send a very clear message” to governors about the importance of accessing guidance, despite the government’s inaction. “The government provides training for other volunteers, such as magistrates,” she said. Evelyn Forde, the ASCL vice-chair, said systemic racism was “such a massive problem in education when it comes to recruitment that we’re now putting our heads above the parapet to name it”. She added: “The issue is specifically that governing boards – which are largely monocultural – tend to choose heads who look and sound like them.” School governors – only 4% of whom are from a minority-ethnic background – are untrained, unpaid volunteers who require no formal qualifications. The role of trustees in academies and multi-academy trusts is very similar to that of governors in state-maintained schools. It is six years since Sir Michael Wilshaw, the former chief inspector of schools in England and former head of Ofsted, said too many school governors and trustees were not fit for purpose and called for mandatory training. Since then, he has said, not enough has changed. “I am deeply disappointed that there has been such little progress on this recommendation,” he said. Like the NGA and the ASCL, the National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT) has been asking the government for years to introduce mandatory training for governors. “Despite the data proving massive ethnic under-representation among headteachers – which the government itself admits is unacceptable – they’ve resisted introducing even the most basic of mandatory training,” said Natalie Arnett, a senior NAHT equalities officer. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, has admitted that there are not enough black headteachers working in schools in England. The Department for Education declined to comment on the government’s refusal to introduce training for governors, pointing instead to their programme to increase diversity among governing bodies. But Jack Worth, the school workforce lead at the National Foundation for Educational Research, said that “before we can solve the problem of lack of ethnic diversity among headteachers, we need to know where the biggest problems lie”. Worth said current evidence on racial equality in England’s teaching workforce was fragmented and incomplete. “Is it that monocultural governing bodies don’t select headteachers of colour – or is it that not enough teachers from ethnic minority backgrounds are being recruited and retained at the other end of the pipeline: just 14.3% of teachers in state-funded schools come from ethnic minority backgrounds?”Scotland Yard has placed the heart of government under investigation after receiving evidence from Sue Gray’s inquiry on alleged parties at Downing Street and Whitehall in a move that will delay her report’s publication. As a result, Boris Johnson will face a wait before Gray’s inquiry is released, with the Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, performing a U-turn and signing off on a formal investigation. Both the Cabinet Office and the Met have concluded that allegations uncovered by the inquiry are serious enough to warrant investigation beyond Gray’s remit. The move is a significant change of tack by the Met, which previously said its policy was not to undertake retrospective investigations of lockdown breaches. On Tuesday, Dick told the London Assembly her force had launched a criminal investigation into eight events where lockdown rules were allegedly broken, as a result of information provided by the Cabinet Office. She said: “As a result, firstly, of the information provided by the Cabinet Office inquiry team, and, secondly, my own officers’ assessment, I can confirm that the Met is now investigating a number of events that took place at Downing Street and Whitehall in the last two years in relation to potential breaches of Covid-19 regulations.” Gray has provided her “outline findings from its inquiry”, according to the Met, but the Cabinet Office said she would continue to take evidence. The Met has asked the Cabinet Office investigation team to formally send it the evidence it holds regarding the events police are now investigating, the Guardian understands. Up until now, the Cabinet Office team had been briefing officers as they secured evidence. The decision to investigate means the force believes there appears to be potential evidence of wrongdoing, that those involved knew or should have known it was wrong and that they may not have any reasonable excuse for their actions. Police will not give a timescale for their inquiry, but they are expected to contact those under investigation. A Cabinet Office source said they were hoping for an update within weeks but that an investigation could take longer. Officers will have to unpick which regulations were in place at the time the parties and gatherings took place, as the rules were regularly changing. A Scotland Yard spokesperson said: “The MPS [Metropolitan police service] has had ongoing contact with the Cabinet Office in relation to its inquiry into allegations of gatherings. Throughout this process specialist MPS detectives, supported by senior officers, have continually considered whether criminal investigation into any of these events was proportionate based on the available information. In recent days the Cabinet Office has provided outline findings from its inquiry to the MPS.” Dick told the London assembly police and crime committee: “I absolutely understand that there is deep public concern about the allegations that have been in the media over the past several weeks.” Dick said police would not normally investigate retrospective breaches, but emphasised it was not a blanket ban. She said there were three factors that could merit a retrospective investigation. Firstly, there is evidence, those involved knew – or ought to have known – what they were doing broke the laws. Other factors, the Met commissioner said, included “where not investigating would significantly undermine the legitimacy of the law”, and “where there was little ambiguity around the absence of any reasonable defence”. She said police and the Cabinet Office investigation headed by Gray had been liaising. Dick then announced her U-turn, after weeks of her force being criticised for not investigating numerous allegations. Neil Coyle, the Labour MP who referred the parties to the Metropolitan police, said Dick had “serious questions to answer about why the investigation could only be launched now.”. Coyle said: “It has taken a civil servant whose boss is the prime minister to insist the Metropolitan police investigate these alleged breaches – including taking evidence from its own officers.” A Cabinet Office spokesman said work would continue on the inquiry. “The investigation being carried out by Sue Gray is continuing,” he said. “There is in ongoing contact with the Metropolitan police service.” The inquiry’s terms of reference state: “As with all internal investigations, if during the course of the work any evidence emerges of behaviour that is potentially a criminal offence, the matter will be referred to the police and the Cabinet Office’s work may be paused. “Matters relating to adherence to the law are properly for the police to investigate and the Cabinet Office will liaise with them as appropriate.” Angela Rayner, deputy Labour leader, called on the prime minister to resign. She said: “With Boris Johnson’s Downing Street now under police investigation, how on earth can he think he can stay on as prime minister? Boris Johnson is a national distraction. Conservative MPs should stop propping him up and he should finally do the decent thing and resign.” The Met investigation will be carried out by its special inquiry team and be overseen by deputy assistant commissioner Jane Connors, who leads the force’s Covid enforcement.Why is Nish Kumar such a bete noir for angry rightwingers everywhere? Everybody hates him, he cries from the stage tonight, in a show that takes stock of his life as a partisan political comic who has brown skin. Its case study is a 2019 charity gig (think “millionaires in ballrooms”) where Kumar, anti-Brexit gags blazing, had a bread roll thrown at him before being booed off stage. The incident, much embellished in the press, triggered death threats, which in turn prompted a reckoning for Kumar with his brittle mental health. This may sound like a more sobering show than you’d expect from Kumar. But it isn’t. It’s more personal, perhaps – he’s seldom before spoken about his mental fragility, not least because (as he says here) he was totally in denial about it. But the keynote is still uproarious and self-mocking, as the 36-year-old holds himself up for relentless ridicule: as the comic self-sabotaging in front of his “pre-gout” audience; as the messianic ego fantasising his own tragic assassination; and as the shmuck trying to impress people by pretending to have read Tess of the d’Urbervilles. Save for Kumar’s opening 10 minutes, which leathers the government for its “incompetence, corruption and ideology”, and takes particular aim at the myth of Rishi Sunak’s competence, we’re not in a world of Mash Report-style topical satire. Instead, the show unspools its tale of the gig-gone-wrong and its aftermath by way of “a silly window on to something more serious” – specifically, how non-white people, public figures included, are now being screened for their supposed anti-Britishness. The set has its less effective moments. A routine about the inanity of national anthems is over-illustrated with a surfeit of caterwauling examples. Too many jokes, no matter their subject, reach for knob-gag punchlines. Maybe that stems from an anxiety that his serious concerns might capsize the comedy – which is unwarranted, but understandable. Certainly, Kumar’s chilling argument about our slide towards nativism, and the insights he affords into life on the receiving end of death threats, will linger even after the considerable laughter subsides. • Your Power, Your Control is touring until 17 May.Mohammad Haque, an Android engineer, first discovered computers when his father bought their first one in 1995, in Bangladesh. It was a marvel then and he still laughs when he remembers his mother hearing about ‘computer viruses’ for the first time (the room was apparently thoroughly cleaned two to three times a day). When he finally got to use the computer, Mohammad discovered he had a love for building things and writing commands. It started as a hobby but by the time he got to university he was ready to start a degree in Computer Science. He soon followed that up with a masters at the University of Greenwich. What drew you to software development on Android in the first place? I had an interest in small computing devices and that led me to do my masters in mobile computing. After I finished my masters in 2006 I started my career as web developer during which time smartphones started making an appearance. I found them incredibly interesting (just like another computer but on a much smaller scale) which also meant you could still write code for it. I leant more towards Android than iOS because it felt like it was a more open and adventurous landscape. So, in 2010 I got my first job as an Android Developer. How did you end up at the Guardian? I’d been working for a magazine publishing company for a few years and, in that time, I developed a great interest in content based apps. I built my own news aggregator app, specifically for a Bangladeshi audience, which is still popular. In doing this I realised that I had something of a passion for news and wanted to carve out a new path for myself. Coincidentally it was about that time that I was in touch with someone from the Guardian through LinkedIn who was hiring Android Software Engineers. I was already quite aware of the Guardian through my English lessons back home in Bangladesh- many of the courses would use news publications like the Guardian as learning materials all the time. I thought it was a very reputable news organisation so I decided to apply. What does a typical day look like for you? Well, I became a father three months ago, which is very exciting. Because of that, I decided I needed to spend some more time at home. So now, with the support of my manager, I work compressed hours and get every second Friday off. My working day typically starts at 10am when I check my inbox and complete any urgent tasks. Then I have a morning standup with my team to check in on each other. Usually after that I work on tickets. In my team we follow an agile ‘sprint’ methodology where every two weeks we decide on the goals we need to achieve, work on related tasks and release updates to the app at the end of the sprint. It’s a great way of working because it allows you to make quick changes and deliver a result on a regular basis. We also try to explore different exciting technologies together on a regular basis. Of course I also attend the occasional meeting. One of my favourites is the Product and Engineering ‘All Hands’ which is a fortnightly departmental meeting and an opportunity to share news, celebrate success, learn a little bit more about other parts of the business and – most importantly – meet any new starters. We are also hiring at the moment so I also have quite a few interviews I attend as well. I enjoy being part of the process and getting to meet potential new team members. What do you enjoy the most about working here? My favourite part is feeling like you can affect real change as an individual and that you’re not just another cog in the machine. Our department runs hack days about twice a year and it’s always a great opportunity to be innovative, work on anything that you’re passionate about, and sometimes even see your work go into production. ‘Read it to me’ is one of those examples in the Android Guardian news app where you can choose a list of news articles which the app then will read to you as if it were an audio playlist. That came out of a hack day and it was brilliant to have been a part of that. I’d like to add as well that as an introvert, as well as a practicing Muslim, I can honestly say that the Guardian feels like home. If you’re on the quiet side you are always allowed the space and opportunity to speak. Though I may not speak up often, I do always feel heard. Being a religious man, and knowing how my religion has been often portrayed in the media, I have also never felt discriminated against here. We even have a prayer room in the office which I take full advantage of any time I’m in. There is a great respect and fellowship between colleagues here. You are accepted for who you are and you never feel left out in any way. Development of digital products is central to the Guardian. You could be building the products that showcase our progressive and independent journalism, crafting the tools that journalists use to write their stories, developing the services that allow those stories to be distributed across the globe, or safeguarding our financial future. If you’re interested in joining our product and engineering team, please visit the Guardian News &amp; Media careers page.Europe has some of the world’s most awe-inspiring skiing areas, from historic towns carved into mountainous valleys to apres ski hotspots meandering through alpine villages. Whether it’s time to don the show shoes for a small, lesser-known resort in Italy or whether you’re often seen in the Balkans for your winter season fix, we would like to hear about your favourite smaller skiing destination in Europe. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 1 February at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereAs Rafael Nadal initiated another run at the Australian Open, he was as curious as anyone else about how well his game and body would serve him. He had endured a six-month layoff due to a chronic foot injury and a tough bout of Covid, and arrived in Melbourne having barely spent time on court in the preceding weeks. The hope, he said, was that he would keep himself in the tournament long enough to continue improving. He maintained his presence on Tuesday but it took all he had. He led Denis Shapovalov by two sets, only for the Canadian to pull Nadal all the way back into a desperate fifth set. After four hours, Nadal rose to win 6-3, 6-4, 4-6, 3-6, 6-3 and reach his seventh semi-final here. Nadal was asked how he managed to turn the match around. He shook his head: “I don’t know,” he said. “I was completely destroyed after that. Very tough day, very warm. “I didn’t practise for this. I was a little lucky at the beginning of the fifth. At the beginning of the match I was playing great, then I know how difficult it is to play against a player like Denis.” Nadal was extremely sharp from the start as he took hold of the match. He served well in the first two sets, found a high number of forehands and dominated with it from the middle of the court. Shapovalov initially exhibited all of the worst parts of his game. He was erratic and unreliable, his forehand sprayed errors and he complemented Nadal’s excellent serving with dire returns. Early in the second set, Shapovalov directed his frustration at the time Nadal took between points. After an argument with the umpire, Carlos Bernardes, he shouted: “You guys are all corrupt.” While the 22-year-old is likely to face scrutiny – and could be fined – for the comments, he repeated his concerns after the match while admitting he misspoke on court. He was adamant, though, that he was in the right and said Nadal and other top players receive preferential treatment. “Of course, 100% he does,” Shapovalov said. “Every other match that I have played, the pace has been so quick because the refs have been on the clock after every single point. This one, after the first two sets it was like an hour and a half just because he’s dragged out so much after every single point. He’s given so much time in between sets.” After those first two sets, however, momentum had swung. Despite Nadal’s opportunities to take hold of the third set, Shapovalov showed his toughness, digging out tight, gritty holds with bold shotmaking. Nadal’s serve began to crumble as he struggled in the heat. While Shapovalov took control of the baseline, Nadal double faulted four times in the third set. In the fourth he gave the decisive break away at 2-1 with a double fault. Shapovalov served supremely to force a fifth set. “I started to feel bad at the end of the second,” said Nadal. “It was very warm out there and the conditions were hard. All these kind of matches helps me to be in better shape, but we can’t forget that I didn’t play much tennis for such a long time, no? So under these very hard conditions it is difficult for me.” During the fourth set the 35-year-old called the physio and was given tablets after being evaluated. He had a further off-court medical evaluation at the end of that set before taking a bathroom break. The decisive moment came at 1-0 in the final set as Shapovalov capitulated on his serve, striking four unforced errors to let Nadal in. Despite his service woes, his physical issues and a much younger, hungry opponent the veteran held serve throughout the set to reach his first Australian Open semi-final since 2019. Nadal said he felt sorry for Shapovalov after such a tough loss. “I wish him all the very best. He’s young and everybody, I think, we all make mistakes on our careers. I made a lot of mistakes when I was younger and probably he will understand after he thinks the proper way that probably he was not right today.” During those long months spent trying to find a solution for his foot injury, and even while he was bedridden by Covid, Nadal questioned his future in the game. How quickly things can change. He now stands two wins from his 21st major title. “Two months ago we didn’t know if we would be able to be back on tour,” he said. “It is a present of life that I am playing tennis again.” Nadal will face Matteo Berrettini, the seventh seed and last year’s Wimbledon runner-up, in the semi-final. The Italian, the first man from his country to reach the last four in Melbourne, also led by two sets before a spirited fightback by Gaël Monfils. Berrettini, however, responded well in the deciding set to win 6-4, 6-4, 3-6, 3-6, 6-2 in just under four hours. “I’m really happy for myself,” he said. “What a great fight again against Gaël. Great match, a lot of emotions. I thought I had him in the third and then I found myself in the fifth but I really fought hard and put everything in the court.” Friday will mark the second meeting between Berrettini and Nadal after a US Open semi-final in 2019. “It was a really tough match for me, he won the tournament after,” Berrettini said. “It was my first semi-final, I didn’t really know what to expect and even for the first set I had set points. I’m pretty sure it’s gonna be a great fight. He played five sets today as well, so he needs to rest as well.”A congressman from New Jersey has disclosed that he is receiving calls from viewers of Tucker Carlson’s primetime Fox News show, expressing distress at the Biden administration’s backing of Ukraine in the tense military stand-off with Russia. Democratic representative Tom Malinowski said in a tweet his office was fielding calls from Carlson viewers “upset that we’re not siding with Russia in its threats to invade Ukraine”. The callers, he said, “want me to support Russia’s ‘reasonable’ positions”. News of the effect of Carlson’s broadcasts doubting support for Ukraine came as the Pentagon placed 8,500 troops on high alert ready to deploy to Europe, amid fears that a Russian invasion could be imminent. Nato allies have been struggling to project unity in opposition to the Russian president Vladimir Putin’s belligerent amassing of more than 100,000 troops on the Ukraine border. Carlson, the top-rated host on Rupert Murdoch’s rightwing news channel, has been using his nightly bully pulpit to question the merits of Washington’s backing through Nato of Ukraine in the face of Putin’s expansionist threat. On Monday night, his show screened an image of the White House with the words “War Machine” stamped over it. The host accused “neocons” in the Biden administration of “betraying our country’s interests” and said a massive lobbying campaign by Ukrainian politicians and American defense contractors was behind the strategy. Ukraine was “strategically irrelevant” to the US, Carlson said. In his analysis of the crisis Carlson made no mention of Putin or his ambition to push back Nato from eastern and central Europe, nor of Ukraine’s standing as a sovereign nation which achieved independence 30 years ago. Ukraine is a country bigger in land mass than France, with a similar population to Spain, now facing an unprovoked invasion from the neighbouring power. Carlson has used his show to express contentious views on Europe before. For a week in August, he relocated Tucker Carlson Tonight to Budapest, from where he broadcast glowing reports on the authoritarian leadership of Viktor Orbán. This week he indicated that he plans to return to Hungary soon for more broadcasts praising the government’s tough stance on immigration. Speaking to the Hill, Malinowski said: “People get their opinions by watching the news, that’s nothing new. What is new is we have at least one talkshow host with a huge captive audience that is not exposed to any counter-programming elsewhere. “I find that very concerning.”We would like to hear from parents of under-5s in the US about the long wait for the Covid-19 vaccine for children in this age group. What has your experience been of taking care of under-5s during the pandemic, especially during day care or pre-school closures due to outbreaks? Has anything changed between now and the start of the pandemic? Do you want to get your children, aged under five, vaccinated, and why? What difference would vaccination make to your lives? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Thanks all for your company – ta-ra. So there we go: Ash Barty is through to play Madison Keys in the women’s semis – gosh, that seems a long time ago, which I suppose it was – then Matteo Berrettini and Gaël Monfils bestowed upon us a classic, with Berrettini seizing the semi against Rafael Nadal. We’ll see you again tomorrow – there’s Collins v Cornet and Swiatek v Kanepi in the women’s quarters, then Sinner v Tsitsipas and Auger-Aliassime v Medvedev in the men’s. Not bad. Berrettini is the first Italian to reach an Aussie Open semi and he’s proud, though notes that Sinner will probably become the second tomorrow. He thought he had Monfils in the third, but he stayed focused and he’s seen it before, you’e winning and an opponent plays better. On the crowd, prompted by shouting he says that he doesn’t think some are tennis fans, but he won so he’s happy. He’s only played Nadal once, in his first semi – he lost, but he didn’t know what to expect and had set points in the first. He’ll definitely watch Sinner-Tsitsipas tomorrow - he’s really good friends with the former and good friends with the latter, plus there’s nothing to do in his room anyhow. Finally, he’s asked about a doc that’s coming about life on tour, and what people will learn about him: the trouble he has with his body, and what a mess his room is, apparently. Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 6-3 2-5 Berrettini* A big serve yields 15-0, then Monfils goes long on the backhand; he knows the jig is up. And he definitely knows when a high-kicker out wide turns into yet another ace, raising three match points, but saves the first when Berrettini nets ... then the second when a good return, close to the baseline, prompts an error. But no more. Monfils nets, and rather than celebrate, Berrettini asks the crowd for their thoughts - ah man, it wasn’t like that, they like you, they just love him. But he’s through to a semi against Nadal, having played a blinder of a set to close a beauty of a match. Love and respect to both players. *Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 6-3 2-5 Berrettini You’ve gotta love Monfils, who serves three straight aces for 40-0 ... then a double ... then another ace! After a little sit-down, Berrettini will serve for the semis! Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 6-3 1-5 Berrettini* Berrettini has found a new gear here, coming to the net off a big forehand and doing superbly to control a volley off the tootsies for 15-0. A big serve backs it up, and though he might be wondering why he couldn’t play like this sooner, I’m just relieved he didn’t deprive us of the last 90 minutes. Anyway, Monfils hasn’t given up, charging to the net to bump a winner down the line, but Berrettini then comes in off a backhand slice, well-aimed to the corner, and puts away the riposte nicely before closing out with another biggun. This is monstrous behaviour from Berrettini, who could easily have got down on himself – Monfils seemed to have his number - but instead committed to attack, and now look! *Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 6-3 1-4 Berrettini Monfils holds to 15, and he’s got a glimmer – the tiniest one imaginable, but nevertheless. Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 6-3 0-4 Berrettini* Man, you’ve gotta feel for Monfils, who worked hard enough going two-love down, never mind to find a strategy that let him come back. But you’ve also got to credit Berrettini, who rediscovered his aggression between sets though, as I said right at the start, these five sets, his second of the competition, make even more likely the presence in the final of Nadal. But there’s a match to finish here first, and at 40-15, Berrettini hooks an extraordinary forehand from wide that breaks the sideline! There’ve been 22 points in this set of which Monfils won the first two – but he’s only taken three since then. *Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 6-3 0-3 Berrettini Berrettini’s got the forehand going again and it earns him 0-15, before a backhand plops into the net. No matter, Berrettini again starts hammering away, and the power eventually tells - well not exactly because Monfils has power too, but because he’s the one seizing the initiative, his is the power that’s dictating. He quickly gets 15-40, the umpire asks whoever’s making noise to leave, and there’s a pause before what are surely two effective match points. Here they come! And Berrettini only needs one, somehow getting back one of those whipcrack flat forehands, eliciting another into the net! After losing two straight sets, Berrettini has made two straight breaks, and out of nowhere he’s nearly in the last four! Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 6-3 0-2 Berrettini* Curiously, the crowd no longer seem to be bothering Berrettini, who’s back playing nicely as Monfils has dipped. I guess it makes sense: it’s very hard to sustain the zone for long, so the bloke who started there has more chance of getting back to it at the end, and that’s a love consolidation. Regardless, Berrettini has serious stones. *Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 6-3 0-1 Berrettini That extra break means it’s Monfils serving first in the decider, and he looks like the winner here. Berrettini has never lost from two up and just earlier today, Nadal was clawed back from that position only to win anyway. But this looks very different – Berrettini doesn’t have Nadal’s aura nor was he relaxing through the fourth set to conserve energy. However, at 30-all, Monfils follows an approach to the net and finds himself chasing a tremendous chip-lob that he can’t return via tweener! Break point! Monfils saves it, but Berrettini is into this, monstrous forehanding allowing him to move his man around, a backhand eventually forcing the error, and here comes another chance! AND HE’S GOT IT! Monfils goes wide on the backhand, and after barely featuring for a set, doing almost nothing on his opponent’s serve for two sets, Berrettini has a break and Monfils, who worked so expletive hard to earn this position, might just’ve tossed it at the first time of asking. This game! Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 6-3 Berrettini* Every now and again, Monfils really opens his shoulders to smite a flat one, earning 15-all in precisely that manner. Berrettini then complains to the umpire between first and second serves that the crowd – backing Monfils – are distracting him, which suggests a mind slightly frazzled by the situation, but he wins the next two points nevertheless. Monfils then splatters a couple more of those flat forehands for 40-30, making deuce ! Both players will want to win this game to ensure they serve first in set five if nothing else, and on advantage Berrettini again complains to the umpire, then Monfils nails a backhand cross-court onto the sideline! He is buzzing like a cow here – that made it 40-40 on winners – and when Berrettini goes long, that raises set point! He misses his first serve too, but nails a backhand down the line to regain deuce only to hit the net cord when advantage up, the ball sitting there for Monfils to hit a winner. Next, Berrettini can’t control a volley coming in, raising another set point; this time he times his volley nicely, and back to deuce we go, another banging game in a match that’s been full of them. And it’s not over yet, Berrettini trying to hit too perfect a drop and netting, redeeming the error with a devastating forehand. So Monfils goes again, earning another set point that he can’t convert, then another ... and this time Berrettini nets a forehand! Monfils’ needle has hit the groove, matching Berrettini’s power off the ground and finding better angles and arcs, so here we go with a decider! Phew, this is some match and these are some boys! *Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 5-3 Berrettini Monfils is flowing here, Berrettini making almost no impression on his serve – in his last eight service-games he’s lost just five points. And in this one, he finds an ace and two winners, holding to 15, and he’s a game away from bestowing a decider upon us. Thanks, Gael old mate. Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 4-3 Berrettini* At 40-0, Berrettini sends down his second double of the match, but a service-winner down the middle rights him. He needed that, but it’s been a while since he put any pressure on Monfils. *Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 4-2 Berrettini Has Monfils broken Berrettini?! He is absolutely smoking at the moment, racing to 40-0 before larruping a forehand long. I wonder, if he gets to a decider, he’ll be able to play with the freedom of the last two sets, but in the meantime he’s all over this, holding to 15. Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 3-2 Berrettini* Berrettini nets a forehand for 0-30, making it six points in a row for Monfils, and is this the match right here? Well, well in the rally, Monfils nets a backhand for no good reason then does likewise on the return, and when a forehand sails long, the stench of missed opportunity is palpable. But Berrettini doesn’t do enough when he serve-volleys, allowing Monfils to stay in a point that should be over, and after a quick rat-a-tat-tat at the net, he dumps another volley for deuce! AND WHAT! Monfils again targets the Berrettini backhand by taking the pace off, then when the corner is vacated, opens up to spank another of those corner-to-corner forehand winners ... THEN NEXT POINT HE DOES IT AGAIN! From two sets down, Monfils is three holds away from a decider, and Berrettini is in trouble! What a match this is! *Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 2-2 Berrettini Er yeah, but Monfils already was, holding to love in a matter of seconds. Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 1-2 Berrettini* An ace sets Berrettini away, while in comms they debate the merits of one and two-handed backhands. I’m not sure how many players have one majors with a single - Henin and Federer, not many others - but Henman says he’d teach a single-handed slice, which makes some sense. Anyway, back on court, the players exchange forehand booms, until Monfils finds a gorgeous angle cross-court, breaking the sideline – he’s hitting flatter than Berrettini, I think, and that particular corner-to-corner shit is working really well. So Berrettini seals the game with an ace, of course he does, and he’s starting to move again. *Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 1-1 Berrettini Monfils nets a backhand down the line for 15-all, and I just wonder if Berrettini is coming back into this – I think that last hold gave him a lift. But after an exchange of backhand slices, he creates the opportunity for a winner only to clump into the net, making 30-all when Monfils hooks wide, and two quick points later, we’re level in the set. Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 -1 Berrettini* That double Berrettini served on break point was only his seventh of the tournament; remarkable really, given how hard he hits it and that he played a four-hour five-setter in round three. He gets to 40-0, but then when Monfils uncorks another forehand winner he finds himself at 40-30 ... and is muttering under his breath when a return clips the net, drops over, and he distractedly errs. Deuce it is, and Berrettini is beginning to wonder, hitting passively instead of attacking as he was before. So he tries to up it, dictating the advantage point, but gradually Monfils plays his way into it, opening the angle for another corner-to-corner forehand winner! Naturally, a violent serve regains deuce and an ace seizes advantage, then a high-kicker out wide seals a vital hold. *Monfils 4-6 4-6 6-3 Berrettini Well, he opens with an ace, then a clever hook to the forehand corner from mid-court is enough for 30-0. Berrettini, though, finds a fine return to a second serve, only to net his drop with the entirety of the court to hit! Three set point Monfils! Berrettini saves the first, but Monfils is dominating from the back now, and clobbers a forehand winner, cross-court from middle to corner, and HAVE A LOOK! The crowd go wild, and I can honestly say I’ve no idea how this is going to shake out; I’ve not thought I’d be feeling that way at any point before or during this match. Monfils 4-6 4-6 5-3 Berrettini* You can sense and see Berrettini trying to hit himself back into the groove and he plays a pretty good game here, rediscovering his first serve and forehand in the process of holding to 15. Can Monfils serve it out? *Monfils 4-6 4-6 5-2 Berrettini Again, that was coming. Berrettini hasn’t played that well today – the serve and forehand aren’t firing like they were, maybe a toll of the five-setter against Alcaraz the round before last. Meantime, Monfils is going for broke and it’s working for him, a love consolidation putting him a game away from set three and us a game away from more of this compelling contest. Monfils 4-6 4-6 4-2 Berrettini* Monfils is taken the Stanimal approach now, looking to hit winners whenever and from wherever he can, earning 0-15 with a big forehand. Then Berrettini goes long, and this is a second consecutive 0-30 ... but we know what’s coming next and there it is, a 132mph serve down the middle and on the outside of the line too. But Berrettini then misses an inside-out forehand, and this is the first time he’s faced two consecutive break points; he misses his first serve and Monfils steps in, only to panic and clump into the net. But a double follows, Berrettini’s first of the match, and Monfils finally has his break! We got ourselves a ball-game! *Monfils 4-6 4-6 3-2 Berrettini What’s that?! Why it’s a love game! Monfils holds, and for the first time in the match, I think he might be the better player. Monfils 4-6 4-6 2-2 Berrettini* Monfils is giving this everything, battering away from the back before opening the angle to clatter a forehand winner cross-court from the backhand corner. That gives him 0-30, but then he nets a nothing forehand without any serious prompting then sends a return long. It’s noticeable, though, that Berrettini isn’t serving anywhere near as many aces and winners as he does usually, and when Monfils returns one on the stretch, Berrettini nets his cleanup for 30-40! Can Monfils earn his first break? Er, no, a brutal service-winner yields a howl of pain, then another yields a bellow of delight. Berrettini has been very strong when he’s really needed to be. *Monfils 4-6 4-6 2-1 Berrettini Neither player is quite on it at the mo, which I guess is dangerous for Monfils, who doesn’t have extreme power that’ll be there whatever. At 30-15, Berrettini opens the court with a backhand slice, then creams a forehand winner cross-court, and it feels like he’s two points away from victory ... make that one point. Berrettini defends well enough, then when Monfils earns the opportunity to advance, he spanks a forehand into the tape and out! Two gorgeous shots, from the backhand corner but hit forehand cross-court, save break point, but when he goes for the line again, he misses ... only to regain deuce with a service winner out wide. Another unforced error, though, hands Berrettini another advantage, but what a backhand he finds, walloped cross-court, to back up a weak second serve ... but what a poor forehand he finds, hooked wide, to lose game point. This is another proper struggle, but when Berrettini goes down the line with what looks like a winner, Monfils hangs down to guide a volley into the open court for a monumental hold. Monfils 4-6 4-6 1-1 Berrettini* Monfils has only come back from two sets down twice in his career, neither time against a player in Berrettini’s postcode. Whatever happens here, I guess we’ve seen why winning a major might be a stretch for him – better players than Monfils will take his backhand apart – but in fairness to him, he’s not played anywhere near as well as he did against Carreno Busta. To prove the point, he finds himself serving at 30-all, finding a big delivery when he needs it, before a big forehand from Monfils lands on the line and he can’t keep his riposte within the court. At deuce, though, Monfils clumps a backhand wide – he’s raging with himself – then a booming serve seals the deal. *Monfils 4-6 4-6 1-0 Berrettini The players take a break, the absolute malingerers. I don’t know who they think they are, but this is a really big service-game for Monfils who, if he loses it, will be almost out. And at 40-15, he looks in trouble, when Berrettini zones onto a short ball, but he nets his forehand and the comeback is away! Monfils 4-6 4-6 Berrettini* A serve out wide is too good and Monfils, on the stretch, nets before sending a forehand long; 30-0. Another long forehand cedes three set points, a return goes into the net, and Berrettini has broken the back of this match. That was an absolutely blinding set (of tennis), but I’m not sure we’ll be seeing more of the same from here on in. *Monfils 4-6 4-5 Berrettini Serving to stay in the set, Monfils sends down consecutive aces for 30-0, securing a first love-hold of the match and forcing Berrettini to serve for it. Monfils 4-6 3-5 Berrettini* It’s hard not to see that last game, or the long one at 1-2, as the essence of this game. At 30-0, Monfils really opens his shoulders, hammering forehands at Berrettini’s backhand, and when the desperate lob arrives ... he dumps his overhead into the net! You don’t see him miss many of those, but he looks a bit tired now and mentally, he must’ve expended a lot of energy. At 40-15, a forehand goes long, and that’s three games in a row for Berrettini, the second set almost his. *Monfils 4-6 3-4 Berrettini New balls, greeted by Monfils with a double, then a backhand that flies long. But a serve out wide halves his arrears before Berrettini goes long himself, only for another error to hand him break point ... whereupon a forehand off the frame sails over the baseline! Ach, after all that graft, Monfils has ceded the advantage in aggravatingly tame fashion; sport, and tennis, are hard and cruel. Monfils 4-6 3-3 Berrettini* Monfils is standing a long way back here, giving himself time to see Berrettini’s serve, so Berrettini takes some pace off and holds to 15 in a game that doesn’t last 20 minutes. Pathetic. *Monfils 4-6 3-2 Berrettini Oh this is wonderful stuff! You kind of fear for Monfils after losing a game like that, though most of the time he was fighting to save it – he only had three break points – and Berrettini gets 0-15 with a tremendous backhand down the line. He can play it! Monfils, though, quickly makes 30-15, only to net for 30-all – he’s under pressure here – but a fine forehand volley earns game point, converted with a glorious backhand sent shrieking down the line! What a treat these two are giving us! Monfils 4-6 2-2 Berrettini* Monfils makes 0-15 and has a second serve to go at, but Berrettini sends him out wide with a forehand ... then he chases it down and clouts an ankle-biting forehand of his own that Berrettini can’t get back! In the context, this is a chance, and though a careless long forehand cuts it in half, Monfils then picks out the backhand with a loopy ball and sees it hit back into the net! Two break points! Colossal forehands, one to the forehand side then a clean-up to the the backhand from half-court, save the first, then a serve out to the backhand and simple volleyed put-away save the second. There wasn’t much Monfils could’ve done about that; I’m not sure if that makes it better or worse. Either way, Monfils seems to have found a way to impose himself, flighting balls to the backhand, and one such earns him another break point – an ace down the middle follows from a kicker toss, cunning – but right as Berrettini looks poised to cinch the hold with a forehand, the ball bouncing high and short, he nets. This is developing very nicely now! Again, Berrettini is ready to earn his hold, but this time a forehand into the backhand corner comes spinning past him, cross-court! What a crucial period of the match this is, Monfils again finding Berrettini’s backhand when advantage down, then again, racing about the place to make a series of ludicrous sliding gets before eventually inciting the error! Not bad for 35 - he noises up the crowd and rightly so – and this is such a game now! Again, Berrettini makes a backhand error on advantage, netting another low volley, and on the next a forehand down the line catches the tape and leaps long! I’m tired just watching this, the athleticism and focus are something else, and have a look! Caught at the net, Berrettini controls two nasty volleys when Monfils clatters balls at him, the second a double-handed backhand; now it’s his turn to salute! I’m running out of elegant variation here, please excuse me because these lads deserve some, but after another advantage Berrettini deuce, an ace – I’m surprised this game wasn’t finished time ago on account of one - but again Monfils hangs in there. The first five games of this match contained 25 points, and this one has had 24 so far ... but Berrettini wins the next two to secure a monstrous hold! That was stunning behaviour from both players, and the question now is whether Monfils has found a route to win – varying flight and spin to the backhand - or whether he’s given all he’s got. I can’t wait to find out! *Monfils 4-6 2-1 Berrettini Monfils opens the game with a double, and almost loses the next point when a squash-shot forehand zones low over the net. But he hangs in long enough to force an unforced error – yes, I’m saying it’s possible – and quickly makes 30-15, adds an ace, and closes out. Monfils 4-6 1-1 Berrettini* There’s a quick break because a bird’s enjoyed a clearout on the court, during which time Tim Henman, in co-comms, says he doesn’t think Berrettini will win a major because he’s not good enough to beat Medvedev, plus Sinner and Alcaraz are coming up behind. But he’s looking nifty for the now, guiding a backhand down the line when Monfils attacks that wing, having intimated a cross-courter. Berrettini holds to 30, but it never looked tight – he was up 40-0, and denied a love game by the merest net-cord. *Monfils 4-6 1-0 Berrettini Funny thing to say, but this is the half of the draw you want to be in – I’m sure that, at this point a semi with Nadal is more inviting that one with Tsitsipas, Sinner or Medvedev. Anyway, Monfils opens the court then nets a volley, handing Berrettini 15-30, and a tame forehand hands yerman two break points ... but saves them well, the second via ace. He cannot afford to lose his serve here, but when Berrettini zetzes a return early and down the line, he’s in danger again ... only to find another ace for deuce. On advantage, though, he sends down a double, redeems it with an ace ... then a terrific Berrettini forehand ... another terrific Berrettini forehand ... hauls him back to deuce. This is the longest game of the match now and it might be pivotal - if Monfils loses it, it likely means curtains, but eventually his forehand sorts him out, and he’s away i set two. Monfils 4-6 Berrettini* Berrettini must be nervous serving for the set ... ahahahaha! A service winner opens the game, then Monfils nets a slice having done well to force a return back into play. At 30-0, Berrettini slaps a forehand wide, and in the context this constitutes a chance; what can Monfils do with it? Well, he stays in the next rally long enough for Berrettini to net, then after Berrettini serves well out wide and hits a decent forehand too, he finds a sensational backhand down the line on the slide! Break-back point! The inevitable happens next, of course it does – Berrettini serves an ace – then another for advantage. What on earth can you do? But Monfils does superbly to hit at his backhand, then when the slice comes slowly, he runs around his own to steam a forehand winner down the line! it doesn’t matter – Berrettini quickly cements the set with two quick points – but we’ve seen, as if we didn’t already know, what Monfils has to do: find the backhand and attack it, attack the second serve. There’s plenty mileage left in this one. *Monfils 4-5 Berrettini At 15-all, Monfils nets a back from the back – Berrettini is giving him no time to set. But he finds an ace for 30-all, a service-winner to the backhand earns game point – how well he can find that wing will be crucial – and when another goes into the net, Berrettini is forced to serve out. Monfils 3-5 Berrettini* Berrettini opens the game with a high-kicking ace, and at 30-0 wrong-foots Monfils so completely that he slips, feet going in opposite directions. A huge serve and colossal forehand follow, leaving Berrettini a game away from the set. *Monfils 3-4 Berrettini Eesh, Berrettini is climbing into Monfils here, unloading the suitcase with every forehand and battering away until Monfils wilts. He nets a forehand for 0-15 and you fear for him, but a better stroke forces Berrettini to go wide. Still, it was the Italian who dominated that rally, even finding a decent drive-backhand, and he finds a gorgeous top-spin forehand for 15-30, whizzed onto the sideline like a table-tennis shot. Monfils makes 30-all, though, with a forehand that clips the outermost fibre of the line, then earns his sit-down with an ace. Berrettini is controlling things, but he’s only one break up. Monfils 2-4 Berrettini* Monfils will be raging that he handed over that break so tamely – I doubt there’s anyone on the tour whose serve is harder to take than Berrettini’s, and he’s looking absolutely nails out there, consolidating via a second straight love-game, making it 10 points on the spin. *Monfils 2-3 Berrettini Oh Gael! Er, as I was saying, double gives Berrettini 0-30, and a colossal forehand followed by an excellent putaway - a backhand volley guided obliquely across the face of the net – raises three break points. And Berrettini only needs one, a Monfils forehand dropping long! Monfils 2-2 Berrettini* A tremendous get from Monfils – on the slide, doing the splits and from close to the net – gets him 0-15. Then at 30-15, he steps in on a second serve and absolutely bases a forehand return down the line, flat as your gran’s Makro Coke. That’s one way he might win – it’s unlikely Berrettini will give him a game of those, but in a breaker one or two might do it. Anyway, the big serve/forehand combo see the game away, and this is developing into a fascinating contest. *Monfils 2-1 Berrettini Berrettini wallops a forehand down the line for 15-all, while from comms we learn that Nadal rates Monfils as the greatest athlete tennis has ever seen. I certainly can’t think of anyone in his class, and he secures another hold to 15 with a booming serve down the T. Monfils 1-1 Berrettini* I quite fancy Berrettini – in general, for his is devastatingly dishy - but for this competition. As noted by Calvin Betton, our resident coach during his match against Carreno Busta, his drive backhand is the only thing stopping him from winning multiple majors. But if his serve and forehand are on, which they almost always are, he’s a tough night for anyone – I think he’d beat Tsitsipas, but probably not Medvedev. He holds to 15. *Monfils 1-0 Berrettini It’s easy to be glib about such things, but Monfils does seem to have found his equilibrium since marrying Svitolina. He’s so talented, but some of her focus seems to have rubbed off on him – he won in Adelaide and has been really excellent here, especially against Kecmanovic on Sunday. He holds to 15. And play... The players are warming up... Coming up next: Gaël Monfils [17] v Matteo Berrettini [7]. On that point, it’s worth noting that for the first time, both women’s semis are at night. That might help the slice skid on, though could make Keys’ serve more of a problem. I can’t wait to find out. The reason I think Keys is a good matchup is that she has the power to trouble Barty. She doesn’t move as well, but if her serve is there for her, it could come down a few points her and there. One thing in Barty’s favour, though, is how well her slice is working, because she can deploy it to set up winners or buy her time, from pretty much anywhere on the court. Now here’s Barty talking to Eurosport, saying it was a helluva atmosphere and she really enjoyed the match. She thinks that was the best she’s played this year, which I didn’t expect to hear at all – I thought she was much better against Anisimova. Obviously, what do I know – nothing – and she explains that Pegula forced her to play well and she was happy to miss in the right way as long as she was assertive and aggressive. Again, I thought Pegula hit close to her bottom level but anyway, Barty talks about how lucky she is to play in her home Slam, and though she’d have loved to be born 20 years earlier when then Aussie Open was on grass, she loves the hard surface too, though notes that at night and with the roof closed, it can sometimes play dead. Barty says she was solid tonight and had fun, finding serves and forehands but not worrying if she missed a couple. She thinks she did that all match, which I’m not so sure about, then says “Jess” is “an incredible person and a brilliant girl”. Their lockers are near each other, so they know each other well, and she says Pegula is a top-20 player for sure. On herself, Barty explains that she’s grown as a player and as a person, better able to problem-solve on court, thanking her team for their input. The night sessions have been amazing, though the weather isn’t Melbourne it’s Brisbane which is to say it’s hot, and on Keys she gushes about how nice it is to see back “one of the most incredible girls in the locker room”. Praising “Maddie” - another mate, obviously, who wouldn’t want to be her mate – for her charity work as well as her game, she explains how excited she is for the matchup – you and me both – then makes her merry way off. I could listen to her talk all day. Barty meets Madison Keys next, and that should be an absolute jazzer – if Keys can let herself go – not a done deal – in a way Pegula couldn’t. Anyway, here’s Barty. *Barty 6-2 5-0 Pegula I feel bad for Pegula because she’s been fighting all her life to get to this moment, and it could barely have worked out worse. Had Barty turned up with her A-game, what can you do. But in the first set, she played pretty much as badly as she’s capable of doing and still took it with a double break because Pegula couldn’t find any aspect of herself. In short order, Barty has three match points, and though Pegula saves one, a big serve and a desperate return that drops long finishes things. Barty 6-2 5-0 Pegula* at 40-0, Pegula serves a double ... then another. It never rains, but sometimes it pours so hard it makes your head bleed. Eesh. Pegula then nets a forehand, and her game has totally deserted her here – it’s lonely out there – then a forehand goes wide to give Barty advantage. In comms, they note that Barty is like Murray in her ability to make opponents play their worst, then Pegula nets another forehand and that’s eight games and four breaks in a row for the world no1. This isn’t nice to watch. *Barty 6-2 4-0 Pegula I should apologise, though, if I gave the impression those aforementioned slices were unserious – verily they are not, they’re one of the best shots in the game. Anyway, Barty’s won six games on the spin and when, at 15-0, Pegula plays a good point only for her attempted winner to miss the line by fractions, seven looks imminent. Barty, though, swipes a simple net putaway long and follows it with a double – a glimmer for Pegula – but another forehand drops just a little bit wide for 40-30, then an inside-out forehand clips the net but refuses to deviate, yet another winner. Barty 6-2 3-0 Pegula* Pegula is totally frazzled out there, which is understandable - she’s getting handled – but if she’d hit anywhere near her top level in set one, she’d be in the contest. I hate to say it, but I wonder if the occasion got to her, because she was broken from 0-40 in the first game, and in this one she finds herself 30-40 down having not forced Barty to do all that much. And shonuff, a succession of slices allow Barty to control the rally before, eventually, inevitably, Pegula nets a backhand, and the only consolation for her is that this’ll soon be over. *Barty 6-2 2-0 Pegula Barty is hitting much more freely now, getting first serves in and forehands into corners – just what you need a set and a break down. Still, at 30-0, Pegula times a return beautifully, a forehand down the line ... so Barty sends her next serve out wide, cleaning up with a forehand into the corner, then seals the game with an ace. She is very, very good at tennis (and numerous other things, including being a human being). Barty 6-2 1-0 Pegula* We return from the commercials with set two already underway, and this is a huge game for Pegula. If she holds, we might get ourselves a ball-game, but if she’s broken it’s over. At 30-15, though, she prods a tame backhand into the net, and she just can’t relax into thing at all; she’s waiting to lose. So at 30-all, Barty leaps into her, and though she reads the direction of an overhead, her attempted pass down the line strays marginally wide. I hate to it, but this break point might as well be match point ... and Pegula saves it with a first-serve and forehand, only to cede another when Barty hits the baseline with a slice and she can only net. Here comes break point number two ... and Pegula saves it with a backhand down the line! She only hit two winners in set one, a totally unsustainable state of affairs, especially when you combine it with the number of unforced errors, another one of which hands over another break point, saved with her first ace of the match. Barty then catches the top of the net with another backhand slice and again, Pegula nets her volley – she’s got a real hands issue – and when she picks out Barty with an overhead, she’s forced to chase a beautifully measured lob then hoist consecutive moon-balls, the second of which Barty hammers into the corner. This feels extremely did. *Barty 6-2 Pegula Poor old Jessica. Suddenly, Barty finds some first serves and Pegula, knowing she’s cooked, can do nothing about it. At 40-0, Barty seals the set with an ace, and I don’t think this is going to get more competitive I’m afraid. Barty 5-2 Pegula* If Pegula can just up her level she can make a match of this, and she should be taking confidence from Barty’s struggles. But she’s struggling too, hitting a forehand long having been handed 30-0, then comes in again and can’t dig a passing shot out of her tootsies. Gosh, why is she doing this? Pegula comes in again, nets a volley, and Barty has a point for a double break ... which she seizes, a backhand slice eliciting a backhand into the net. Barty is too good to play much worse than this, and yet she’s cruising to the first set! *Barty 4-2 Pegula Barty just can’t get going, struggling to make any first serves, and a poor forehand gives Pegula 15-30. It’s odd, because she’s getting chances without playing well – I doubt that’s something she anticipated – but a tremendous second-serve draws Barty level and she quickly closes out. Barty 3-2 Pegula* At 15-0, Pegula slaps down a double, and at 30-15 she goes long on the forehand. She’s a bit eager, I think, blazing at every half-chance lest Barty finish the point if she’s patient. We end up at deuce and Barty dictates the next rally, but goes marginally wide with a forehand that just drops over the sideline, then a return flies long and Pegula is still in this set. *Barty 3-1 Pegula Barty opens the game with an ace, and we learn that it’s the first of the match – I guess Pegula got fibres on the two I called in her previous service-game, but I’m not at all sure. But oh look, there’s another one, down the middle for 30-15, while our commentary team praise Pegula for having a “minted” dad – he owns the Buffalo Bills – and not being a layabout. Seriously. At 30-all, she whacks a forehand wide, then at 40-30 Barty goes big on a second serve and misses; can Pegula capitalise? Er, no. An impeccable point from Barty follows: big serve, big forehand, then another big forehand, cross-court on the volley from near the back, for a clean winner. But then she misses another so we return to deuce, and Barty clips the top of the net with another forehand, the ball dropping out for her 12th unforced error of the match! Break point! Pegula gets a second serve to go at too, but stepping in, she’s so eager to attack she rather swipes at her forehand, taking it early and netting. Barty, though, isn’t as sharp as she was on Sunday, struggling to find first serves and struggling to get her forehand going, so she needs a couple of advantages to secure the game, but secure the game she does. Still, some hope for Pegula there - or some despondency that she missed her chance, depending on how you look at things. Barty 2-1 Pegula* Pegula plays a decent first point for 15-0 but then nets a forehand – Barty is getting big on her here, forcing her to rush her shots. If she doesn’t relax soon, she’ll be back in the locker room, but at 30-15 she gets lucky when she comes in again and Barty surprisingly misses the pass, eventually holding to 30. She’s really struggling with Barty’s variety of spins and angles. *Barty 2-0 Pegula Barty begins with an ace and follows it with a service winner, then a good forehand return onto the baseline gives Pegula a sniff. A very minor sniff, a quick point followed by a booming ace down the T consolidate the break, and this is going exactly as expected. Barty 1-0 Pegula* Excellent start from Pegula, who reads Barty’s forehand to hit a cross-court winner for 30-0. Then at 40-0 she opts to come in – not sure about that one, Jess old mate – and nets then, when Barty comes in she hooks a pass wide. From nowhere, she’s put herself under pressure and shonuff when she’s invited in again, she nets a simple forehand putaway. Barty is into this now and soon has advantage – Pegula’s started missing first serves – then Barty surprisingly dumps a backhand. Already, this seems like a pivotal game, and a big forehand into the backhand corner allows Barty to clean up at the net, then Pegula nets a backhand and that’s the break. She’ll be wondering, already – and rightly so. Pegula won the toss and wasn’t sure what to do, but eventually opted to serve and here we go.... While that Nadal match was going on, Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis were causing a bonzer storm on Court, beating Puts and Venus, the number 6 seeds, in the men’s doubles. They’d already sorted Mektic and Pavic, the number 1 seeds, and meets Zeballos and Granollers, the three seeds, in the semis. Here come our players... I was delighted to see Madison Keys beat Barbora Krejcikova earlier today. Not because I’ve anything against the latter, but the former’s renaissance is just so affirming. She’s got so much talent, and I’m hoping that she’s finally found the mental equilibrium to realise it to its fullest extent. The last time she went deep in a major, at the 2017 US Open, she meekly subsided in the final, losing 3 and 0 to her mate, Sloane Stephens. She meets the winner of Barty v Pegula in the last four, and if she could win that – admittedly a monstrous conditional – I’d fancy her to see off whichever of Collins, Cornet, Swiatek or Kanepi she met in the final. In the Europsort, er ... cube, they’re saying that they don’t see a killer shot in Pegula, who’s solid but not much more. I can’t disagree with that, and Barty would have to drop a 2/10 to lose this. Just a little while ago, Denis Shapovalov fought, grunted and hauled his way back from two sets to love down against Rafael Nadal, only to lose his first service-game in the decider. I don’t know if it got big on him, or if he lost concentration, but it didn’t seem like a coincidence, and Nadal took the fifth 6-3. That will sting for quite some time, I shouldn’t wonder, and though I don’t think Nadal will win the thing, it would be typical if he did, taking advantage of Novak Djokovic’s absence and making the final by beating almost no one. G’day, g’avo and g’evening; whatever time it is, wherever you are, it’s Barty time. In a moment or two, one of sports most likable characters and one of tennis’ most brilliant players takes on Jessica Pegula for a place in the semi-finals of her home grand slam. Barty is in terrific form and totally outclassed the also brilliant Amanda Anisimova in her last match, but in Pegula finds a player finding herself. This is already her best major effort – her best efforts in all four have come in the last year – and Sunday’s straight-sets win over Maria Sakkari was the performance of her career. So, you never know. Er, OK, you probably do, but Barty is always fun to watch, and once the match is done we’ve got Mario Berrettini v Gaël Monfils which will be an absolute treat. Here we go!Josephine Okokon, head of St Martins-in-the-Field high school for girls, London My race became an issue very early in my career as a teacher and I began to discover these subtle, covert barriers. I was often the only female teacher of colour and I soon began to see the white teachers getting more encouragement, more support and more mentoring than me. I was left to fend for myself. Whenever I tried to put myself forward for promotion, I was told that I needed more experience but I’d look at the white teachers who had moved up and think, they’ve got the same, if not slightly less experience than me. I always had to go over and above to show that I could do the job well. But even though I worked so hard, I still had to keep moving to different schools to make sure I didn’t get stuck. It’s been incredibly frustrating and disappointing but I’ve taken pay cuts to get out of schools where I was told that I “didn’t fit the mould” or when I’ve found myself pushed towards pastoral roles instead of the academic route. As I gradually worked my way up, I found that if there was any multicultural mix in the school at all, it stopped at the middle leadership. After that level, school governors are the ones making the recruitment decisions. The only jobs I ever got at senior leadership level were when the governor panels were diverse: I never got the job if the panel was all-white – which almost all of the panels were. I sat in front of panel after panel of white men, hearing in their questions and the tone they used towards me that they couldn’t perceive that a black woman could do the job. I began to be very strategic with my applications. I researched 26 deputy head jobs but, after visiting the schools and speaking with the senior leadership teams, there were only six I felt I even stood a chance of getting – purely because of my skin colour. It was worse for headship roles. I looked at 23 jobs and, after researching each one, felt there were just four where my application would have been welcomed. I was offered two of those roles. Funmi Alder, head of Bearwood primary school, Berkshire There is absolutely systemic racism in the teaching profession, which makes it very hard to progress in your career. I know a disproportionate number of very good teachers of colour who would make amazing headteachers but seem to be stuck in middle leadership posts. It doesn’t become easier when you become a headteacher. If anything, your position becomes more precarious because the higher you go, the more people have a problem with taking direction from those who don’t look like them. This is why new black headteachers have to work much harder than their white counterparts in developing relationships with staff with the sad reality being, that some will never accept you. I’ve done my own research and found a disproportionate number of cases where a board of governors has decided to get rid of a perfectly competent black headteacher, perhaps because the area is gentrifying and they think a white head will attract a different class of parent. Governors are enormously powerful and largely unchecked. If they want to get rid of a head, they can. I’ve also spoken to a lot of heads of colour who have decided to move on because the governors have made their position so uncomfortable. I know of cases where the heads have chosen to leave despite having really good Ofsted reports, because the governors have made ill-founded criticisms then gone off on fishing expeditions among the teaching staff, to find other faults to lay at the head’s door. The problem is that these heads have had to sign non-disclosure agreements, so they’re not allowed to talk about it. Anne Hamilton, headteacher at the Evelina hospital school, London When I was doing my national professional qualification for headship (NPQH), my mentor – a white head – told me she didn’t know where I could get a headship. Now, why did this white woman imply that I would never be a head? I had got on to this prestigious course and she had been chosen as my mentor. It was her role to give me everything I needed to do a good job when I became a head, not to tell me to give up. If I’d listened to her, I would still be a deputy head instead of a head entering her 10th year with a number of outstanding Ofsted reports behind her. Even as things were, it took me at least 15 years longer to be a head than it would have done, had I not been black. When I was a teacher, the leadership of every school I taught in, bar one, was entirely white – as was the teaching staff. I found this meant my voice wasn’t heard when discussions about the school were made and I wasn’t offered the opportunities to progress in my career that my caucasian teacher peers were. I had to keep moving schools to move up and avoid becoming like so many colleagues of colour, who have got stuck as teachers when their ambition was to go further. Becoming a head hasn’t been the end of the problems. I’m convinced my race has a big part to play in that. It’s never explicit racism but as a person of colour, I’m attuned to the micro-aggressions: the signs of the lack of respect, the lack of trust. The subtle undermining, challenging, second-guessing and constant questioning. The requirement for me to apply pressure to get anything done. Ross Ashcroft, headteacher, Cherry Oak primary school, Birmingham One clear example of unconscious bias is the number of times I have turned up to greet a visitor in reception in a suit and tie, and they presume I’m a teaching assistant. Almost every non-white leader of education I know, has had the same experience numerous times. But I don’t know of a single white leader in education who has ever been mistaken for a teaching assistant; not once. I’ve been accused many times of being too aggressive, when I know that I haven’t been but that it’s an easy racial slur to throw at a person of colour. I’ve even had an executive head say to me, when I didn’t agree with him about something, “This is why your kind don’t make it in leadership roles.” Going for headship interviews as a candidate of colour is a difficult and upsetting experience. I’ve often been told that I didn’t get the job because the governing board said I “wasn’t the best fit” or that “they weren’t sure whether they could work with me” despite me scoring top marks in all the tasks and having no areas identified for improvement in the interviews. I’ve spent pretty much my whole career in pastoral, behavioural and safeguarding. It wasn’t what I necessarily wanted but being nudged or pushed towards these specialisms is a common theme among teachers of colour, especially black men. I can only assume that’s because BAME men are inherently thought of as being intimidating and confrontational. It means we often end up being glorified bouncers rather than teachers. Because we’re given these non-academic specialisms, the knock-on effect is that we can hit a brick wall when applying for headships because most senior leadership roles require specialist experience in curriculum areas. Appearance is also a hard one for teachers of colour. Very early in my career I was asked by my manager if I thought having canerows in my hair was “appropriate or professional”. These were professionally done, in straight lines and not patterned. I asked another member of staff who was also a teacher, with bright pink hair, a nose piercing and several visible tattoos, if management had ever asked her about professionalism. She said that they hadn’t, ever.This is an action thriller set in a secret Guantánamo-style black-ops facility where “terrorists” are tortured in the name of America’s homeland security and an extraction goes very wrong. It has risibly cliched dialogue and wooden, poorly directed acting from a B-to-G list cast, but it appears to be shot in one continuous take and strictly as an example of choreography and technical skill it’s pretty nifty. I would bet a box of popcorn there are a few sneaky invisible edits in there: for example when a suicide bomb goes off and the smoke clears to reveal devastation surely carefully arranged by set dressers, strewn with actors made up to look fatally wounded by shrapnel and debris. Nevertheless, with One Shot director James Nunn has crafted something as weirdly mesmeric as it is schlocky. The action starts in a military helicopter flying to a remote island belonging to some unnamed Nato country. (It was apparently shot in Suffolk, which would explain the presence of comically quaint pebble-dash on the walls.) A gaggle of Navy Seals, led by Scott Adkins’ head honcho Jake Harris (these protagonist hero guys are always named Jake or Jack), are escorting a CIA analyst Zoe Anderson (Ashley Greene). Anderson has arrived at the site to take a man named Amin Mansur (British actor Waleed Elgadi, giving the best performance in the film) back to Washington DC with her. Supposedly, former businessman Mansur knows the location of a dirty bomb with radioactive material that’s going to go off very soon, although he furiously protests his innocence and the guys running the site, led by Ryan Phillippe’s embittered senior officer, aren’t keen to comply unless the paperwork gets cleared. But suddenly, a truck breaks through the amusingly flimsy chainlink fence with what must surely be over a hundred trained mercenaries crammed inside (judging by the body count by the end of the film). From this point on, the camera dodges and weaves about, following the different factions as they all shoot and row and blow each other up. The sound mix is a bit odd because every sound is equally loud, be it the purring phut-phut-phut of a machine gun or a shouted command or a platitudinous word of comfort to a dying comrade. But the digital cinematography is very crisp and the lighting adjusts seamlessly from indoor to outdoor settings. Maybe this is one big product demo for the camera technology? • One Shot is available on 29 January on Sky Cinema.I’m not drinking, but have lots of good bottles of wine. What recipes are worth using them in? Jo, Cardiff “My strongest advice would be to hold on to them, take a picture, hug it, but don’t waste them on cooking,” says Luca Dusi, co-founder of London wine bar and shop Passione Vino. But I won’t call it a day just yet. “Cooking is all based on detail,” Dusi adds. “The recipe is the main body for the success of a dish, but the quality of the ingredients and their origin play a major part.” Wine in the context of cooking, of course, becomes an ingredient and the Guardian’s Fiona Beckett’s mantra is: “If you wouldn’t drink it, don’t cook with it.” (Hello, corked and “cooking” wine.) That isn’t to say you should crack open your best bottle, mind, especially if you’re planning on pouring it all into a coq au vin, say. Pegs Quinn, chef and co-owner of Sonny Stores in Bristol, says: “There’s a certain level I would go to in terms of cost – about £8 as a starting point – but if you cook down wine, you’re going to lose a lot of the characteristics you’d enjoy from drinking it instead.” Bert Blaize, co-author of Which Wine When, goes a step farther: “I don’t think it matters what wine you use; it’s all about the cooking and preparation, so save the good stuff for when you can drink or gift it.” Plus, if Jo is off booze completely, it’s worth remembering that not all the alcohol will burn away anyway (depending on how much you’re using and how long you’re cooking it for). When it comes to those better bottles, Beckett writes: “The only time I’d use a better wine is if I was cooking something for a short period and wanted the flavour of the wine to come through.” Quinn, meanwhile, suggests a dish from his former haunt, The River Cafe: “Veal shin cooked in barbera with sage, pancetta, tomato and loads of garlic is an absolute banger. Do that with risotto bianco or polenta and greens, and you’ll make me very happy.” Blaize recalls a meal from Piedmont that used wine like a seasoning. “I ate some really simple but delicious cheese tortellini, which didn’t come with a sauce. They recommended adding a splash of red and eating it all together.” Alternatively, if you’ve got any pedro ximénez sherry knocking around, Blaize pours it over vanilla ice-cream and dried fruit for rum-and-raisin vibes. It’s also worth considering what style of wine you use, Quinn says: “The floral characteristics of riesling, for instance, will kill the subtle flavour of pear, say.” Instead, try a “fresher, dry white” such as soave. For anything tomato-based, Quinn leans towards the likes of “sweeter, juicier” nero d’avola, while a punchy chianti pairs well with irony flavours, such as chicken livers. But back to Jo’s “good” bottles. Rules are, of course, made to be broken, and Dusi sanctions one exception: “If you have a good bottle, we’ll allow you to use one glass in the cooking, but you have to drink the rest. It will help your tastebuds get ready for the food, too.” • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comThere is a photograph that is often pasted on to telegraph poles and hung in city squares during protests across Pakistan. It is of a woman, her hair dishevelled, her lips severely parched, her head at a strange angle. It is also a picture of a very tired woman. In Pakistan, you’ll find hundreds of women who, after a very hard life, giving birth and raising children, and then losing them to state violence, begin to look like that. The woman is Aafia Siddiqui, a neuroscientist and mother of three who is serving an 86-year sentence in a Texas prison for attempting to kill American soldiers in Afghanistan. Earlier this month, a British citizen, Malik Faisal Akram, held four people hostage in a Texas synagogue and demanded Siddiqui’s release. Akram was killed in a shootout and the media were once again full of Siddiqui’s story – with her presented variously as victim and terrorist, genius and pawn. So much of her story is unknown or contested that it can be co-opted by all sides to suit their own ends. In Pakistan, we trot her out when we need to remind ourselves of our failure as a nation. We bemoan the fact that a monster called the United States of America came stomping in, took away our daughter and locked her up for life. Occasionally, noises are made that she should be released in exchange for this prisoner or that hostage, then we forget her again. According to Pakistan’s rulers, Siddiqui is a symbol of everything that is wrong with the west. A middle-class, very Muslim girl gets a PhD, raises her voice for oppressed Muslims everywhere and is punished. That narrative, of course, never includes the fact that, while the Americans have been accused of kidnapping her, so have our own intelligence agencies. Neither the Pakistani government nor US prosecutors have ever deigned to tell us how exactly she ended up being interrogated by two American soldiers in Afghanistan in 2008 in the first place, after disappearing, along with her three children, in Karachi five years earlier. There is another picture of Siddiqui, this time often used by western media – her graduation picture, where she is bright-eyed, smiling, full of reckless optimism. Along with that photograph goes the narrative that she was a kind of terrorist genius, buying night-vision goggles, smuggling diamonds to raise funds for al-Qaida, and loitering around a government building in Afghanistan with bomb-making materials and a map of New York landmarks. In this narrative, it is rarely mentioned that, while she appeared on the FBI’s most-wanted list, she was never charged with terrorism. Siddiqui is often held up as “ransom girl” by the Pakistani government and various jihadi groups. The former prime minister called her the “daughter of the nation”, while Imran Khan, the current premier, proposed that Pakistan might be willing to swap her for Shakil Afridi, who is imprisoned in Pakistan after being accused of helping the CIA track down Osama bin Laden. Aside from the fact that we apparently live in a world where the idea of justice has been reduced to a hostage swap, both prime ministers and many other rightwing parties that brandish Siddiqui’s pictures never seem to raise the question of how and why she left Pakistan, and where she was during those missing years. Is it perhaps because it might lead to another question: who is kidnapping and disappearing our citizens now that the US is not even paying us to do so? When the US agreed to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan under the Doha agreement in February 2020, as a pre-condition to negotiations the Taliban got thousands of their brothers released from Afghan jails. Siddiqui was a high-profile female jihadist who faced a trial criticised by many international human rights organisations, yet did the Taliban negotiators say “no Siddiqui, no deal”? They forgot to even bring her up as a bargaining chip when they had their enemies on their knees. What we know for sure is that, after years of disappearance, she turned up in a Ghazni police station in Afghanistan in July 2008 and was interrogated by Americans. She picked up a rifle and was injured in a scuffle. She was charged with assault and attempting to kill the American soldiers, and during her trial she was declared mentally unfit, and then fit again. Witnesses couldn’t agree how many people were in the room when the scuffle happened, and there were no fingerprints on the gun. So much of her story remains a mystery. Based on the facts we can establish, Siddiqui is no emblem of jihad. Nor is she an emblem for hardworking girls wanting to go to MIT and do PhDs, and have children. Whatever the truth of her story, its murkiness is instead a symbol of everything that is wrong with our justice system and with the delusions of jihadists. Mohammed Hanif is a Karachi-based author. His latest novel is Red BirdsThe International Monetary Fund has sharply cut its growth forecast for 2022 with a warning that higher-than-expected inflation and the Omicron variant have worsened the outlook for the global economy. In a quarterly update to predictions made in October 2021, the IMF said it anticipated growth of 4.4% this year – down 0.5 percentage points – and emphasised the risks were of a weaker performance. Gita Gopinath, the IMF’s economic counsellor, said that as a result of Covid-19 the global economy would be $13.8t smaller by 2024 than it would have been had its pre-pandemic trend continued. The Washington-based organisation blamed the downgrade on rising cost pressures and the rapid spread of Omicron, and said while the 2022 outlook was markedly worse for the world’s two biggest economies – the US and China – few countries would be spared a slowdown. The UK is expected to grow by 4.7% in 2022, a cut of 0.3 points to the IMF’s forecast in its October 2021 World Economic Outlook. Despite the reduction, the IMF anticipates the UK growing faster this year than the other six members of the G7 industrial nations – the US, Japan, Germany, France, Italy and Canada. Gopinath said there was a case for the government providing “well-targeted support to highly vulnerable” UK households facing rocketing energy bills this spring. After recent stock market volatility, Gopinath said she would expect to see corrections in share prices as global interest rates went up this year, but said these should be “orderly” provided central banks communicated the thinking behind their decisions. An escalation of the tension between Russia and Ukraine would give an added twist to already high global energy costs, she predicted. In its updated WEO, the IMF said bottlenecks had shaved between 0.5% and 1% off global growth in 2021. “Meanwhile, inflation has been higher and more broad-based than anticipated, particularly in the US. Adding to these pressures, the retrenchment in China’s real estate sector appears to be more drawn out, and the recovery in private consumption is weaker than previously expected.” The IMF publishes its world economic outlook each April and October, with updates in January and July. After pencilling in 2022 world growth of almost 5% in October, it has now cut its baseline forecast for every G7 country apart from Japan. The biggest downgrade has been to the US – where the IMF’s growth forecast has been shaved by 1.2 points to 4%, but there were also cuts of 0.8 points for Germany and Canada, and 0.4 points for France and Italy. China’s growth forecast has been reduced by 0.8 points to 4.8%. “Risks to the global baseline are tilted to the downside,” the IMF said. “The emergence of new Covid-19 variants could prolong the pandemic and induce renewed economic disruptions. Moreover, supply chain disruptions, energy price volatility, and localised wage pressures mean uncertainty around inflation and policy paths is high.” The IMF used the update to repeat its call for more equal vaccine coverage, noting the fully vaccinated share of the population was about 70% for high-income countries, but below 4% for low-income countries. It set a target of vaccinating 40% of the world’s population by the end of 2021 but this was missed in 86 countries. “With the pandemic continuing to maintain its grip, the emphasis on an effective global health strategy is more salient than ever. Worldwide access to vaccines, tests, and treatments is essential to reduce the risk of further dangerous Covid-19 variants.” The IMF said its forecasts were based on Covid-19 health problems declining to low levels by the end of 2022, a pickup in vaccination rates and therapies becoming more effective.Pressure is mounting on Rishi Sunak to scrap April’s planned increase in national insurance contributions (NICs) after the latest figures for the public finances showed the government borrowing £13bn less this year than expected in the October budget. With cost of living pressures mounting, thinktanks and City analysts said a faster drop in the UK’s deficit would prompt the chancellor into a rethink of the £12bn tax hike to pay for the NHS and social care. Official data from the Office for National Statistics showed the government borrowed almost £17bn last month, the fourth highest December figure on record. It took borrowing in the first nine months of the 2021-22 financial year to £147bn, £13bn less than the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) – the independent body which compiles the government’s economic and financial forecasts – was expecting in October. The OBR said higher income tax, corporation tax and VAT payments explained why the deficit had come in lower than forecast. James Smith, economist with the Resolution Foundation thinktank, which seeks to help those on low and middle incomes, said: “This fiscal room for manoeuvre makes it inevitable that the chancellor will set out a plan to deal with the cost of living crunch.” Smith added a targeted package of support would be preferable to abandoning the increase in NICs, since the bulk of the gains would go to the richest fifth of households. Julian Jessop, of the free market thinktank the Institute for Economic Affairs, said the chancellor had the “fiscal room” to ditch the NICs rise. “The economy has recovered more quickly than expected, creating a “growth dividend” for the Treasury.” Rising tax receipts were partly offset by a surge in interest payments on the £2tn national debt, swelled by the emergency measures to support the economy over the past two years. Prompting a warning from the chancellor of the need to reduce government borrowing, debt interest payments rose to a six-month high of £8.1bn after the sharp rise in inflation. Repayments on some of the UK’s borrowing is linked to the cost of living. Sunak said: “We are supporting the British people as we recover from the pandemic through our plan for jobs and business grants, loans and tax reliefs. “Risks to the public finances, including from inflation, make it even more important that we avoid burdening future generations with high debt repayments. ” Samuel Tombs, the chief UK analyst at Pantheon Macro, said that despite rising debt payments, Sunak still had scope to intervene to ease the “cost of living crisis”. The Institute for Fiscal Studies, a thinktank that specialises in tax and public spending, warned the long-term upward pressures would persist whether or not the chancellor abandoned the NICs increase. “If he acts now on the cost of living, Mr Sunak will also need to find a credible means of committing to taking tough action on the public finances in the not too distant future.” Despite the arrival of the Omicron variant, the ONS said that at £16.8bn, the UK’s budget deficit was £7.6bn lower in December than in the same month a year earlier and came in below the £18.5bn expected by the City. Analysts said the UK was on course to hit the OBR’s £183bn borrowing forecast but might be blown off course next year by soaring debt payments.“Virginity repair” surgery known as hymenoplasty has no place in the medical world, British healthcare professionals were warned today, as legislation to criminalise the practice was introduced by the government. An amendment added to the health and care bill on Monday will make it illegal to perform any procedure that aims to reconstruct the hymen, with or without consent. Dozens of clinics, private hospitals and pharmacies have offered the controversial surgery with the promise of “restoring virginity” – with growing numbers of girls and young women coerced into undergoing the procedure. Scar tissue is used to construct a fake hymen with the aim of making a girl or woman bleed when she next has intercourse. There had been pressure to outlaw the surgery from campaigners, including doctors and midwives, since the government pledged to criminalise virginity testing last July. Both practices are considered forms of violence against women and girls. One British survivor of “honour”-based abuse who was harassed for months by her parents to have the surgery said the ban would provide vital protection to girls under family pressure. Hafsah, who did not want to give her real name, is in her 30s and was raped as a child. Afterwards, her Kurdish parents became obsessed with the idea of presenting her as “pure” on her wedding night and her father told her there was a surgery that would “fix her shame”. She explained: “The risk of being ostracised by my community because I didn’t want to go ahead with the surgery under my parents’ orders put me in an extremely dark frame of mind. I felt like I didn’t belong and I was abnormal. “I told them I didn’t want the surgery but for more than a year they used emotional blackmail to try to persuade me.” Hafsah explains: “If hymenoplasty had been illegal when I was a teenager it would have saved me a lot of emotional abuse. I’m sure it will be a great comfort to vulnerable girls in a similar position to know that the law is on their side. It could give them the strength to stand up for themselves.” Dr Edward Morris, president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, said hymenoplasty can never be justified on health grounds. “We have been campaigning for the ban of both virginity testing and hymenoplasty alongside women’s health and rights charities, as they are inextricably linked forms of violence against women and girls. “We want to send a clear message to healthcare professionals that neither practice has any place in the medical world and should not be carried out under any circumstances. We will inform the General Medical Council if we are made aware of anyone carrying out these procedures, so they can take the appropriate action.” He added: “Women deserve to have ownership over their own sexual and reproductive health.” Diana Nammi, executive director at the Iranian and Kurdish Women’s Rights Organisation, said: “Every woman and girl who faces this invasive surgery [does so] under duress, direct or indirect, to present as a ‘virgin’, and, in many cases, it is carried out to enable a forced marriage, organised by her family. “Hymenoplasty causes trauma and, in around half of cases, it fails to make the woman or girl bleed the next time she has intercourse, leaving her highly vulnerable to ‘honour’-based abuse or even ‘honour’ killing.” The government moved to ban hymenoplasty after consultation with an independent panel of experts. The minister for care and mental health, Gillian Keegan, said: “I am committed to safeguarding vulnerable women and girls in this country. That’s why we are making virginity testing illegal and why we have taken another significant step to also ban hymenoplasty in the health and care bill.” She said the abusive practices had no place in society, adding: “We will continue to work across government and with local communities and organisations to tackle the taboos and damaging preconceptions associated with virginity and a woman’s worth.” • In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines International • In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid and the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233) and the suicide prevention lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732 and the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org.‘A way in” – that’s the great phrase. The problem never goes away: the film world’s eternal problem is, as ever, trying to achieve diversity while not being run down by the commercial demands of whatever version of film power is in command at any one moment. The world has changed, Netflix and other streaming services are dominant, but in the end things don’t change if “the money” (whoever it is) don’t feel that a project is as fully commercial as it might be. Commercialism is always the first yardstick, which when it works is fair enough – and so it should be, no one is asking for a soft ride. But sometimes that means a film-maker will be asked to make something they don’t recognise, something which isn’t what was intended and has been misread. Getting a project perceived for what it is is always problematic. Oddly enough, reading has become a problem in the film industry: people just don’t like doing it and it is a bore. But at some point someone will have put their energy behind 90-100 pages of script – at which point, people have opinions and notes. While some professional script people are good at it, especially in TV, in the movies it’s seen as the junior’s way in, and it may be that the junior needs more experience. Then there’s the question of actors and what makes it commercial for the people who are going to give you the money. A tremendous amount of the energy goes into getting the money. Bending to commercial pressure actually gets worse the smaller the film is, the more modest its budget is. If you are dealing with a massive operation like a studio or a streamer, they have got the resources to back up an idea if they buy it. On the other hand, a script conference with Netflix is extremely weird: you are at a screen with your three or four people, and at the other end in California there is a screen where there are 20-25 people. There is just an enormous number of people involved. What the film industry desperately needs is a way to break this logjam. Somehow or other young film-makers have got to be able to raise enough money, and have enough independence, to make their first film. The danger is that these first films, which are the lifeblood of the industry, do not get off the ground, because they are too small to make much money for their investors. There are a number of small independent film companies in the UK who have striven over the years to produce these films but recent changes in legislation no longer allow them the opportunity to offer incentives to their financiers. The Gadarene rush of the box office to the point of greatest profit makes it really difficult, and dashes the hopes of progress for lots and lots of people. The result is an alarming decline in low-budget British independent films and the demise of part of our culture. I was inspired by a film festival in Ferrara, in Italy, where young people were encouraged to bring in their ideas and scripts and films, and the festival tried to provide this “way in”. Having seen this group of young people filled with energy and optimism, without a breath of cynicism, I realised there’s something tangible festivals can do. Despite the fact that the actual making of a film gets easier each year that passes, it’s all too easy to scare people, and we are aiming to do a similar thing at the Kingston international film festival (Kiff) in London for which I am a patron, which is offering awards schemes for young film-makers and mentorship programmes. On top of this, Kiff calls on the industry as well as government to support lower budget independent film-making because they in turn will help provide “a way in”. Right now might be at one of these points in cinema history: there’s a new rationalisation of the way money is spent, things will renew themselves but it won’t have made it any easier for new film-makers to function. As people get older they are less and less prepared to take risks, and that’s why the clockwork tends to wind down generationally, until old blokes like me start to have too much to say for themselves. Anyone who is any good has a great middle period, then it all turns to shit in your hands in the last couple of movies. It all goes wrong in the end simply because you stop wanting to get up at five o’clock in the morning and you just don’t take the risks. But to make a great film you have to absolutely be prepared to take a risk. Films don’t always work. They didn’t always work for Billy Wilder, for God’s sake. You need people to back their luck and not turn into bureaucrats or financiers. They have to take a punt – that’s the only way Four Weddings and a Funeral got made. • Mike Newell is the director of Four Weddings and a Funeral, Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, and Donnie Brasco. Apply to the Kingston international film festival (Kiff) hereBulgaria’s government has been accused of negligence for failing to prioritise over-65s and people with pre-existing health conditions in its Covid vaccine rollout, in a case that exposes the low uptake of jabs in one of the EU’s poorest member states. The Open Society Foundations (OSF) charitable group said it was filing a formal complaint to the human-rights-focused Council of Europe, alleging that Bulgaria’s government had put lives at risk, possibly leading to thousands of avoidable deaths. The complaint is targeted at the policies of Bulgaria’s previous government led by Boyko Borisov, who was ousted in elections last April. After eight months of political stalemate, Kiril Petkov, the co-founder of the We Continue the Change party, became prime minister last month at the head of a centrist-liberal-socialist coalition. The OSF is urging the new government to implement an emergency action plan to vaccinate people over 60 and those with pre-existing conditions, such as respiratory diseases or conditions that compromise their immune systems. Only 36.9% of Bulgarians over 60 are fully vaccinated, the lowest in the EU where the average for this age group is 90.8% according to available data from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The other outlier is Romania, where only 45.9% of over-60s are vaccinated. The fact the two Balkan states, which joined the EU in 2007, have the lowest vaccination rates in the bloc has been attributed to superstition, misinformation and deep distrust of governments and institutions. In comparison, Hungary has vaccinated 81.4% of over-60s, Poland 76% and Latvia 75%. In western Europe vaccination rates for this age group are above 90% in many countries, with near or universal coverage in Denmark and Portugal. According to the OSF, between January and May 2021, 8,813 people over 60 died from coronavirus in Bulgaria. In May 2021, only one in five people over 65 had been vaccinated. Despite the well-known risks to senior citizens and people with pre-existing health conditions, they were behind health workers, teachers and essential workers in the queue for vaccinations. In February 2021, Bulgaria’s government opened access to jabs to the general population at a time when supplies were still scarce. Long queues formed outside vaccine centres, meaning older people and those with pre-existing conditions had to wait alongside healthier, younger groups. “By rolling out the vaccine in such a negligent manner, the Bulgarian government put lives at risk, leading to possibly thousands of avoidable deaths,” Maïté De Rue, a senior legal officer at the OSF, said. “Even today, only about one-third of the Bulgarian population above 60 years old have been fully vaccinated, far less than most other Council of Europe countries.” Bulgarian authorities, she said, had made “almost no effort” to inform people about the vaccine, and had failed to tackle disinformation or take every step to make jabs accessible. The complaint has been lodged at the Council of Europe’s European committee of social rights, which is responsible for upholding the European social charter. The OSF alleges Bulgaria has violated two articles of the charter: the right to health protection and the principle of non-discrimination. Bulgaria’s health ministry has been contacted for comment.An environmental activist who was deceived into a two-year intimate relationship by an undercover police officer has been awarded £229,000 in compensation after winning a landmark legal case. Kate Wilson won the compensation after a tribunal ruled in a scathing judgment that police had grossly violated her human rights in five ways. She pursued a decade-long campaign to discover the truth about how she was deceived into the sexual relationship by the undercover officer, Mark Kennedy, who spent seven years infiltrating environmental groups. The Investigatory Powers Tribunal (IPT) ordered the Metropolitan police and the National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) to pay a total of £229,471 to Wilson “by way of just satisfaction for the breaches of her human rights”. Such awards by the IPT, which hears allegations of abuse by the state, are rare. In a ruling last September, three judges in the IPT found that Kennedy had “grossly debased, degraded and humiliated” Wilson by deceiving her into the relationship. Wilson’s relationship with Kennedy lasted between November 2003 and February 2005. Kennedy did not disclose to her that he was a police officer who had been sent to spy on her and the political groups she supported. She only discovered his real identity in 2010. Kennedy was part of a covert police operation that spied on more than 1,000 predominantly leftwing and progressive political groups over more than four decades. Many undercover officers deceived women they were spying on into sexual relationships during their covert deployments. These relationships are known to have occurred between the 1970s and 2010. The three IPT judges ruled that senior officers supervising Kennedy “either knew of the relationship [with Wilson], chose not to know of its existence, or were incompetent and negligent in not following up on the clear and obvious signs” of the relationship. On Tuesday, Wilson said: “The finding that these operations breached the rights to freedom of expression and assembly and were unlawful amounts to a long overdue recognition that spying on protest movement is political policing and has no place in a democratic society.” “It is important, because it goes beyond the scandal of undercover officers deceiving women into intimate relationships. Violating our political rights was the entire reason for these deployments and thousands of people will have had their political rights violated in this way.” The IPT judges praised her “tenacity and perseverance” in pursuing the complaint. She fought a significant portion of the case herself as she could not afford lawyers. Helen Ball, the Met’s assistant commissioner for professionalism, said: “We recognise the gravity of the judgment in this case, which outlined a series of serious failings that allowed Kennedy to remain deployed on a long-term undercover deployment without the appropriate level of supervision and oversight. This resulted in Ms Wilson’s human rights being breached.” In recent years, the Met has admitted the undercover officers formed “abusive and deceitful” relationships with at least 12 women, including Wilson, and paid them compensation, after they took legal action in the civil courts. Wilson is the only woman who has so far pursued her case in a different legal arena, the IPT. The conduct of the undercover officers is being examined in a slow-moving public inquiry which is headed by the retired judge Sir John Mitting. The inquiry, which was set up in 2014, is due to hold its next round of hearings in May.A consultant psychiatrist was tortured, robbed and left for dead in a city centre park by two men and a teenage girl who were motivated by “greed, homophobia and a straightforward liking of violence”, a jury has heard. Dr Gary Jenkins, 54, had gone to Bute Park in Cardiff seeking “sexual contact” with other men, Merthyr Tydfil crown court was told, when he was subject to the vicious 15-minute attack. Jason Edwards, Lee William Strickland and a girl, who was 16 at the time, egged one another on and laughed as they beat Jenkins before stealing his bag and leaving him with his trousers pulled down. During the attack the girl could be heard shouting “Fucking pig. Fucking dick” while Edwards yelled: “Stamp his head. Stamp his head.” Afterwards the girl said “I needed that,” the court heard. Jenkins, a father-of-two, suffered a brain injury and fractures to his face and ribs and died 16 days later. Edwards, 25, Strickland, 36, and the girl, who is now 17 and cannot be named for legal reasons, have pleaded guilty to manslaughter, robbery and assault occasioning actual bodily harm. The three deny murder. Dafydd Enoch QC, prosecuting, said the attack was “evil and sadistic” with the defendants “indulging in sport”. He said: “We like to think as human beings we do protect each other. Sadly the man at the centre of this case encountered the worst traits of humankind. “Dr Jenkins was in the habit of attending Bute Park at night looking for sexual contact with like-minded men. He would often drink heavily as well. “On 20 July last year in the early hours of the morning he was viciously beaten, robbed, tortured and left for dead by these three defendants. It was a beating apparently motivated by greed, homophobia and a straightforward liking of violence.” The court heard Jenkins had met his wife at medical school in London and they had two daughters. He moved to Cardiff after the breakdown of his marriage and went on to explore his bisexuality. He was open about his sexuality but Enoch said: “He was a very easy target as he wandered about Bute Park.” Jenkins left work at 5pm on the night of the attack before going for a meal and a glass of wine. He was later spotted on CCTV buying cigarettes and alcohol before last being seen at 9pm near the park. The court heard the attackers positioned themselves in the park “to target somebody for robbery and violence”. Enoch said: “They were hurting Jenkins for the best part of 15 minutes as he lay on the ground. It was torture pure and simple. Dr Jenkins is heard to be pleading with those people to stop hurting him and he pleads over and over again until he can speak no more.” A passerby, Louis Williams, spotted Jenkins on the ground being kicked. Enoch said: “He went towards them shouting, ‘Stop. Leave him alone.’” The girl was then heard yelling: “Take his bag. Get his bag.” Williams described the three “egging each other on” while laughing during the attack. The court heard Williams said the teenage girl was “confident” and said she thought “everything she was doing was just funny”. Police found Jenkins unconscious with his trousers pulled down. “He had been left in a humiliating state,” said Enoch. The prosecutor told the court the three defendants had been “in search of vulnerable gay men who were in the park for sex” to rob and made homophobic remarks to Jenkins as they beat him. Another man who will give evidence during the trial described being lured by the three around the back of a cafe with the suggestion of a sexual encounter with Strickland. However, sensing something was wrong, he left. Enoch said: “The unlikely combination of these three defendants produced a lethal powder keg which sadly for Dr Jenkins detonated right in front of him. He didn’t deserve what happened to him – he was a much-loved and admired individual.” His line manager, consultant psychiatrist Paul Cantrell, told the court: “There was something extraordinarily unthreatening about Gary which made him well-liked by all those who came across him. He had a wide circle of friends within the field in which we worked. “I was aware from colleagues he frequented Bute Park after hours. The impression conveyed to me by colleagues was well-known that he had occasion to attend the park late at night and knew him well enough to know it was to find a male partner. We were worried about these practices and were thinking of warning him.” The trial continues.Yesterday’s announcement of an inquiry into alleged anti-Muslim racism in the government meant I was going to begin with one of the more eye-watering quotes from Boris Johnson’s terrible novel Seventy-Two Virgins. (Seventy-Two Virgins is the title, not who bought it.) But further partygate revelations – and finally a police investigation – instead force me to tong open another work in the Johnson canon: The Churchill Factor. This minimum opus is riddled with sensational factual errors but is meant to advance Johnson’s big theory that we shouldn’t write off great men as “meretricious bubbles on the vast tides of social history”. On the contrary, great men turn history, and he’s one of them. (Johnson, obviously – not Churchill. Britain’s greatest wartime leader is chiefly deployed as a useful proxy for the narcissist author.) It is, then, entirely fitting of Boris Johnson’s historical stature that as Russia stands on the brink of an invasion of Ukraine, the talk is all of the PM’s singalong birthday party during the first lockdown. Has ever a meretricious bubble been more in need of a pin? A vast tide of something is flowing out of Downing Street, but it doesn’t smell like history. Needless to say, that isn’t the line Johnson’s few remaining allies are going with. Sent out into no-man’s land this morning, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, claimed that what people were really concerned about was the genuinely serious situation in Ukraine. Sorry, but no. This populist government can’t have it both ways. You can’t forever claim to be the voice of the people, and then claim that what the people are really worried about are Russian troop manoeuvres on the Ukraine border. I’m afraid that is just total bollocks. “The people” are not talking about that very much at all. Whether the cabinet and other serious folk reckon they should be is a separate matter – but it’s a little too late for coulda-woulda-shoulda from an administration that has spent the past two and a half years stoking every single trivial and diversionary culture war that it possibly could. Go to the pub, go online, stand at the school gates. What the people are actually doing their nuts about is the endless revelations of Downing Street partying. Such is life? Such has this government made it. Anyway, a recap on the latest party, which took place in June 2020 in the cabinet room and involved a birthday cake, singing, and 30 guests, including Lulu Lytle, the PM’s interior designer. Clearly, the presence of the personal decorator is the rococo detail that really elevates this tale, although according to her own account, Lulu seems to have been what you might call present but not involved. In all honesty, I can’t help feeling rather sorry for Lytle during the whole saga of the Downing Street flat refurbishment. She is simply a decorator who took a commission, clearly with no understanding that she was working for a couple of greedy chancers who didn’t have a clue how they were going to pay for it, nor particularly cared. Last night’s statement from her firm says Lytle “entered the cabinet room briefly as requested”, and that she was “waiting to speak to the prime minister”. I bet she was. She was probably thinking this was her best chance of asking Johnson if he’d found his lost wallet yet. But I’m afraid that upon receipt of the latest information, we’re going to have to raise the odd question about the dates involved. Here is Lytle’s office last night, confirming that she “was present in Downing Street on 19 June [2020] working on the refurbishment”. And yet, more than five months after that date – on 29 November 2020 – here is Boris Johnson emailing Lord Brownlow that his flat is “a tip” and he is “keen to allow Lulu Lytle to get on with it”. Has some tear opened up in the time-chintz continuum? Can work be under way five months before the prime minister is keen to get it started? It does all serve as a reminder that the flat refurbishment scandal has yet to be got to the bottom of by any of the various Clouseaus who’ve had a crack at it. Then again, it’s just one of a cavalcade of shameful businesses, frequent lies and serial obfuscations that were always the inevitable result of putting Johnson in Downing Street. I wonder if the great political theorists of the Conservative party still want to boast that they are all “priced in” to Johnson’s long-lasting appeal. They are now reduced to “welcoming” criminal investigations into his Downing Street. Meanwhile, the impression that the public were treated like mugs by the overlords who made the rules has become thoroughly overriding. I now have no idea why I couldn’t have had a sixth birthday party for my daughter that same week of Johnson’s gathering. After all, she’d been working in a classroom with her friends all day – what’s the difference if they then all come round to ours/the cabinet room, and carry on with cake there? They’re all in a bubble too, aren’t they? Had I known that Nadine Dorries would have defended me to the hilt, I would have gone ahead and thrown the usual sugarfest. And yet, are we perhaps all on the point of developing a sneaking suspicion that Nadine only defends very important and powerful people who give her jobs at which she’s useless? As for the prime minister’s wife, maybe she just couldn’t bear the look on her big kid’s little face if he was denied his 56th birthday tea. Quite how long Conservative MPs and the wider British public will continue to indulge him is another matter. Realism appears to be getting the upper hand on cakeism. Boris Johnson promises you “global Britain” but in fact makes your country a laughing stock. He promises to level you up but he just drags everything down to his level. He promises you “the people’s government” but you get the Downing Street version of Marie Antoinette’s ridiculous hameau. He tells you that you can have your cake and eat it, but the only one who actually gets cake is him. In the end, Johnsonism is little more than a con trick, and the jig looks increasingly close to being up. Perhaps that is beginning to dawn upon even him. Enemies of the naff will shudder at reports that Johnson has installed a fire pit in the Downing Street garden, but it may well be the only constructive thing he’s ever done. After all, familiarising himself with fiery pits would seem to be an increasingly wise long-term hedge. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistJuventus have reached an agreement with Fiorentina to sign the much-coveted striker Dusan Vlahovic for €75m (£62.8m), including add-ons. Vlahovic and his agent are holding contract talks with Juventus, subject to which the move is due to go through. The 21-year-old Serbia international, a target for clubs including Arsenal, made clear he would not extend his contract beyond next season, prompting Fiorentina to strike a deal for his transfer this month. Vlahovic has 17 goals in 21 Serie A appearances this season, making him the league’s joint top scorer with Lazio’s Ciro Immobile. The Juventus striker Álvaro Morata, on loan from Atlético Madrid, hopes Vlahovic’s arrival will enable him to join Barcelona but that would hinge on permission from his parent club and whether Barcelona have the financial capacity to register him. Fiorentina want to sign the Brazilian striker Arthur Cabral from Basel to replace Vlahovic and have submitted an opening bid of €14m plus €2m in add-ons. The Fiorentina midfielder Sofyan Amrabat is Tottenham’s main target if they conclude a deal to send Tanguy Ndombele on loan to Paris Saint-Germain. Amrabat is with Morocco at the Africa Cup of Nations.A man who spent 54 hours trapped in a Welsh cave and thought he was going to die has joined the rescue team that saved his life, in the hope that he might do the same for others. It took about 300 volunteers from across the country to rescue George Linnane, who broke his arm, ribs and jaw after a fall at Ogof Ffynnon Ddu cave system, in the Brecon Beacons, in November. The 54-hour-long operation was the longest cave rescue mission in Welsh history, and the 38-year-old told the BBC he felt “lucky to be alive”. His ordeal had not put him off caving in the slightest, though. The engineer, from Bristol, said the sport was part of who he is and he was keen to get back underground as soon as possible. He has now signed up to volunteer for the South and Mid Wales Cave Rescue Team, who coordinated the operation to save him, “so I can help the next poor soul who finds themselves in that situation”. Reliving his ordeal, Linnane described how he set out on the morning of 6 November with a small group for what was supposed to be a six-hour excursion into the deep cave system near Penwyllt. But the experienced caver fell and when he awoke he could not move. As well as his broken ribs, jaw and arm, he suffered a dislocated clavicle, lacerated spleen, collapsed lung and a broken scaphoid in his wrist. “I was just screaming and screaming in pain at that point. It was nasty,” he said. While one friend went to raise the alarm, another stayed and spoke to him for hours to keep him awake. “I kept flipping between two states – there was: ‘I’m going to fight this and survive’, which became: ‘I really don’t care’,” he said. “It was when those first advanced first-aiders turned up, from that point onwards, I always felt like I had a chance. But initially, I wasn’t sure I was going to make it.” Rescue volunteers came to his aid from all over the country and Linnane said he remembered seeing familiar faces from the Forest of Dean, Mendips and Yorkshire. They descended into the 43.5-mile underground network to pull Linnane through the narrower passages to get him to a larger area where he could be put in a tent to keep him warm. Strapped to a stretcher, he was pulled out of the cave with rescuers forming a line and passing him along. The process took more than two days, with the operation having to pause regularly to treat the injured man or change teams. The caver said he had an “overwhelming sense of relief” when they finally got to the exit. He emerged in the dark of the third night, with hundreds of cavers on the site and members of the press, and he was rushed down the hill to a waiting ambulance which took him to hospital. Now, he says he is thankful for the “tight-knit bond between cavers” and wants to give back by becoming a rescuer himself, saying it is the “right thing to do”. “Caving is a very safe sport, generally speaking, for people that know what they’re doing. It’s as safe as crossing a road,” he said. “But things do happen occasionally. And when they do, there is only one team of people, one type of person that is going to get you out of there. He added: “I’m a caver and I’m a diver. It’s what I do and what makes me happy. And I know that whilst something bad did happen to me, the chance of it happening again is very, very low.”Keeping the bedroom window open in the depths of winter, worrying about having a hot flush in parliament and discussing HRT with her doctor: Nicola Sturgeon has spoken frankly in a new podcast about her experience of the menopause. In an interview with the editor and author Sam Baker for The Shift, which explores the challenges in life for women over the age of 40, Scotland’s first minister admitted her own ambivalence about discussing the subject in public. She said: “We talk about the menopause much more, and I’m very conscious of being a woman with a profile and a platform, a fair degree of influence, so I feel a responsibility – given that I’m at that age – to talk about it myself. “And yet even talking about it like this, I am so far out of my comfort zone, in terms of the intensely personal nature of it. That tells me no matter how far we’ve come in this discussion, we still have a long way to go that somebody like me still feels kind of uncomfortable with it.” Sturgeon, who is 51, described herself as “still in the foothills” of the menopause, adding: “Even though there is more information available than there has ever been before, there’s still a massive amount of guesswork about it. We’re still all feeling our way through it.” She told Baker that she had already had a conversation with her doctor about taking hormone replacement therapy, noting that her generation grew up reading – now discredited – scare stories about the treatment and asking: “How many women just suffered in silence and suffered unnecessarily because of that?” Asked how she might deal with a hot flush during a work meeting, she said: “I would like to think I would be open about it. If you look around the world, there’s not been that many women leaders … I guess Angela Merkel must have gone through when she was in office, Hillary Clinton … so if you’ve got that platform, then I would like to think I would use that positively, but I’m also a human being.” Sturgeon said that while she had not yet experienced those symptoms, she was “definitely at the stage of feeling hotter overnight, not being able to sleep and all that sort of thing”. She added: “So I’ve got windows open in the depth of winter, my poor husband is shivering. I’ve thought to myself: what if that happens when I’m on my feet in parliament in the middle of first minister’s questions? What would I do? That could happen any time. I’m not sure I will know the answer to that question until it happens.” She joked: “Maybe male opposition leaders should be thinking about what I will do, as well.” Last summer, the Scottish government published its first women’s health plan, which included commitments to reduce waiting times for diagnosing endometriosis from more than eight years to less than 12 months, to offer individual care plans after a woman’s first miscarriage, and to widen access to specialist menopause services.‘I learned the truth at 17 / That love was meant for beauty queens / And high school girls with clear-skinned smiles / Who married young and then retired.” Janis Ian’s At Seventeen is an indelible portrait of life from the perspective of a socially awkward unattractive teen, inspired by a newspaper article that the singer-songwriter read about a young woman who thought her life would be perfect. “I learned the truth at 18,” the girl told the journalist. Ian changed her age and spent three months working on the intimate and confessional lyrics. “You couldn’t write a song like that without having gone through it,” Ian says, video-calling from her home in New Jersey. Now 70, her hair is short and white, no longer the dark curls she sported on her album covers during the 60s and 70s. “The first time I sang At Seventeen in public I did it with my eyes closed. I felt like I was naked and I was sure the audience was going to be laughing.” She couldn’t have been more wrong: At Seventeen won a Grammy in 1976, where Ella Fitzgerald led the ovation describing her as “the best young singer in America”. Ian, who sang “to those of us who knew the pain of valentines that never came”, received 461 Valentine’s Day cards the following year. Ian, who has just released her first album in 15 years – and also her last – has been singing to those outsiders for close to 60 years. Born in New Jersey to leftist parents who were on an FBI watch list, she wrote her first song aged 12, was signed to a recording contract at 13, recorded her first album aged 14 and scored her first hit, Society’s Child, aged 15. The song was about an interracial relationship, inspired by a couple she had seen holding hands on a bus, even as the other occupants moved away from them. Society’s Child was considered so controversial that 22 record labels turned it down. It was released twice but only became a hit when it was publicly championed on television by Leonard Bernstein. Society’s Child gave Ian her first taste of success. But it came with a price. “The song held up a mirror,” she says. “And when you hold up a mirror, people don’t like what they see.” A radio station in Atlanta was burned down for playing the record and journalists were fired for publishing the lyrics in newspapers. “I was dealing with threats all the time,” says Ian. “I wasn’t able to go in the street without somebody spitting on me. I wasn’t able to have anyone open my mail without worrying there would be a bomb in it.” In the face of such extreme reactions – people bought tickets to see her perform in order to scream racist abuse as she sang – Ian’s response was simply not to respond. “I did what every adolescent does when faced with an untenable situation,” she says. “I ignored it.” It seemed, at first, as though the strategy had worked. The success of Society’s Child, and her debut album of the same name, propelled Ian into a world where her social circle included Nina Simone, Janis Joplin and Jimi Hendrix. “I was 16 and would go club-hopping with Jimi,” she says. “In one night you could go see Nina Simone at the Village Gate and then go to the Gaslight to see someone else.” Nine years older, Hendrix was nevertheless a responsible accomplice. “I really wanted to try cocaine, but Jimi was way against it because he was horribly addicted to it.” One night Ian and Hendrix went to see BB King in the Village and he stopped the performance to announce that Martin Luther King had died. It’s an extraordinary anecdote: did she recognise it was extraordinary at the time? “You don’t know you’re hanging out with people who will be legendary,” she says. She recalls one night at a party with Janis Joplin when a heroin dealer was handing out free shots. Before Joplin accepted hers she turned to Ian and said, “Kid, time for you to go home.” Ian was invited by Leonard Cohen and James Brown to work as backing singer on their records. During the session with James Brown he stopped her while she was singing. “He said ‘If I wanted you to sound like a [N-word], I would have hired a [N-word]. Now do it again, but this time sound white’,” Ian recalls. She was feted by her heroes – Odetta and Joan Baez became friends and Salvador Dalí offered to paint her portrait for an album cover – but the starry company only told half the story. Ian’s later teen years were also defined by self-harm – cutting her arms with razor blades and eating so little that her weight plummeted – which she now says was connected with the pressures of fame and the extreme reactions that Society’s Child provoked. “When you don’t know what else to do, you harm yourself,” she says. “Sooner or later the dark side always gets you.” After releasing five albums in four years, Ian took a three-year break from music in the early 70s. By 1975, her album Between the Lines – which featured At Seventeen – brought her a second burst of success. Soon she was hanging out in the Bottom Line club in New York with Mick Jagger, Charles Mingus and Stevie Wonder, performing on the first ever episode of Saturday Night Live, and going on tour with an up-and-coming comedian named Steve Martin as her opening act. She was also drinking buddies with James Baldwin and Nina Simone – one of the songs on her new album is about her friendship with the singer whose mastery inspired her: “She led the band, wrote the songs, played the instrument, sang, did the arrangements: there was nobody else.” At Seventeen was the last time Ian would have a hit song in the US. Although she continued to have success around the world – Fly Too High, produced by Giorgio Moroder, reached No 1 in several countries – she ultimately walked away from music for more than a decade. Her life outside music was troubled. Ian had known she was attracted to women since her childhood but throughout her teens and 20s had relationships with men. She had married a Portuguese film-maker in 1978, who was violent and threatened with her a gun, she wrote in her 2008 memoir. They divorced in 1983 but the hard times kept coming: she endured serious illness – fatigue syndrome – and lost her life savings due to an unscrupulous business manager. “I couldn’t perform. They [the IRS] took the money every time I did,” she says. “I couldn’t record because nobody was interested. I was terrified I would not have any food, rent or heat. Those were very hard years. Very hard.” Ian re-emerged in 1992 with Breaking Silence, which chronicled her recent coming out. The Village Voice had outed her in 1976. Although the wider media didn’t run with the story, Ian still faced consequences. “When I got outed I lost the ability to play any place that served liquor,” she says. (Venues requiring a liquor license had a “morals clause” and could terminate a contract over actions undertaken in an artist’s private life.) “If the news outlets had picked up on it, it would have been a career killer.” She met Pat Snyder, now her wife, after she moved to Nashville to work as a songwriter. She credits the city with rescuing her, producing a run of six albums. “When I moved to Nashville I became a much better writer,” she says. “I wouldn’t wish the IRS on anyone but the one thing I learned is you can’t take away what I do – nobody can take that.” The Light at the End of the Line is Ian’s first album of new material since 2006’s Folk Is the New Black. “I didn’t want to make an album for the sake of making an album,” she explains of her break from releasing records. “I wanted to make an album because the songs should be heard.” The new album bookends her career – “to me it’s full circle” – but while Ian says she will continue to tour and write songs she is certain she is finished with releasing albums. “I’m done. I don’t want to be in the music industry,” she says. “It was bad enough when it was a business, but now that it’s an industry? I’m really done with that part of it.” Ian’s final record opens with the song I’m Still Standing, which starts with the line: “See these lines on my face / They’re a map of where I’ve been / And the deeper they are traced the deeper life has settled in.” Now 70, how does she feel about the young woman she was at 17? “The advantage of being that age is you’re coming at everything when it’s brand new,” she says. “It’s easy to lose. I love that part of me. I love that kid.” The Light at the End of the Line is out now on Rude Girl Records. This article was amended on 25 January 2022 to correct the lyrics to At Seventeen. It is “clear-skinned smiles”, not “clear-eyed smiles” as previously stated.A 15-year-old boy has been flown to hospital after being stabbed multiple times at school, allegedly by a fellow pupil. Police were called to Walney school in Cumbria after the knife attack at about 10am on Tuesday. Cumbria constabulary said a 15-year-old boy had suffered “multiple stab wounds” to his body and was taken to Alder Hey hospital by air ambulance. The force said he was in a stable condition and that his injuries were not believed to be life-threatening at present. A 16-year-old boy was arrested on suspicion of grievous bodily harm with intent after being detained near Barrow train station at 10.40am, nearly half an hour after police arrived at the school. The force said in a statement: “Police are in attendance at the school and can reassure the public and parents that there is no perceived wider threat.” In a letter to parents, Walney school’s headteacher, John Richardson, said support was available for students affected by the incident. He added: “The whole school community is in shock at these events and all our thoughts and prayers are with the victim and his family. “The school day is now continuing while police officers remain on site as part of their ongoing investigation, which we are of course supporting.”Alan Cumming will play Scotland’s national bard Robert Burns this summer in a solo show that will delve beyond “the traditional biscuit tin image” of the great poet. Burn, a dance-theatre production, was announced on Tuesday amid preparations for the evening’s traditional Burns suppers celebrating the poet’s birthday. It will be staged as part of the 75th Edinburgh international festival (EIF) in August. Burns, an 18th-century tenant farmer who became an excise collector, wrote passionately about his country in vivid poems and songs including Tam o’ Shanter, Auld Lang Syne and Address to a Haggis, which is recited at commemorative Burns suppers. His work “tells us the absolute truth of who we are as Scots” said Cumming. “But the more I researched him, the more I realised I didn’t know the absolute truth of him.” With Burn, Cumming aims to tell the poet’s story “using my whole body” and he said: “If I have one regret in my artistic life it would be that I did not become a dancer.” The actor will collaborate on the show with the choreographer Steven Hoggett whose productions include Black Watch and Harry Potter and the Cursed Child. Burn is co-produced by the National Theatre of Scotland, the Joyce theater in New York and EIF, which said the show explores his personal struggles and spectacular successes. Cumming is no stranger to Edinburgh’s annual arts jamboree. He was a roof-raising Dionysus in the National Theatre of Scotland’s production of The Bacchae at the 2007 festival and had a cabaret residency, Alan Cumming Sings Sappy Songs!, in 2016. Towards the end of last year’s festival – which was dramatically scaled down because of Covid – he presented a show called Alan Cumming Is Not Acting His Age. Burn was announced alongside a revival of Liz Lochhead’s contemporary Scots-language adaptation of Euripides’ Medea, which will be directed at EIF by Michael Boyd and will star the actor and playwright Adura Onashile whose play Expensive Shit was staged at the Edinburgh fringe in 2016. Lochhead’s Medea was first staged in Glasgow in 2000 by Theatre Babel. Boyd’s revival starring Onashile had been due at EIF in 2020 but was postponed due to the pandemic. Further programming for this year’s EIF, which runs 5-29 August, will be announced in spring.Is the office dead? Or have rumours of its death been greatly exaggerated? The pandemic has already spawned a million think pieces on the subject. Now that Boris Johnson has dropped work-from-home guidance and some big companies are starting to tell staff to come back in, brace yourself for a gazillion more. If you don’t have time to navigate the debate, here’s a handy summary: the future of work looks very different depending on who you ask. People who have spent the pandemic Zooming from spacious holiday homes, and those with a financial stake in remote work, seem to be adamant that the days of trudging to an office are over. People with a financial stake in commercial real estate and ancillary industries, meanwhile, have been working overtime extolling the virtues of in-person work. One big proponent of the “offices are for ever” crowd is an architect called Clive Wilkinson who (this will shock you) designs office spaces. Not just any office spaces, mind you: Wilkinson is the guy responsible for Google’s fancy headquarters in California. He’s got some regrets about the Googleplex now: in a recent interview with NPR, Wilkinson admitted that too many on-site perks can be “dangerous” because employees never have any reason to leave the office. Still, Wilkinson said the office may need to be reimagined but that doesn’t mean it’s dead. “The office is the fermenting ground for people growing into successful adults,” he opined. “How would that ever be dead?” I’m not going to answer that. I’m just going to say his thoughts on the matter may have fermented a little too long. Meanwhile, on the other extreme of the debate, is Brian Chesky, Airbnb’s CEO and a man who clearly hasn’t spent the last two years quietly weeping as he tries to get work done while living in a one-bedroom flat with a very loud baby, a hyperactive dog and another adult who is also trying to get work done. (I’m not projecting here; not projecting at all.) Last week Chesky announced that he will be working remotely as he hops from Airbnb to Airbnb around the world. Why? Well, because he’s a billionaire and he can. And also, as he explained on Twitter, because he reckons this is the future: remote work has “untethered many people (obviously not everyone, but a large chunk) from the need to be in an office every day.” Per Chesky, that means “more people will start living abroad … and [becoming] digital nomads”. Which, of course, is great news for Airbnb. Airbnb-hopping as you work from the beach sounds lovely, right? But let’s remember that the people who can do this may be a lucrative customer base for Airbnb but can’t, by any means, be described as a “large chunk” of the population. It’s important to stress that point because it can be easy for those of us who have been lucky enough to work remotely during the pandemic to overestimate how many people have had the same opportunity. Last September, the Atlantic commissioned a poll asking Americans to estimate how many people had worked from home during the pandemic. Seventy-three per cent of the respondents who had worked remotely guessed at least half of Americans had done the same. In reality, the number of Americans who worked remotely was only 35% at its highest point (May 2020). Only 13.4% were working from home by the end of last summer. The numbers seem to be higher in Britain (47% of people worked from home in April 2020) but we’re still not talking about an overwhelming majority here. And this, really, is the key issue when it comes to the whole remote v in-person work conversation. Far too much airtime is given to the experiences of a relatively small proportion of the population; every other type of worker seems to be invisible. There may be a lot of grand ideas about the “future of work” floating around, but there’s nothing futuristic about fixating on how to improve the lives of white-collar workers while ignoring everyone else. That’s just business as usual. • Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistExperts have warned against the “unproven” and “unethical” use of genetic tests to predict the risk of complex diseases in embryos created through IVF. Though not currently available in the UK, such tests are being marketed in the US and their availability is likely to increase as the technology develops, representatives from the European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) said. Writing in the European Journal of Human Genetics, they stressed that there is currently no evidence that the technique called polygenic risk score (PRS) analysis can predict the likelihood of as yet unborn children being at risk of complex diseases such as schizophrenia, type 2 diabetes or breast cancer in later life. The geneticists also called for a societal debate about the future application of such tests, such as selecting for traits like height or intelligence. “We believe that this is a highly promising field in genetics and for the prevention of disease, but at the [present] stage, it cannot be used,” said the ESHG president, Maurizio Genuardi, a professor of medical genetics at the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Rome. “There is no evidence that this kind of selection can lead to better or healthier babies.” Unlike genetic testing for Down’s syndrome or diseases such as cystic fibrosis that are caused by mutations in a single gene, PRS aims to calculate an individual’s susceptibility to complex traits or disorders by combining the effects of dozens or potentially millions of genetic variants into a single figure. It involves analysing cells from embryos created through IVF, before they are implanted. “Many conditions are caused by a combination of genetics and environment, and PRSs are only able to capture parts of any of the relevant genetic component, which is itself likely to be highly complex and difficult to analyse,” said Dr Francesca Forzano, the chair of the ESHG public and professional policy committee and a consultant in clinical genetics at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS foundation trust in London. Even so, private testing companies are increasingly marketing such tests to prospective parents as a means of selecting embryos with a lower risk of disease in later life. At least one child has been born after such a procedure, Forzano and colleagues said. Although US companies are leading the charge, “we do not really have a very good sense of what is happening in each individual private clinic across Europe and other countries,” said Forzano. Sarah Norcross, the director of the Progress Educational Trust (PET), a charity that improves choices for people affected by infertility and genetic conditions, called on the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority to clarify the legal and regulatory status of such tests within the UK, and said the Advertising Standards Authority and Competition and Markets Authority should keep a careful eye on whether and how such tests are marketed to UK patients. “PET supports this clear and unequivocal warning to fertility patients not to waste their money on having embryos tested using polygenic risk scores,” she said. “Even if – for the sake of argument, and despite a complete lack of clinical evidence – a polygenic risk score could meaningfully predict certain things about certain embryos, the sheer number of embryos that would be needed to make use of this test could not be achieved in a clinical setting. “There are precious few embryos to choose from in a fertility treatment context, and so reasons for preferring one embryo over another must be grounded in clear evidence.” The ESHG also called for a societal debate about the future application of PRS, to avoid discrimination and the stigmatisation of certain conditions. “If, theoretically, we are going to offer a test to select common traits, for which traits would our society consider it is ethical to offer?” said Forzano. “We need to consider whether we think that this is acceptable, whether it is ethical, and whether our society really wants to have something like that.”Donna Barba Higuera has won the US’s top children’s book award, the Newbery medal, for her story of an Earth destroyed by a comet, and the girl who is the only one who remembers it. Higuera’s The Last Cuentista, which blends Mexican folklore with science fiction, was named winner on Monday. The prize, which is named after John Newbery, the 18th-century English publisher who was one of the first people to publish books exclusively for children, has been running for 100 years. It has been won in the past by some of the most enduring classics of American children’s literature, from Madeleine L’Engle’s A Wrinkle in Time to Katherine Paterson’s Bridge to Terabithia and Neil Gaiman’s The Graveyard Book. Higuera’s novel, her second, tells the story of Petra Peña, whose family is chosen to travel to a new planet when Earth is destroyed by a comet. When she wakes up, hundreds of years later, she finds she is the only person to remember Earth, after a “sinister Collective” has taken over the ship, purging the memories of those on board. “Petra alone now carries the stories of our past, and with them, any hope for our future. Can she make them live again?” says publisher Levine Querido, an independent press. “I have pinched myself, squeezed my eyes super tight, and it’s all still real life! What a day! Taking a minute to digest over here,” said Higuera on learning of her win. The awards, which are run by the American Library Association, also saw the Caldecott medal for the illustrator of the most distinguished American picture book for children go to Jason Chin’s Watercress. The picture book, which was written by Andrea Wang, tells the story of a child of Chinese immigrants who stop off while driving through Ohio to harvest watercress they see growing wild. At first, the girl is embarrassed, but changes her mind when her mother tells her a story about the family’s time in China. “Speechless. Honored. Overjoyed,” tweeted Chin on learning of his win. Wang congratulated him. “I can’t express how much I wanted [Jason Chin] to win the Caldecott. His incredible, luminous, exquisite art not only brought the story to life but also brought lost family back to me,” she said. Watercress also won the Asian Pacific American award for best picture book at Monday’s ceremony.Nvidia is becoming increasingly resigned to giving up on its $40bn takeover of Cambridge-based chip designer Arm, as regulatory hurdles and industry opposition mounts, making it almost certain that the two-year time frame the companies aimed to complete the deal in will expire. The contentious deal, the largest ever in the semiconductor industry, has become mired in seemingly insurmountable regulatory red tape on both sides of the Atlantic as well as in China since being announced in September 2020. Executives at US-based Nvidia have reportedly expressed serious doubts that the deal will be closed, while SoftBank, the Japanese owner of Arm, has rekindled plans to float Arm as an alternative to a sale, according to Bloomberg. Nvidia, and Arm, continue to pursue regulatory clearance while the initial deal terms are set to expire on 13 September, a date by which the parties now cannot hope to gain clearance. “We remain hopeful that the transaction will be approved,” said a spokesman for SoftBank. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) dealt the most recent blow to the prospect of a successful takeover, launching legal action in December to block what it called an “illegal vertical merger” that would give Nvidia too much market power. Despite the mounting opposition to the takeover of Arm – which many of its 500 clients, which range from Apple and Samsung to Qualcomm, say would end the company’s status as the “Switzerland” of the semiconductor industry – Nvidia continues to expound the benefits of the deal. “We continue to hold the views expressed in detail in our latest regulatory filings,” said Bob Sherbin, spokesman for Nvidia. “This transaction provides an opportunity to accelerate Arm and boost competition and innovation.” Arm, which employs 6,500 staff including 3,000 in the UK, declined to comment. The increasingly severe global shortage of chips – the “brain” within every electronic device, from smartphones and cars to aviation and smart TVs – has increased takeover activity and increased scrutiny on deals in the now geo-politically sensitive sector. In 2018, US company Qualcomm abandoned its $44bn, two-year pursuit of Dutch chip maker NXP after failing to secure approval in China, a victim of a trade dispute between Beijing and Washington.The Marmite maker Unilever has announced plans to cut 1,500 management jobs globally, as it comes under mounting pressure from a US activist investor and other shareholders to improve its performance. The FTSE 100 company, known for brands such as Dove soap, Hellmann’s mayonnaise and Ben &amp; Jerry’s ice-cream, said it would reduce its senior management roles by 15% and more junior management posts by 5% as it takes out some layers to simplify the business, including in the UK. It will consult unions on the plans and stressed that shop floor workers in its factories would not be affected. Unilever, headquartered in London, employs 149,000 people worldwide, including 6,000 in the UK and Ireland. The chief executive, Alan Jope, has been under pressure for months to revive sales growth as the company missed its profit margin targets. In recent days it emerged that the US activist investor Nelson Peltz has built a stake in the company. Peltz has not said publicly what changes it is pushing for. Jope had a tilt at GSK’s consumer health venture, but Unilever’s £50bn offer was rejected as too low by GSK and drew fury from shareholders, forcing the group to abandon its interest last week. The outspoken fund manager Terry Smith, the founder of Fundsmith and one of Unilever’s top shareholders, described the failed offer as a “near-death experience” and said management should focus on improving its core business – or step down. He had previously declared that Unilever had “lost the plot”, accusing management of pursuing sustainability at the expense of business performance. As the furore built, Unilever rushed out a strategy update on 17 January in which it promised to grow its health, beauty and hygiene business and sell slower-growing operations. When asked at the time whether the plan included job cuts, Jope said: “This is not driven by cost. We’ve seen tremendous step-ups in Unilever’s speed and agility during the pandemic.” Unilever said on Tuesday the company would be reorganised around five areas: beauty &amp; wellbeing, personal care, home care, nutrition and ice-cream. Each business group will be fully responsible for their strategy, growth, and profit delivery globally. At the moment, its 400-plus brands operate in three divisions – beauty &amp; personal care, foods &amp; refreshment, and home care. The shake-up will split the food business into two divisions, which could pave the way for a partial sale. “This new business model will likely make a major divestment easier,” said James Edwardes Jones, analyst at RBC Capital Markets. “The fact [that] ‘nutrition’ includes fast-growing food segments such as plant-based and healthy snacks perhaps moves the divestment focus on to the slower-moving ice cream category.” “Our new organisational model has been developed over the last year and is designed to continue the step-up we are seeing in the performance of our business,” Jope said. “Moving to five category-focused business groups will enable us to be more responsive to consumer and channel trends, with crystal-clear accountability for delivery. Growth remains our top priority and these changes will underpin our pursuit of this.” Unilever announced some new appointments to its leadership team. The changes include Nitin Paranjpe, the chief operating officer, taking on a new role as chief transformation officer and chief people officer. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “The management team clearly want to show they are getting the house in order before embarking on another shopping spree, given how badly the bid was received. “Shares rose initially on news of the clear-out, but have lost ground, with some investors not satisfied that cost cutting alone will be enough to ensure Unilever turns a corner. Customer loyalty is still a big asset for Unilever, and it’s been working to build a volume-led business, but with the cost of living squeeze intensifying there is a risk pricier products will struggle to shift. So clearly more clarity is being demanded about the direction ahead, and Alan Jope is still under pressure to come up with a brand new strategy.” The shares were slightly lower at £39.40 on Tuesday afternoon. A year ago, they changed hands at £44.65.Serbian authorities have extradited a Bahraini dissident in cooperation with Interpol despite an injunction by the European court of human rights, in the first test for the international policing organisation under the presidency of a top Emirati security official. Authorities in Belgrade approved the extradition of Ahmed Jaafar Mohamed Ali to Bahrain earlier this week. Days earlier the ECHR had issued an injunction saying the extradition should be postponed until after 25 February to allow Serbian authorities time to provide more information to the court, which was responding to a request by the Belgrade Centre for Human Rights to consider Ali’s case. The court also asked for further evidence from the Serbian authorities about the case and warned that failure to comply meant that Serbia risked breaching the European convention on human rights. Ali’s lawyers claimed that a judge in Belgrade informed the Serbian authorities and Interpol about the ruling last Sunday. He was extradited to Bahrain in the early hours of Monday morning on a charter flight by Royal Jet, a private Emirati airline headed by a member of the ruling family of Abu Dhabi. The Bahraini interior ministry hailed Ali’s deportation as a “joint operation between member countries of the International Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol)” and said he was “arrested after coordination and communication with a friendly country”. Ali’s extradition represents the first case of its kind since Maj Gen Ahmed Naser al-Raisi, a leading Emirati security official, was elected to the presidency of Interpol. Raisi, who oversaw the Emirati detention system, was accused by former detainees of complicity in torture amid growing concern that his election could also embolden authoritarian regimes’ abuse of Interpol’s structures to arrest dissidents overseas. Earlier this month a complaint containing new allegations of torture was filed against Raisi in France after he visited Interpol’s headquarters in Lyon for the first time as president. None of the complaints have resulted in any formal proceedings against the general. Interpol is a supranational police force providing investigational support to its member states, including sharing information on suspects via its red notice system. Its critics have accused the organisation of allowing anti-democratic regimes to abuse the red notice system by flagging political dissidents for arrest. “The fact that Interpol proceeded with this extradition to Bahrain despite knowing they were violating a direct decision from the European court of human rights prohibiting Ahmed’s return sends a devastating message that, under al-Raisi’s leadership, red lines will be crossed,” said Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei of the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy. “This scandal has unfolded on his watch, and Interpol will now be complicit in any abuse faced by Ali.” Ali was arrested in Belgrade in November on the basis of a red notice issued in 2015 at the request of Bahrain. He previously sought asylum in Serbia fearing that he would be tortured on return, as he personally described in a 2010 report by Human Rights Watch on the use of torture in the kingdom. The 48-year-old was sentenced to life in prison in absentia in 2013 for alleged terrorist activities including bomb-making. Rights groups have accused the Bahraini authorities of using similar charges against anti-government protesters in order to suppress dissent following mass protests that gripped Bahrain in 2011. Ali was also named in 2015 as one of 10 defendants in a separate case over the killing of an Emirati police officer, where three of his co-defendants were executed by firing squad two years later. The UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial killings, Agnés Callamard, and special rapporteur on torture, Nils Melzer, accused the Bahraini authorities of relying on false confessions and evidence obtained under torture in the case, as well as denying the accused access to legal assistance. Callamard later condemned the executions as “extrajudicial killings”, after what she called an “unfair trial and flimsy evidence”. A spokesperson for the Bahraini government said Ali was not at risk of mistreatment. “As with all inmates in Bahrain, he will have his legal rights guaranteed and will be able to pursue proceedings in accordance with due legal process,” they said. When contacted about Ali’s case, an Interpol spokesperson said that decisions about extradition and arrests are the responsibility of domestic authorities. “Extradition is a bilateral matter between member countries and Interpol is not involved in this process,” they said. “The Interpol general secretariat was not informed of either the individual’s arrest or the extradition ruling by Serbian authorities. Please note also, no individual member of the executive committee, including the president, has any involvement or influence in the decision-making process to publish or cancel a red notice.” The Serbian Ministry of Justice, which approved the extradition, and Royal Jet have been approached for comment.Name: Middle-age spread. Age: 40+. Appearance: Doughy, wrinkled, overspilling. You mean old and fat? It comes to us all, inevitably. Speak for yourself. I just joined a gym and lost 50 pounds. You lost 50 pounds by going to the gym? No, that’s how much I spent. I haven’t actually been inside the gym. That was also sort of inevitable. I guess I’m just doomed to spend my later years being overweight and in ill-health. One or the other, maybe, but not necessarily both. What does that mean? You might be genetically disposed toward favourable adiposity. I see. What does that mean? It means you could be OK, provided your middle-age spread is spread right. According to a new study, some obese people are much healthier than others, depending on where they store fat. In the fridge? On your person, they mean. Oh. I suppose it’s a sort of saddlebag arrangement. Why does it matter? The study suggested that obese subjects who stored fat mostly under the skin were better off than those with an identical BMI who stored fat predominantly in the liver and the pancreas. How can I make sure all my fat is in the right place? You can’t. According to Dr Hanieh Yaghootkar, who led the research, “Some people have unlucky fat genes, meaning they store higher levels of fat everywhere, including under the skin, liver and pancreas.” What about under my chin? That’s quite far away from my liver. If you’ve got favourable adiposity, you’re at lower risk of 12 obesity-related diseases, including type 2 diabetes, coronary disease and stroke. That’s it – I’m waddling down to that gym tomorrow and demanding my money back. Not so fast – for some conditions, obesity increases your risk no matter where the fat is stored. These include rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis, gallstones, psoriasis and deep vein thrombosis. But still, middle-age spread is genetic; it’s just my metabolism slowing down. That’s not true – a study published in Science last year showed that your metabolism peaks at the age of one, but stays relatively stable from 20 to about 60. You mean this double chin is my fault? There may be larger societal forces at work. I’ll take that as a yes. I’m sorry. Do say: “It doesn’t matter what you look like on the outside, as long as you’re healthy on the inside.” Don’t say: “There’s just more of me to love; unfortunately, it’s tightly packed around my liver.”The west has been fixated for more than two months on Russian preparations to mount a new land invasion of Ukraine. Except, it hasn’t happened – and it’s not likely to happen, at least in the form that’s most commonly imagined. Russia has used the bright, shiny object of an obvious troop concentration to panic the west into considering seriously its demands for rolling back Nato. But by focusing on the wrong problem, and joining in negotiations on Russia’s terms, the US and Nato have fallen for a massive strategic deception operation. By all accounts Russia’s preparations for conflict are genuine. But then, they have to be. When it conducted a dry run for the current deployments last year, Russia saw how foreign analysts swiftly discounted the likelihood of a major assault because they saw forces had not arrived with essential materiel, such as medical supplies or ammunition, or the support elements necessary to mount and sustain combat operations. This time Russia has made sure they are there, and visible. And Russia is continuing to move troops westwards in order to keep up the pressure on western decision-makers. That’s led to a view that the deployment cannot be just for show, since it is “too big not to be used”. But that misses the point that it already has been used – it is precisely this concentration of Russian troops that has brought the US to the table to talk about what Russia wants. And away from the immediate and explicit demands tied to the troop buildup, Russia has achieved other, secondary, objectives. Issues previously at the front of western minds, such as Russia’s occupation of Crimea and continuing ceasefire violations in eastern Ukraine, have been swept aside by more urgent concerns over imminent escalation. This isn’t even the first time Russia has done this. After the seizure of Crimea in 2014, Russia caused surprise with the speed and effectiveness with which it moved large numbers of its land forces to the border with Ukraine. But the main role of those forces throughout most of 2015 was to sit on the border, augmenting and depleting as required, in order to focus the attention of the west and provide the menace to reinforce Russia’s demands for a flawed and unworkable “ceasefire”. It’s true there are a number of well-argued and highly plausible scenarios for land operations against Ukraine. But each of them presents Russia with significant challenges. A limited-scale operation brings no benefits Russia doesn’t already have, while a full-on onslaught designed to take and hold Ukrainian territory is considered beyond the reach of the force currently assembled. In the most recent statements from the US, firm responses to Russia are promised in the form of severe economic sanctions and military reinforcement of Europe – but if, and only if, Russia mounts a land invasion of Ukraine. That’s another powerful incentive for Russia to do something different instead. In fact, the the approach the US has taken seems to completely disregard the wide range of options for hostile action by Russia that don’t actually involve invading anywhere. The option of cross-border strikes using air, missile or cyber power remains on the table. But even then, the UK’s public naming of individuals said to be earmarked by Russia as a puppet government for installation in Kyiv shows that conventional military forces are only part of the story. Subversion, sabotage and deniable operations to disrupt and destabilise the target country are other tempting means for Russia to make its displeasure felt. And Ukraine may not even be the target. If Russia believes any of its own propaganda, President Putin thinks that what he is confronting in Ukraine is not Ukrainians but the west. And Russia’s demands are aimed at Nato and the US, not Ukraine itself. What that means is that any Russian action intended to step up the pressure may be directed elsewhere, and non-Nato European states farther afield may be at risk of deniable damage or disruption. Finland is a hard target. Sweden has demonstrated its readiness. And Ireland, recently the target of unwelcome Russian attention, is anticipating Russian naval exercises in its exclusive economic zone (EEZ) at the beginning of February – Irish parliamentarians have pointed to the sensitive location for the live-fire drills, saying Russia deliberately chose it for proximity to shipping lanes, flight paths and subsea cables. When considering the full range of Russia’s options, it’s essential to think not only outside the box but also outside Ukraine. None of this means that defensive assistance to Ukraine is wasted. Supplies of essential arms and equipment are reducing the likelihood of a ground incursion still further. And regardless of its intent, for as long as Russia has the capability poised to move on Ukraine, precautionary measures such as evacuating embassy staff from Kyiv are prudent. And there’s always scope for all-out war after a catastrophic error of judgment by Russia. Despite caricatures of Vladimir Putin as a wily strategist anticipating his opponents’ every move by simultaneously playing judo and chess, the ruling elite in Moscow is no more immune to miscalculations and self-inflicted injuries than others around the world. But for now, officials in Kyiv point out that responding to Russian threats with “panic” only serves Moscow’s interests. Early concerns that Russia would mount a hostile demonstration in order to force the pace of negotiations have not been borne out. Instead of Putin delivering his promised “military-technical response”, the process has dragged on, with its economic cost steadily mounting. Russia may soon feel it needs to make its move, but we shouldn’t expect that move to be the one everybody is waiting for. Keir Giles works with the Russia and Eurasia programme of Chatham House. He is the author of Moscow Rules: What Drives Russia to Confront the WestA former Irish soldier accused of joining Islamic State was prepared to die a martyr, a court in Dublin has heard. Lisa Smith, 39, from Dundalk, County Louth, has pleaded not guilty to being a member of the terrorist organisation between October 2015 and December 2019. Opening the case on Tuesday in the special criminal court, the prosecutor, Sean Gillane, said the former Irish Defence Forces soldier had “enveloped” herself in the “black flag of Islamic State” and had “tried to access Islamic State-controlled territory and sought out the means in which this could be done”. The court was told she had gone to the self-declared IS caliphate in 2015, where she married and had a child. Gillane said she then fled with the group as it lost territory before eventually ending up in a refugee camp, from where she was repatriated and subsequently arrested on arrival in Ireland. The prosecutor said the case against Smith was not about religion, and that she was not accused of using arms during her time in Syria. He said that membership of the organisation could be adduced by her association, state of mind and allegiance to the IS leadership. The court was told Smith had converted to Islam in 2011 and left the Irish forces after being refused permission to wear a hijab. Gillane said she became an administrator on an online group called We hear, we obey, which hosted online discussions about jihad and women’s obligations. The court was told she lied to her family about her trip to Raqqa in Syria. The case is expected to continue for 12 weeks. Smith has also pleaded not guilty to financing IS by sending €800 by Western Union money transfer to a named person in 2015.Descendants of the last king of Italy have made their first formal request to reclaim the crown jewels, which for almost 76 years have been stashed in a treasure chest in a safety deposit box at the Bank of Italy amid a long-running mystery over their ownership. The bank took delivery of the jewels, comprising more than 6,000 diamonds and 2,000 pearls mounted on brooches and necklaces worn by various queens and princesses, on 5 June 1946, three days after Italians voted to abolish the monarchy and nine days before King Umberto II, who ruled for just 34 days, was banished into exile along with his male heirs. Umberto II had tasked Falcone Lucifero, the minister of the Royal House, to bring the jewels to Luigi Einaudi, the then governor of Bank of Italy who later became president, for safekeeping. The jewels are said to have been the only part of the royal estate that were not confiscated by the Italian state after the monarchy was scrapped, an element that might help the descendants of the House of Savoy, including Umberto II’s son, Vittorio Emanuele di Savoia, and three daughters, Maria Gabriella, Maria Pia and Maria Beatrice, win back possession. The family is also hoping that a cryptic note delivered alongside the treasure chest, which said the “precious” crown jewels must be “entrusted to the custody of the central cashier” and “kept at the disposal of those who have right”, will help determine that the jewels belong to them and not the state. Sergio Orlandi, the family’s lawyer, told the Corriere della Sera newpaper: “The Savoy family will get the jewels back.” The first “mediation meeting” between Orlandi and representatives of the Bank of Italy and the Italian government to discuss the family’s claim is taking place on Tuesday. If the parties fail to reach a solution, the family will proceed with suing the state in their attempt to repossess the jewels, according to Corriere. An informal request was already rejected by the Bank of Italy in November. “The [request for] return cannot be accepted, taking into account the responsibilities of the depositary,” lawyers for the bank reportedly said. Until now, the family had never taken any formal action to repossess the jewels over fears they might fuel a wave of resentment. It wasn’t until 2002 that the male descendants of the House of Savoy were allowed to reenter Italy. Before returning from exile in Switzerland in 2003, Vittorio Emanuele said he would not lay claim to the crown jewels, adding that “they are no longer ours”. However, he hoped the jewels would be put on public display. In 2006, a politician in the Piedmont region reached out to Mario Draghi, Italy’s current prime minister who at the time was governor of the Bank of Italy, asking if the jewels could be displayed at an exhibition being held as part of the winter Olympic Games in Turin, the northern Italian city that hosted the royal palace. Draghi in turn asked the government, but the jewels were never displayed. Another factor that could support the family’s case is that the jewels are said to have been either given as gifts to various royals or were personal purchases, as opposed to being given to the family to wear for official functions over the years of the monarchy. It is unclear how much the gems are worth, although wildly disparate estimates of €18m and €300m have been given in the past. Umberto II spent his exile years in Portugal, never setting foot in Italy again. He died aged 78 in Geneva, where he was being treated for cancer, in 1983.Doctors have discovered an “antibody signature” that can help identify patients most at risk of developing long Covid, a condition where debilitating symptoms of the disease can persist for many months. Researchers at University hospital Zurich analysed blood from Covid patients and found that low levels of certain antibodies were more common in those who developed long Covid than in patients who swiftly recovered. When combined with the patient’s age, details of their Covid symptoms and whether or not they had asthma, the antibody signature allowed doctors to predict whether people had a moderate, high or very high risk of developing long-term illness. “Overall, we think that our findings and identification of an immunoglobulin signature will help early identification of patients that are at increased risk of developing long Covid, which in turn will facilitate research, understanding and ultimately targeted treatments for long Covid,” said Onur Boyman, a professor of immunology who led the research. The team studied 175 people who tested positive for Covid and 40 healthy volunteers who acted as a control group. To see how their symptoms changed over time, doctors followed 134 of the Covid patients for up to a year after their initial infection. When Covid strikes, IgM antibodies ramp up rapidly, while IgG antibodies rise later and provide longer-term protection. Blood tests on the participants showed that those who developed long Covid – also known as post-acute Covid-19 syndrome (Pacs) – tended to have low levels of IgM and the antibody IgG3. The scientists combined the antibody signature with the patient’s age, whether they had asthma and details of their symptoms to produce a long Covid risk score. To confirm that the score was useful, they ran the test on a separate group of 395 Covid patients that had been followed up for six months. The test cannot predict a person’s risk of long Covid before they are infected because details of their symptoms are needed, but Dr Carlo Cervia, the first author on the study, said people with asthma and low IgM and IgG3 levels beforehand could assume they were at an increased risk. “This is expected to improve care for long Covid patients as well as motivate high-risk groups, such as asthmatic patients, to get vaccinated and thus prevent long Covid,” Cervia said. The research is published in Nature Communications. Although there is no effective cure for long Covid, being able to work out who is most at risk could help doctors direct patients to clinical trials for long Covid therapies and arrange early rehabilitation. Better control of the infection through antibody treatments, antivirals and anti-inflammatory drugs, may all help to reduce the risk and vaccines can sometimes alleviate long Covid symptoms, but more studies are needed. Another hope is that early identification of long Covid patients will help doctors work out what causes the condition in particular people. Researchers have proposed several possible drivers, from long-term damage wrought by the virus to a misfiring immune system and pockets of virus hiding out in the body. Dr Claire Steves, a clinical senior lecturer at King’s College London, welcomed the work but said it was important to replicate the findings in a larger number of patients. With cases still high, she added, many more people were at risk of developing long-term symptoms. “We urgently need to scale up research on how to prevent this happening,” she said. Dr David Strain, a clinical senior lecturer at the University of Exeter medical school and the British Medical Association’s lead on long Covid, said the study was a step towards better understanding long Covid. The antibody signature identified by the Swiss researchers was similar to that seen in myalgic encephalomyelitis, or ME, he said, a condition that affects a quarter of a million people across the UK. “Further comparisons between these diseases may allow mutual benefit and cross-pollination of ideas as the learnings from each benefit the other,” he said.Like a sad, greedy king in some fairytale or parable, the Georgian billionaire and former prime minister Bidzina Ivanishvili set out, six years ago, to buy and uproot hundreds of magnificent mature trees and transport them at colossal expense and difficulty across Georgia to be transplanted in his own huge private garden. It sometimes involves taking a tree by water, along the Black Sea coast – a truly surreal image. Salomé Jashi’s fascinating and deadpan film shows, in a series of tableau-type shots, the effect that these purchases are having up and down the land. Local workers squabble among themselves at the dangerous, strenuous, but nonetheless lucrative job of digging them up. The landowners and communities brood on the sizeable sums of money they are getting paid and Ivanishvili’s promises that roads will also be built. But at the moment of truth, they are desolate when the Faustian bargain must be settled and the huge, ugly haulage trucks come to take their trees away in giant “pots” of earth, as if part of their natural soul is being confiscated. (Surely at least some of these trees will have died en route, although this is not revealed.) Whole villages are clearly in the throes of emotions they cannot understand: angry, upset, yet also weirdly elated at the undoubtedly extraordinary spectacle that they have facilitated – a Birnam Wood coming to Ivanishvili’s exclusive Dunsinane. Transporting these trees is a Fitzcarraldo-type operation: a folie de grandeur of staggering proportions. And finally, far from the remote villages from which the trees have been abducted, sometimes in darkness (perhaps to avoid mass protests from those suffering seller’s remorse) we see the strange private garden that the oligarch has built, with its trees and manicured lawns. The whole country is the real garden which he has attempted to subdue, reducing it to the tamed sterility of private property. • Taming the Garden is released on 28 January in cinemas and on digital platforms.One Big Bag is a portrait of a young death doula: a holistic carer who tends to the wishes of a dying individual and assists their family after they die. In the film, made by US artist Every Ocean Hughes, a young woman details the contents of her “corpse kit”, while the items hang by strings from the ceiling at the respective heights of their use on the body. The list is prosaic but revelatory, comforting and unsettling: glue to seal wounds and tampons to plug orifices; snacks for the living who forget to eat; ice to chill, but – careful – not to freeze. The doula considers the items closely, but adds mysterious choreography, rhythmically pounding her fists on her body, slamming her thighs against the ground and marching around the space with spiritual fervour. Shown alongside an installation of the suspended items, One Big Bag marks a shift into direct, material work from an artist previously known for abstraction. Hughes appears over Zoom from her home in Stockholm, a kind and effusive presence with a cropped bob and fantastic hexagonal brown glasses. Caring for her beloved grandmother Enid Hughes at the end of her life set her on this path, she explains, though at first she spent a year thinking she might never make art again. She still worked as an art professor but craved a more tangible skill. “I have a lot of friends who are incredible activists and I thought, ‘What’s my service?’ Then I thought, ‘Actually, I can do this: I can not turn away. I can look at death, and the processes around death.’” Born Emily Roysdon, Hughes changed her name in tribute to her grandmother and Enid’s love of the sea. Her death also inspired Hughes to attend end-of-life doula training on the west coast of the US in 2018, which she calls a deep and intimate experience. It’s a growing area: End of Life Doula UK currently has 220 registered members and acknowledges other UK practitioners outside the organisation. While Hughes hasn’t yet practised, she considers it part of her “long-term apprenticeship to death” – one that started when her childhood best friend died aged nine. Her subsequent best friend died when Hughes was 15. “I don’t even think I can begin to limit the impact it had on me,” says Hughes, who was raised in Maryland. “It gave me a strong backbone and some resilience but it also shut me down. I was quite emotionally repressed for the longest time.” She connects the abstraction of her previous works to “learning to survive in my head. I became an intellectual and I was much less attached to anything from the neck down.” Finding a queer community helped her break through that repression. People generally think of queer culture in relation to coming out and sexual politics, says Hughes, “and surely that’s present. But for me it was also encountering a political community of people who have experienced grief and trauma.” She found it at hippie Hampshire College in Massachusetts, where she made friends with such feminist artists and zine-makers as K8 Hardy. Later, in New York, she met JD Samson, who would go on to join feminist punk bands Le Tigre and Men. Samson became her first girlfriend and got a tattoo of Hughes’s face on her arm – after they broke up. These experiences, plus discovering David Wojnarowicz’s famous photograph of Peter Hujar as he was dying, “opened this door to art and grief and queer culture”. One Big Bag has a particular resonance in the Covid era, when many families have been forced to watch loved ones die over video call, but Hughes actually started developing the work in 2019. “I didn’t want to then turn it into pandemic work,” she says. “But of course, the context is profoundly changed. The whole world is confronting death every single day in a way that you can’t turn away from.” She would rather frame One Big Bag in the context of “queer death”, an emerging area of study. For Hughes, this means self-determination “for people who are dying to think about the fact that this is their experience”. Lindsay Rico, who plays the death doula, describes the importance of different hair braids in death preparation, and how a death doula for an LGBTQ+ person may have to defend their wishes to relatives and the healthcare and death industries to make sure their identity is respected. Watching One Big Bag filled me with a strange relief at the doula’s capability and an understanding of a good death as the ultimate form of respect – one that the living might learn from. Hughes agrees. “If you can connect to somebody in respect for their life and their ability to self-determine their death, then you should be able to do that in life as well.” Naturally, agency isn’t an option with sudden deaths – and nor does it reach equally across racial and economic divides. “Making this work is not only about a ‘good death’ but about public deaths, about the news, about policy.” During her research, Hughes studied the extraordinary history of Black funeral homes, which played a crucial role during the civil rights movement, offering hearses and cars to move leaders around the South discreetly and becoming a place for activists to gather. “Then that becomes a political site – meetings around organising and communities were happening in funeral homes. During the pandemic, she took long walks and listened to an audiobook of The Five Invitations by Frank Ostaseski about what death can teach us about living. “I finally did experience joy about my grief and my experiences,” she says. Instead of feeling “heavy and sad” about her earliest childhood friend, “I finally had this moment where I was grateful for ever having had the relationship and for him having put me on this path.” The accessibility of this project has been a revelation. “With grief and dying,” she says, “people lose control. What moves me the most is this element of not knowing and letting go. You can only be present. If there’s a place to learn the lesson about letting go in life, this is the moment.” She laughs. “You cannot control it.” One Big Bag is at Studio Voltaire, London, 28 January to 17 AprilWhat some call science fiction, I prefer to call science possible or sometimes science probable. One branch of sci-fi is based on imagined technological or scientific advances, and major social or environmental changes. It was that branch that I embraced when I wrote Pig Heart Boy. I loved the idea of exploring xenotransplantation through the eyes of Cameron, a 13-year-old boy with a bad heart who just wants to live. I found the whole notion of transplanting organs from one species into another fascinating and the perfect subject matter for a children’s book. Now I hasten to add that I’m not a scientist or expert on xenotransplantation, nor do I claim to be. I’m a layperson with a love of science who occasionally reads science magazines. My approach was from an author’s angle, spending months on research before writing a single word. So where did I get the idea? Whenever I attend a literary or school event, that question is invariably asked. For Pig Heart Boy, the answer is simple. Back in the mid 1990s, I read a newspaper article written by a doctor who speculated that we would eventually have to turn to xenotransplantation as a possible solution to the lack of human organ donors. The article considered the pros and cons of mechanical hearts versus xenotransplantation, and suggested that for xenotransplantation to be successful, gene editing would have to be employed. This would mean the introduction of human DNA into animal embryos to reduce the chance of organ rejection. For the recent pig heart transplant that took place on 7 January, scientists also altered 10 genes in the donor pig, again to lessen the chance of the heart being rejected. And if the bio-sealed environment in which the pigs live allows them to lead a reasonable free-range life, does that mitigate the fact that these genetically modified animals are being purposely bred as organ donors? In the case of heart transplants, for a human to live a pig must die. Of course, every year approximately 10 million pigs are bred and slaughtered in the UK for their meat alone. When I read that article in the 1990s, it left my mind buzzing with questions. What were the ramifications? Do we really have the right to treat animals as mere organ repositories for humans? Is it OK because they are already farmed for food? So I headed to my nearest bookshop and bought all the books I could on heart transplants in particular, and transplant operations in general. I’ve found questions are one of the best places to start from when writing a novel. In my story Cameron, who needs a heart transplant, knows he is unlikely to see his next birthday unless he receives one, but he is a long way down the waiting list. When a genetically modified pig’s heart is offered by a pioneering doctor, Cameron decides to go for it – and his new heart completely changes his life in unexpected ways. Now some people might think that the subject matter is not suitable for children. I completely disagree. As a children’s author, it never ceases to amaze me how some adults underestimate what subject matter will interest and stimulate children and teens. I wanted to write a story that provided no right or wrong answers, but which would provide food for thought and discussion. A story that would allow the reader to walk in Cameron’s shoes for a while and think about what decisions they would make and how they would react if they too were faced with his dilemma. I believe the best stories encourage children to think for themselves. Fictional stories that explore new ideas when it comes to STEM subjects also have a part to play in enriching our children’s reading and learning. Various studies have shown that reading fiction enhances our children’s ability to grasp new concepts and as such has cross-curriculum benefits. Pig Heart Boy was my attempt to incorporate science possible into a believable, thought-provoking story. So now that science fiction has become science fact, do I feel that maybe the time is right to return to Cameron and his family in a sequel? Watch this space …The fire that ripped through Glasgow School of Art’s Mackintosh building in 2018 was so fierce and all-consuming that the cause can never be known conclusively, according to a long-awaited report. The art school said it “shared the frustration” that the exact cause of the fire, which destroyed the iconic Grade A-listed building as it neared the end of a £35m restoration project following an earlier blaze in May 2014, had not been identified in the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service (SFRS) report, published on Tuesday. The report stated that, after the most complex and resource-intensive investigation ever undertaken by the service, involving more than 172 weeks of excavation and examination of hundreds of tonnes of debris along with careful analysis of witness testimonies, CCTV and photographic footage, the cause of the fire has been recorded as “undetermined”. But it also noted that wilful fire raising and electrical failure could not be “fully discounted”. Paul Sweeney, Scottish Labour MSP for Glasgow and board member of the Glasgow City Heritage Trust, said he was “appalled” at the time taken for progress to be made both on the investigation and restoration plans, adding that the report was “hardly worth the wait and tells us nothing we couldn’t have deduced from a cursory glance at aerial photographs”. According to the report, the building was so badly damaged by the fire that complex engineering works had to be carried out initially to stabilise and make safe the remaining structure before investigators could access the site. They discovered that much of the physical evidence which could have provided clues, such as the Fire Warning System (FWS) control panel and the CCTV hard drive, had been so badly damaged that they could provide no data. An investigation into the May 2014 fire, which reported in November that year, found that the first blaze began when flammable gases from a foam canister used in a student project were ignited. In September 2018, three months after the second fire, a Holyrood inquiry heard criticism of “systemic failures” on the part of the art school’s management. Penny Macbeth, director of the Glasgow School of Art and Kristen Bennie, interim chair of the GSA board of governors, said that they “share the frustration that many will feel that the exact cause of the fire has not been identified”, but thanked the SFRS for its “meticulous” approach. They added that the report was an important milestone in the progress of their Mackintosh Project, outlined last October, which will see the “faithful reinstatement” of the Mack building, although it is not expected to be back in use for at least six years. Sweeney urged the GSA to act quickly now: “Three years on and it is still not clear when are contracts going to be awarded, is it financed, will the insurance pay out, are we appointing people to get this back on track? “This is the single biggest disaster to hit Scotland’s built heritage in a century and lack of pace and grip shown by the authorities from the School of Art itself to the Scottish government has been nothing short of disgraceful.”At least four people have died and dozens are missing after strong winds and heavy downpours wreaked havoc in Malawi and Mozambique as Tropical Storm Ana made landfall on Monday. Almost 16,000 people in the south of Malawi have been affected, according to the Red Cross, as search and rescue operations continue after the first cyclone of the region’s season. At least two people were killed and 66 injured in Mozambique on Monday and a further two people died on Tuesday in Malawi. Felix Washon of the Malawi Red Cross Society said people were sheltering in schools-turned-evacuation centres as the organisation rushed to provide survivors with basic necessities, including shelter, food, kitchen utensils, water buckets and washing facilities such as toilets and clean water, adding that they are running short on supplies. “The rains are still coming and the water levels are still rising, meaning more people are going to be affected. Roads are impassable and there are fears that some places might not be reachable,” he said. Heavy flooding has forced the main hydropower supplier to shut down, and much of the country is still without electricity. The Electricity Generation Company of Malawi said in a statement: “We are experiencing flash floods in the power station. As such, we have been forced to shut down some machines to protect the intake structure from damage.” Eveness Masanjala, 47, who lives in Mulanje, southern Malawi, was forced to run with her children on Monday evening when water surrounded her house. Along with dozens of others, she is now being given shelter by neighbouring villagers. “The water just came abruptly and I managed to grab my children and run,” she said. “I’m not sure what remains in the house as it’s submerged in the water. There is fertiliser, poultry, cash for farming and everything.” Dr Victor Mithi, president of Malawi’s Society of Medical Doctors, said the electricity blackout is dangerous. “At the moment most hospitals don’t have power apart from those that depend on fuel. If you think of all the small health centres and small community hospitals – they completely don’t have any source of power. This is very dangerous because if you think of patients that need oxygen therapy, they cannot be assisted. Those babies born prematurely may not be in proper nursery care because there is no power. Drugs that have to be kept at a specific temperature may not be there. We’re not sure when this might end, but we might lose lives.” The Malawi Department of Disaster Management Affairs said on Tuesday that the cyclone made landfall over Nampula province in Mozambique the day before, after crossing from Madagascar. “Councils are conducting assessments to establish the extent of damage and assisting all those in need. Meanwhile, the department has deployed a search and rescue team,” said a statement by Charles Kalemba, Malawi’s commissioner for disaster management. The Department of Climate Change and Meteorological Services advised Malawians to move to higher ground and avoid crossing flooded rivers and streams. Southern African countries have been repeatedly struck by severe storms and cyclones in recent years, which experts say are worsening as waters warm due to the climate emergency.Olavo de Carvalho, the coronavirus-denying mentor of Jair Bolsonaro and Brazil’s radical right, has died in the United States, with one of his children citing Covid-19 as the cause. “The family … asks for prayers for the professor’s soul,” relatives said on Twitter after announcing the death of the 74-year-old polemicist – a towering figure in contemporary Brazilian politics who was adored and abhorred in equal measure by millions of followers and foes. The statement did not say how Carvalho – a former astrologer who repeatedly trivialized Covid as the “moronavirus” – had died. However, his estranged daughter, Heloísa de Carvalho, said coronavirus was the cause. “He has blood on his hands,” she told the magazine Veja, blaming her father’s “denialist ideas” and dissemination of fake news for the Brazilian government’s delay in purchasing Covid vaccines. “But I do not celebrate his death.” Bolsonaro – whose shock 2018 election was turbocharged by Carvalho’s extreme and often expletive-ridden teachings – lamented the loss of “one of the greatest thinkers in our country’s history” and declared a national day of mourning. “Olavo was a … beacon for millions of Brazilians,” Brazil’s ultraconservative president claimed. The president’s son, Eduardo, also celebrated the pipe-smoking septuagenarian whose influence was such that he reputedly named several members of Bolsonaro’s cabinet despite having lived in the US since 2005. Progressive Brazilians – disgusted by the leading role they claim Carvalho played in poisoning their country’s social and political life and spreading life-threatening misinformation about Covid – rejected such eulogies. Before his death Carvalho continually minimized coronavirus – which has killed nearly 625,000 Brazilians and 5.6 million people globally – peddled conspiracies about its origins, and attacked those trying to slow its spread. It is unclear if he had been vaccinated. In May 2020, as Covid pummeled South America, Carvalho tweeted: “The fear of a supposedly deadly virus is nothing more than a little horror story designed to scare the population and make them accept slavery as they would a present from Father Christmas.” Carvalho branded containment measures “the most enormous and sordid crime ever committed against the entire human species” and once alleged the global health emergency “simply doesn’t exist”. On another occasion he said only “a perfect fool” would believe the spread of the “Chinese virus” was accidental. “Does the moronavirus really kill people or does he just help them become statistics?” he wondered last January as Brazil’s death toll rose to over 200,000. When Twitter deleted one of Carvalho’s posts for violating its rules on spreading harmful or misleading information about Covid, he told the company’s then president Jack Dorsey: “You can stick your network up your” buttocks. Felipe Neto, one of Brazil’s top online influencers, tweeted: “The far right will now try to turn Olavo de Carvalho into a martyr, a hero. Olavo is one of the main culprits for the sea of mud into which we have sunk.” Journalist André Fran wrote: “My condolences to all those whose relatives have fallen victim to the Bolsonarista hatred and denialism that Olavo did so much to a disseminate.” Carvalho’s daughter also had harsh words for her father, who was reportedly diagnosed with Covid on 16 January. “May God forgive him all the evil he has done,” she tweeted, recalling losing a friend to Covid on the day her father falsely claimed the world had not seen a single confirmed death. “She was a widow and left three orphaned children under the age of 10.” Brian Winter, a Brazil specialist who interviewed Carvalho at his rifle-filled Virginia home, said Bolsonaro’s guru had helped import “a kind of tropicalized Fox News culture focused on gender, guns and anti-globalism”. Winter said during the first decade of this century – as Brazil flourished under the leftist government of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva – Carvalho was widely considered a “crazy crank”. However, during the 2010s, as the country sank into profound recession and political turmoil, his intellectual-sounding “profanity-laced vitriol” against the left suddenly gained traction. Bookshops sold hundreds of thousands of copies of his most famous work, The Least You Must Know to Avoid Being an Idiot – a tome Bolsonaro promoted after winning power. Winter remembered first seeing Carvalho’s name at a 2013 anti-government protest on a poster reading: “Olavo was right.” “He and Bolsonaro were products of the titanic trauma that Brazil endured during the 2010s: the worst recession in a hundred years, the collapse of the political establishment, corruption scandals everywhere you looked, 70,000 homicides a year. Out of this despair, he and Bolsonaro happened to emerge as the winners because they sounded so radically different from anything that happened before. That was their appeal.” Many believe that appeal is now fading, with former president Lula seemingly poised to trounce Bolsonaro in October’s election. “Part of the struggle Bolsonaro is having now is that he’s still going around talking about gun rights and gender and these other Olavista ideas in a Brazil where people just want solutions to the pandemic, hunger and unemployment,” Winter said. “Bolsonaro is playing the Olavista oldies and most Brazilians want to be hearing something else.”Cast members of the Netflix reality series Byron Baes have posted videos to social media of people dancing to live music at a crowded Byron Bay venue in apparent contravention of New South Wales Covid measures. Two of the show’s other stars have posted videos in the days after receiving positive Covid tests that appear to show them out in public. Covid case numbers in the northern NSW health district have exploded since December, and staff at hospitals serving the Byron Bay area have reported they are under “extreme strain”. On 10 January, two days after the NSW government reintroduced a ban on singing and dancing in hospitality venues, at least three cast members of the reality TV show about social influencers in the Byron Bay area – scheduled for broadcast later this year – were tagged in Instagram videos filmed at the night spot Casa Luna at a birthday party for one of the show’s stars, Hannah Brauer. Footage posted to social media on the night shows patrons dancing to music provided by a DJ. NSW public health orders introduced on 8 January ruled that hospitality venues must not allow singing and dancing on premises, other than by performers. Two of Brauer’s co-stars, social media influencer Jade Kevin Foster, who has more than 1.2m followers, and former Bachelorette star Nathan Favro, are also seen dancing and are tagged in the videos. Police confirmed they had received at least one report of an alleged breach of public health orders at the venue, but when officers attended the venue the following evening there appeared to be no breaches of Covid restrictions by either staff or patrons, a police spokesperson said. The investigation has been concluded without further action. Brauer posted videos of the event to Instagram the following day, and on 14 January asked her 7,685 followers on Instagram whether she was suffering a four-day hangover, or she had contracted the virus. On Sunday 17 January she posted: “Every day, pulling myself out of bed with Covid.” Brauer did not respond to a request for comment. On 13 January, Byron Baes cast member Elle Watson posted a video of what appeared to be a different dinner party at Casa Luna. Videos posted by Watson to Instagram show her standing among people who are dancing. Watson did not respond to questions about the videos. Casa Luna did not respond to a request for comment on whether the venue had complied with NSW health orders. On Wednesday Casa Luna began advertising an electronic music event scheduled for Saturday, to be held outdoors with another local venue. “One thing for sure rave is on!” the online promotion said. “Get your dancing shoes on, it’s gonna swing!” The cover charge for the event is $30 or $50 but a note at the bottom of the promotion suggests certain social media influencers may gain free entry. The promotion signs off with: “We are a Covid safe event”. After Guardian Australia approached Casa Luna for comment on why they were advertising an event involving dancing under the current ban, the venue announced on social media the event had been postponed due to “dancing restrictions applying to outdoor venues”. ‘Morally unconscionable’ As of 12 January, almost one in 10 people living in the Byron local government area had had a positive PCR test in the past three months. Figures from the northern NSW health district show that the northern rivers’ cases almost quadrupled from 306 new cases reported on 31 December to 1,154 on 7 January. The latest figures show 85.9% of people over 16 in the Byron shire are fully vaccinated, compared with the state average of 93.7%. Independent Byron shire councillor Cate Coorey said any instances of people openly flouting rules meant to help curb the spread of the virus would be “morally unconscionable”. Coorey said preventable cases of Covid were ending up in the region’s hospitals, which were already at capacity. “I feel particularly sorry for people with other illnesses who need to be at hospital or need to have surgery but are being sent to the bottom of the list or not getting the treatment they need,” she said. “Why would anyone be promoting an event that could likely worsen an already bad scenario?” ‘Covid shred’ Two other Byron Baes cast members posted their Covid-positive status on social media after attending a huge private New Year’s Eve party at a Newrybar property about 16km south of the Byron township. Such gatherings were permitted under NSW regulations at the time. The electronic dance duo Flight Facilities performed at the party and later posted on social media: “What a start to 22. Thank you for joining us to break the 21 hex, write CLAIMED in the comments if you got Covid and/or you broke your hex!” Dozens of people responded with “CLAIMED”. Among the more than 1,000 partygoers were Byron Baes cast members Dave Frim and Elias Chigros. Chigros told Guardian Australia he became infected within three days of the party. “Pretty much everyone who was out on New Year’s got it, there was a group of about 10 of us,” he said. On 2 January Chigros drove over the border to Queensland and posted images of himself partying on the Gold Coast the same night. Chigros said he had returned a negative rapid antigen test result before travelling to the Gold Coast and did not return a positive RAT until he returned to Byron Bay the following day, when he began isolation. It was another “two or three days” before he was able to obtain a PCR test, which confirmed his positive status, he said, a result which at the time required mandatory isolation for at least seven days from the date of the PCR test. But on 9 January, four days after the PCR test, Chigros posted a video on Instagram showing him in his car, heading out for a surf. “One week later finally leaving the house,” he said in the video. “I have to admit I have been doing some afternoon walks to try and keep somewhat fit.” Asked whether the video showed he had not followed NSW Covid isolation rules, Chigros said: “I have hours of archive footage I roll out depending on what I wish to promote on the day – such as training, beach days etc.” He did not confirm when the video was filmed. Asked how long he had isolated for, Chigros said he wasn’t sure whether the isolation began after the RAT or PCR test result. “But I just kind of waited until I was starting to be non-symptomatic and it was more than seven days from the RAT test before I started going out again and going to shop wherever else.” Chigros, who has previously described Covid-19 as “the flu”, told some media outlets last week he had just recovered from the virus and was delighted with the result, having lost several kilos while ill. The former Love Island star called it his “Covid shred” body. ‘I’m still alive’ Frim confirmed he first tested positive for Covid-19 with a rapid antigen test on 3 January. “I reckon it was definitely one of the New Year’s Eve parties I went to,” he said. Frim said both he and his partner, fellow Byron Baes cast member Saskia Wotton, were unvaccinated, but this did not concern him because “I’m still alive”. Videos posted to Instagram in the days after appear to show Frim isolating and receiving deliveries of food. On 7 January however, Frim posted a video showing himself out in public and maskless, saying he thought he was over the virus. “I’m fucking breaking free and going to wash my sins off down at the beach,” he said in the video. “I feel a bit wobbly but I’m gonna wash this thing out and have a test tomorrow and hopefully I’ll be negative.” Prior to 12 January, NSW Health advice was that a person who tested positive on a RAT “must immediately get a standard PCR test from your nearest testing clinic and self-isolate until you receive a negative result”. NSW Health orders were changed on 12 January to treat positive RAT results as an official diagnosis and require isolation immediately. The video shows Frim in a park near people, including children. Asked about the video, Frim terminated the interview and did not respond to further questions about when the video was filmed and whether he had been out in public while potentially infectious. Frim was also reluctant to discuss an Instagram post he uploaded on 6 January, in which he was holding a vial of ivermectin. In September the Therapeutic Goods Administration banned the prescription of the drug for off-label use after social media misinformation went viral about its unproven ability to fight Covid-19. “Where did I get it, is it legal?” Frim asked in the video. “I 100% fucking don’t know and I don’t care really what’s legal and not. “I don’t know if it’s gonna be the end of us but I feel like I’m dying anyway so may as well give it a go. “But if you do know someone that’s got it, it’s probably not a bad idea to grab some.” The TGA has warned that misinformation about ivermectin on social media could result in people administering dosages at a dangerous level, risking possible serious neurological side effects including seizures and coma. “I don’t want to go down that rabbit hole,” Frim said when asked why he was recommending a veterinary grade drug which the TGA had warned against. Netflix Australia declined to comment on any of the cast members’ posts. Breaking point Assistant secretary of Byron Central hospital’s Nurses and Midwives Association, Liz McCall, told Guardian Australia last week the hospital was at breaking point. It has just 43 beds, and the more serious Covid cases are transferred to Lismore Base hospital 47km away, which is also under severe pressure according to an association delegate there. McCall said she could not verify claims on social media from 11 January that four doctors and eight nurses employed by Byron hospital were off sick with Covid-19, but said the figures sounded accurate. “Like everywhere else, Byron is running on skeleton staff and now skeleton staff are a luxury. The government keeps saying we’re managing, but we’re not. We’re not managing at all,” McCall said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Rumours are rife in Byron that a number of “community immunity” parties were held late last year, where unvaccinated people attended to intentionally contract Covid in the belief it would naturally boost their immunity. There is no suggestion any cast members of the Byron Baes series were involved in these parties. Dr Joel Hissink, a GP at Bay Centre Medical, said he had no doubt the parties took place. “I’ve had a Covid-positive patient who told me they had been approached by other people who wanted to catch Covid, and my patient was asked to suck on boiled lollies so that they could be passed around at such a party,” he said. “I had another patient who told me she had decided to avoid going to the pub because she knew there were people in her broad friendship group who had tested positive and were going to the pub in order to deliberately spread it. “This is just criminal behaviour.” Nicqui Yazdi, who runs a Byron Bay page on Facebook promoting Covid safety, said she had been told about “at least three” of the parties, including one that took place at a property “about a week before Christmas”. “They partied all night, got into the spa together and gave each other Covid on purpose,” she said. “They all got sick, including a baby.”An aged care provider says it has “no faith” in the commonwealth’s supply of rapid tests after deliveries failed to show for almost three weeks after an outbreak, forcing it to withhold them from essential visitors and scramble unsuccessfully to procure its own. The government has repeatedly said it is prioritising its stocks of rapid tests to aged care facilities experiencing outbreaks. But the supply at St Basil’s Homes in South Australia, which runs three facilities in the state, is so precarious that the provider wrote to residents and their families last week, outlining its serious concerns about government supply and warning the tests were “like liquid gold”. The letter, seen by the Guardian, told families they would need to find their own tests or be barred entry. It also said the provider would be attempting to buy its own tests, which could then be purchased by visitors at cost price. Asked about the policy, St Basil’s chief executive, Michelle Church, said the lack of supply from government had forced its hand. “We did not and still don’t have confidence in the supply chain and certainly no faith in the commonwealth delivering on their promise made on the 23 December 2021 that they would supply free of charge RAT kits to all aged care providers,” Church told Guardian Australia. She said one of St Basil’s facilities had ordered 1,300 rapid tests from the national stockpile three weeks ago, after it was declared an outbreak site. The order still hasn’t shown up in full. The facility received a partial shipment of 600 tests on Friday. Instead, St Basil’s has had to ration limited supplies across its various facilities and prioritise them for its outbreak site. “We aren’t the only ones in this situation. I have had providers asking to borrow from us and certainly we have provided [masks] and gowns as these providers were critically short and were desperate,” she said. “We haven’t shared rapid antigen tests at this stage because we can’t risk our own supply.” The lack of faith in government supply has forced St Basil’s to attempt to bulk-buy its own rapid tests. So far, that effort has been unsuccessful. Church said other providers were also struggling to buy their own. The government this week said it had distributed more than 6m rapid tests to providers experiencing outbreaks. The industry peak body, Leading Age Services Australia, says the government was yet to fully commence proactive distribution of rapid antigen tests to providers not experiencing an outbreak, despite announcing plans to do so on 23 December. Spokesperson Sean Rooney said there was still “dire need” of RATs among many providers. It has also caused providers to restrict visitation, a measure that further isolates residents. One Adelaide man, whose parents are in a St Basil’s facility, said the lack of rapid tests had forced him to call off visits to his parents, who were extremely isolated due to Covid-19 restrictions. “St Basil’s has been good at getting them vaccinated and that sort of thing, but they’re finding it hard, they feel even more locked in than usual,” he said. “They can’t even leave their pod at the moment, they can’t do that, they can’t get visitors. They’re finding that isolation tough.” The lack of test supply is placing more pressure on the aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, who was revealed on Tuesday to have attended the Ashes Test on the same day he declined to appear at the Covid-19 committee, citing officials’ “urgent and critical” work combating Omicron. A spokesperson for Colbeck said the suggestion he had “put his sporting commitments ahead of the health and wellbeing of senior Australians … [is] completely misguided” because he had performed other Covid-related duties on that day and the Test was a day-nighter. Responding to separate questions about rapid test supply on Monday, a spokesperson for the minister said “delivery of rapid antigen test kits is currently being prioritised to facilities in outbreak or recent exposure”. “More than 78m RATs have been purchased by the government, and these are being prioritised for aged care,” he said. Colbeck said the government was aiming to provide an “updated guide” to allow for more social interaction for residents, given Omicron was “at this stage appearing not to have as significant health impact”.Among hospitals and health workers there was a sense of galvanising and preparing for Covid-19 as the date for the Western Australia border reopening loomed, according to the president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Omar Khorshid. “It takes something to be really on the horizon for you to understand how urgent it is to actually prepare,” Khorshid, a Perth-based orthopaedic surgeon, said. “One of the good things about the 5 February date was it focused the health system’s collective mind on getting ready. You could finally see some action.” Now the 5 February border reopening has once again been delayed Khorshid is concerned some of that earlier momentum will be lost and may lead to a false sense of security. But with Covid-19 already spreading in the community, Khorshid said it was only a matter of time before health plans would need to swing into action. On Sunday the state’s health minister, Amber-Jade Sanderson, conceded it would not be possible to eliminate Covid in WA. The premier, Mark McGowan, said the delay in border reopening was to give people more time to get their booster shot. But Khorshid said borders should be opened to help address critical health worker shortages. At the same time, he wanted public health measures like venue density limits and social distancing to be introduced to slow spread and reduce the health system burden. “I don’t want to follow the New South Wales model,” Khorshid said, where premier Dominic Perrottet delayed reinstating restrictions even as Omicron cases surged. But simply closing the border, wearing masks, and testing and tracing would not be enough to address ongoing bed and staff shortages and budget cuts in WA, Khorshid said. He is also worried waiting to reopen borders until winter could see a surge in cases due to immunity from booster shots waning and a more Covid-friendly climate. “If you wait until 90% of people have been boosted to open borders, then you’re talking winter, when there is also flu going around,” he said. “But I suspect the borders will become irrelevant within a few weeks anyway, because with Omicron a small number of cases becomes a high number very quickly. It makes no sense to be hard on borders, but not introduce public health measures. It’s not logical.” The director of the Telethon Kids Institute in Perth and infectious diseases expert, Prof Jonathan Carapetis, feels the hospitals where he works are as well-prepared as they can be for Omicron spread. But he is surprised at the lack of public health advertising campaigns preparing residents of WA – where people have lived more normally than almost anywhere else in the world throughout the pandemic – for Covid-19. He said the lack of information from government was causing fear and a lot of anxiety among parents, who were worried about their children catching and spreading Covid once they return to school. “The most frustrating [thing] is, people want to know what the plan for health is, what the plan for schools is, what the plan is for the economy and for families,” Carapetis said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “They’re not getting that information. There could have been a campaign leading up to February the 5th telling people about how we are getting ready within schools and within health. “As a paediatrician I deal with a lot of incredibly anxious parents and teachers wondering about the real risk to their kids. Why hasn’t there been a coordinated plan to help people understand the true risks of both opening compared to the true risks of not opening schools, and educating people about all the things that are being done to minimise those risks?” He believes WA has had more than enough time to prepare such an education campaign and has also had the benefit of learning from elsewhere. He also shares Khorshid’s concern that people may feel a false sense of security knowing the borders are not reopening anytime soon. “But all the systems have to be focusing on the fact that Covid is here, and we need to be equipped for the long haul,” Carapetis said. “We have some of the worst Aboriginal vaccination rates in the country. There is an urgent need to get to them. I’d be worried if people now say, ‘this has bought us a little bit of time, we can relax’. We now need to make sure we use every day to the max and most importantly, let people know what the plan to reopen is.” Khorshid and Carapetis acknowledge the view among health workers is split, with many feeling the health system is ill-prepared for a spike in hospitalisations. The WA secretary of the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation, Mark Olsen, told the ABC delaying border reopening would save “hundreds of lives” and that there was much relief among the majority of union members. “But if I thought another three months would better prepare the health system, I’d be calling for it,” Khorshid said. Prof Jaya Dantas, the dean of international health with Curtin University’s faculty of health sciences, said it was important for those in WA to recognise that they were seeing Covid spread at a time when effective treatments are now available, where vaccination rates are among the highest in the world, and when more is known about how to curb spread. “Public health is not just about one disease, but it is about the broader public and community good,” she said. “That includes peoples’ wellbeing, their mental health, and their capacity to do their jobs. When there’s this uncertainty, and these moving goalposts, it creates problems. “We need to find a better way of living alongside Covid using all the tools we have now,” Dantas said, “not by just closing borders”.Parents in New South Wales have been threatened with court action for keeping their children home from school because of concerns about catching Covid-19. Classes in NSW will resume next week after the release of the state government’s return to school plan on Sunday. While the government said the plan – which includes the use of rapid antigen tests and a rollout of about 20,000 air purifiers across the state – means students can go back to classes safely, some parents remain sceptical. On Monday, the Guardian reported that a group of concerned parents plan to file legal action against the Department of Education over its refusal to grant them permission to keep their children at home because of fears about contracting the virus. Despite premier Dominic Perrottet insisting on Tuesday that it would be “ridiculous” to fine parents who keep children out of school, the Guardian has confirmed that the education department has denied numerous attempts by parents to seek exemptions for their children throughout the pandemic. In correspondence seen by the Guardian, Sterre Siegenbeek van Heukelom, a mother from the Illawarra region of NSW, was last year denied leave to keep her son home from school on the basis that she, not her child, was classified as being vulnerable to the virus. The correspondence – which is similar in tone to other advice given to parents – stated that advice from NSW Health was that there is “limited risk” in students bringing Covid from school into the home. It stated that exemptions would only be granted in cases where a medical practitioner “explicitly advises” the student should not attend classes. Despite later providing medical advice from her doctor, Siegenbeek van Heukelom’s requests for an exemption have continued to be denied. “In summary, your son is not ill, but lives with someone who is at increased risk,” one letter from the department to Siegenbeek van Heukelom stated. “Learning from home for your son can only be supported if clear and explicit medical advice stating that he should not attend school face to face is received.” Siegenbeek van Heukelom, who has health conditions which placed her in the 1b category during the vaccine rollout, said it was ironic that NSW Health advice about avoiding indoor gatherings did not apply to school settings. “With the transmission and rate of the virus going around in the community it doesn’t feel safe for me as someone who is vulnerable to the virus, and NSW agrees with me that enclosed spaces with many people not being able to socially distance and not being able to wear masks is not ideal,” she said. The government has said that the social, educational and mental health benefits for students attending classes far outweigh the health risks associated with the virus, but the premier has repeatedly said he understands the anxiety facing some parents. Perrottet on Tuesday insisted that parents wouldn’t be punished for keeping children at home during the Omicron wave due to existing health concerns. “When we talk about parents being concerned [and] anxious, particularly in circumstances where their children may have underlying health conditions, we’re certainly not going to be fining parents,” he said. But parents have been threatened with legal action. In a letter sent by a principal to a mother with a pre-existing health condition who kept her child away from school last year, the threat of court action was raised because of “unsatisfactory attendance”. “I am required to make an application to the home school liaison program … for consideration of further action,” the letter stated. “An attendance officer may be allocated to work with you and the school to develop an attendance improvement program. “If you do not meaningfully engage with the attendance improvement program, or there is no improvement in [your son’s] attendance … the Department of Education and Communities may consider further action such as an application to the children’s court for compulsory schooling orders.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In a statement, the Department of Education did not respond directly to questions about whether parents could be punished for keeping their children at home once term resumes due to a fear of contracting Covid. Instead a spokesperson said regular attendance at school for all students was “essential to learning and wellbeing”, and cases in which parents were concerned about their child’s attendance would be “managed collaboratively in partnership between schools and parents”. “When schools are open, all students should be at school unless they are unwell; or they have a medical certificate which states that they are unable to return to school due to an ongoing medical condition,” a spokesperson said. “These students can be supported to learn from home provided a valid medical certificate is supplied. “There are a range of options available if students are prevented from attending school, including the sick or general leave and exemptions from attendance under Section 25 of the Education Act 1990. We always act reasonably when considering leave explanations and exemption applications and will continue to do so.”Taking advantage of automaticity (where you set yourself up to do things without having to think about them) is the centrepiece of plenty of positive habit forming advice. For hard-ish asks like exercising first thing in the morning or eating healthy, this might involve something annoying like wearing your gym gear to sleep the night before, or never having chips in the house. But when it comes to saving money, there are now some truly thoughtless solutions (in the best possible way). Automated savings transfers – which whisk part of your wages into a separate account before you can even touch them – are a common weapon of choice for personal finance advisers. These are great for big goals like getting out of debt, building a f-ck off fund, or saving for a major purchase; but there are also smaller ways to save. One of those techniques used to be a change jar, into which you’d empty all your coins at the end of the day. Then, after months or years, you’d take that full jar to the bank for a pleasantly lucrative payday. Now we’re largely cashless, change jars take much longer to fill up, and finding an ATM or bank that’ll accept a big baggie of coins is harder than it sounds (I speak from experience here). But there is a cashless equivalent: round-up savings. These skim the change off the top of your debit card transactions, rounding up to the nearest dollar and placing the remaining cents elsewhere. Round-up savings started as standalone apps, like Acorns in the US, and Raiz in Australia, which take your savings and invest them for you. But the idea proved popular enough that plenty of Australian banks – including Commbank, ING, Bank Australia and Bendigo and Adelaide Bank’s app-only account Up – now offer a similar functionality in-house (without the subsequent investing). This means setting your savings to round up with each purchase could be as easy as toggling a switch on your existing banking app. If your bank doesn’t offer them yet and you like the idea, you’ll either have to sign up for a separate app or switch banks – which to be fair, is much higher effort. Regardless of the initial setup schlep, the end result is the same: a pleasantly lucrative payday, a few months or years down the line, that you didn’t really have to think about. Personally, I like blowing my round-up savings all at once, on frivolous things I wouldn’t otherwise allow myself. But no judgment if you spend it on something sensible.Some years ago I swore I would never write another Invasion Day article, and I know I’m not alone in that decision. I reckon the argument against “Australia Day” on 26 January is fairly convincing and has been well articulated by any number of Blackfullas. The reality is, it doesn’t particularly matter what we say or do, ‘cause “Australia Day” isn’t about us anyways. In its current commemoration, it is a day that tells a story of a violent and heartless nation that insists upon our forgetting; forgetting what has and continues to be done to us, and forgetting that we were ever here in the first place. And each year we are forced to engage in this annual mythologising, as though all that is needed is a legitimate counterargument to convince them otherwise. Spoiler alert – it’s not. The date of 26 January really is just another day in the colony, which we as Blackfullas know too well. It is around this time that our emails and DMs are flooded with last-minute requests to feature in a podcast or write an opinion piece, typically just days prior, because it’s not like they didn’t know it was coming, every damn year. Right on cue, a current or former prime minister makes some idiotic patriotic statement about “modern Australia” and its formations, which conveniently erases 60,000 years of the world’s oldest living culture, and the subsequent two centuries of violence that defines so much of their own culture. Bless. A lot of Blackfullas will sign off from socials in January, while those who remain lose another high school friend or family member on Facebook over “all the money wasted on Indigenous affairs” or something or other. But each year on 26 January, Blackfullas, even those who chose not to author that op-ed or appear on that podcast, will still turn up to a rally or protest donning our latest or favourite Black protest tee, marching down the same streets that they did the year before. And each year, we add names to the list of our dead that we speak of, those who died prematurely at the hands of the state. The date, as a commemoration of this supposed “modern nation’s” story, is a fairly accurate one when you think about it. Since 1788, there has been no change in the relationship it has with us, not substantively. Any sense of Black progress that is spoken of by them is only ever in regard to our ability to be in closer proximity to them, always on their terms, and to be discarded whenever they see fit. Yet, for me and a whole lot of other Blackfullas, turning up on 26 January at protests is not an appeal to the settlers. It is a rallying call for our people, and despite the repetitive nature of this annual ritual, I will never tire of those words “still here” or “always was, always will be”. Each year, that cry gets louder and louder as the marches extend longer and longer. Such change does not offer me a sense of hope that the settlers will have a change of heart. Our emancipation is not to be found in their validation. Turning up to that protest, is to be immersed in a sea of Black power and is a most critical reminder of who we are as a people, despite who they are as a nation. Irrespective of how the nation state chooses to commemorate it (if they continue, change or abolish it), 26 January will always be for Blackfullas. It’s a day of asserting who we are as a people; one of survival, of an unceded sovereignty, and a story that speaks so loudly to the strength of our spirit, in life and in death. The irony here is you would think that if the settlers weren’t so attached to having pride in genocide, they would see what it truly means to be proud of your people and your nation. But sure, “chuck another snag on the barbie”. Dr Chelsea Watego is a Mununjali and South Sea Islander woman and is Professor of Indigenous health at Queensland University of Technology. Chelsea previously wrote under the name Dr Chelsea Bond. Her latest book is Another Day in the ColonyClaudia Karvan has been part of some devastating TV moments – one, in particular, traumatised a generation of Australians. But for her new vehicle, the Stan series Bump, Karvan’s plan was to make something optimistic, funny and “full of humanity”. Amid the turmoil of the pandemic, the show’s warmhearted embrace hit the right notes – Bump became Stan’s biggest ever premiere when it debuted in 2021 and returned for another series last month. Karvan both stars in and co-produces Bump. To bring the show to life, she worked alongside screenwriter Kelsey Munro and her longtime collaborator John Edwards. She and Edwards previously worked together on The Secret Life Of Us, Love My Way, Tangle and the Puberty Blues reboot – shows that helped make Karvan Australian screen royalty. In the much earlier days of her career, she had a small role in a movie called The Nostradamus Kid, which starred actor Noah Taylor. The pair once dated. During that time, Taylor painted an intimate portrait of Karvan that she loved – and then lost. Here, she tells us about that irreplaceable artwork, as well as the story of two other important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire Some linen sheets. I was driving through a salubrious area of Sydney’s eastern suburbs and saw advertised in a boutique shop window: 60% off bedsheets. Never allergic to a bargain, I pulled over and went in. 60% off! That’s a lot. The sheets were linen and white. I’d heard of Egyptian cotton and thread counts and all that palaver, but I’d never heard of linen sheets. I suspected they might be ultra-good, so I scooped them up and took them to the counter. When the amount appeared on the cashier screen I was stunned and embarrassed, having not checked the price. I tapped my credit card. Bargain they were not – or so I thought. I’ve recently discovered I’m a Highly Sensitive Person (look it up, it’s a character trait not a disorder), and apparently us HSP-types are extra aware of the texture of fabrics on our skin – something I’d not thought unique to myself but hey, we never stop learning. These sheets are insane. Even friends who housesit text me to ask “What is the story with these sheets?!” followed by explosive emojis. So they’re coming with me if my house burns down. And it would be silly of me not to use them to wrap up a few of the artworks I’m so lucky to own – specifically one by my closest friend, Lara Merrett. My most useful object Twenty years ago when I had a newborn, my close friend, who was in a relationship with a rockstar (and still is), gave me a gift. She called it The Boyfriend. The rockstar was often away touring and my partner was often away working, so this gadget was all about compensating for those absences. At the time, I underestimated its powers. I thought it was gimmicky, but 20 years on I still reach for that “boyfriend”, who now lives in a kitchen drawer. He never disappoints. After straining myself and almost giving myself blisters there’s always that a-ha! moment when I remember the “boyfriend”. I stop banging the jar on the side of the sink and running the lid under hot water, open the second drawer down, rummage around the tongs and egg flippers and there he is: my dependable, white-plastic-handled jar opening tool. Yes! That jar of curry paste is all mine. The item I regret losing Regret is a heavy word. Regret is such an unfashionable emotion. But I read a great poem recently by David Whyte, called Regret, and I listened to a podcast interview about it. He makes a pretty convincing argument that if we don’t regret anything and if we don’t relive that regret then we won’t learn. So after ruminating on years of losses and even deciding that I didn’t regret losing a family home built out of mud bricks that we’d made with our own hands (nonattachment is a valuable Buddhist practice), I landed on an object that when I lost, I felt deeply crestfallen. When I was very young and going out with Noah Taylor, he painted a terrific, spontaneous, rudimentary nude of me on a salvaged timber baker’s tray. I really loved it. I even travelled three hours to escort it safely during a family relocation. I strapped it to the side of my ute and kept an eye on it in my side-view mirror as I drove down the highway back to Sydney. One moment it was there, next moment it was splinters on asphalt. I think you can see it adorning a wall in the background of some family snapshots, and I’ve bought or been gifted artworks from him since. He’s bloody talented. My lesson from regret is: always check those transport straps!Two of the biggest regional music events are at loggerheads after a Covid-induced date change has seen the Tamworth Country Music festival muscle in on the Parkes Elvis festival celebration. Parkes organisers said they were already experiencing ticket cancellations and event supply constraints as fans were forced to choose their favourite regional music festival. Tiffany Steel, the director of the Parkes Elvis festival, said that every year prior to Covid-19, the Parkes Elvis festival was held first over the second week in January to coincide with the King’s birthday. The beauty of it was that many attendees then travelled on to Tamworth for their music festival usually held in mid to late January. Steel said since Tamworth’s announcement she was still processing cancellations from people who had decided to go to Tamworth. “We have had tour groups that do both festivals cancel and glamping tours that do both, who don’t have enough tents, have told us they’re cutting their tents by half,” she said. Steel said the full extent of the impact of the date clash was still unknown as the cancellations were “still trickling through”. Parkes Elvis festival announced on 30 September last year it would be moving the 2022 festival to April 20-24 due to concerns around Covid-19. A week out from Tamworth’s 10-day event due to commence on 14 January, the organisers announced that the changes to Covid-19 restrictions had made it impossible to proceed with the festival, which would be postponed and held 18-24 April. “I was absolutely gobsmacked that they’ve made that decision,” Steel said. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter She said the Parkes Elvis festival kept the Tamworth Country Music festival in the loop regarding its decision to postpone Parkes’ festival, so to only find out about Tamworth’s decision via social media was “shocking”. Steel said there’s not only a “big crossover” with festival fans but also performers, suppliers and markets. “It would make sense to split the two up so people don’t have to choose, and people in the events industry who have lost all their income over the last 18 months don’t have to choose either,” she said. “Parkes Elvis festival is a really big deal to Parkes.” For Steel the success of the festival is also personal – her parents, Bob and Anne, were the originators of the very first festival in 1993. Inspired by their love of Elvis, they opened a restaurant in Parkes in 1980 called Gracelands after the star’s home. The idea for an Elvis festival later developed as “a reason to stay in town and party” during the January period, which had historically been a very quiet and very hot time for the town. Steel said prior to the pandemic, the festival brought an influx of visitors, an additional 25,000 people in a town of 15,000, and $13m to the local economy. Gail Richardson, a Parkes local, said the festival “helps kickstart the economy, especially for smaller shops and businesses” with a flow-on effect that helps people get employment. “The whole kit and caboodle,” she said. Steel said the wider area also benefited as neighbouring towns including Forbes, Bogan Gate, Trundle, Eugowra, and Tullamore found their accommodation booked out during the festival. The local federal member for Parkes, Michael McCormack, said it was a “hound dog of an act to do by Tamworth to step on Parkes’ blue suede shoes and now they’re all shook up”. McCormack is one of the festival’s fans, known to dress up and perform at the festival. “I know you get ribbed about getting dressed up as Elvis, but in January it’s the only thing on. If you don’t dress up and take a part, it’s frowned upon,” McCormack told Guardian Australia. McCormack said due to Covid, the festival was never going to get pre-2019 crowd levels, given restrictions in place. “But what happens now that the artists, visitors and suppliers they usually share with Tamworth, they’re going to have divided loyalties,” said McCormack. “Do I go to Tamworth or Elvis?” Ken Keith, the mayor of Parkes, wrote to Russell Webb, the mayor of Tamworth, to express his “great disappointment”. “Tamworth were well aware when we were going to hold ours, but they elected in the end to go for the same date,” Keith said. He was still confident the festival would be a success, including Australian-first international performances such as Taylor Rodriguez, the 2019 Ultimate Elvis Tribute Artist Champion. Webb said the decision to postpone Tamworth’s 50th Country Music festival was not taken lightly and finding suitable new dates was a significant logistical challenge. “I totally understand the disappointment from Parkes that the Elvis festival and our milestone overlap but unfortunately it simply could not be avoided,” Webb said. “There were many reasons why 18-24 April were the only suitable dates for us to postpone our 50th celebration to. However, I am extremely confident that while both festivals will run at the same time this year, both will be a success for each community in these very challenging times.” Webb said that he intended to write back to Keith to advise him how things unfolded last Friday extremely quickly. “We simply did not have time to consult or call the organisers of the Parkes event before we made the public announcement about our festival on Friday afternoon – it was a real whirlwind of activity with hundreds of contractors and services providers still in the process of being contacted,” Webb said. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityWhen you’ve got to go, you’ve got to go. But when you’re caught out in public – be it on an outback road trip or in the middle of a city – the pressure intensifies, and finding a public toilet that is clean, stocked and accessible can become painfully difficult. So, what makes Australia’s best public toilet, and where can we find it? We posed the question and, in the comments and on Twitter, Guardian Australia readers shared their picks. Some it seems are only in it for the architecture; others are looking for pristine cleanliness. Alan444 pointed to an “architectural wonder” in Sydney. In Sydney there is an architectural wonder at Georges Heights, near Frenchys Cafe: louvred timber that is open and airy while angled to maintain privacy in a bushland garden setting. Quite the thing for sitting on the throne. Murgatroyd7’s favourite is in Brisbane. The public toilets in Brisbane City Hall are beautiful, 1920’s black and white art deco. Go check them out people, they’re a hidden gem. Hannibalcrackers likes the old pissoir at Sydney’s Dawes Point: There is a magnificent Victorian pissoir at the north end of George Street in Dawes Point, Sydney. Convenience and comfort as long as you’re a bloke. TheOldBotanist praised the custodians of a public loo in a regional Victorian town. Perhaps not the prettiest, best located or most spectacular, but the consistently cleanest public toilets I’ve ever seen - and I mean spotless, odourless, functional, no rubbish – are in the Victorian Mallee town of Walpeup, associated with the very pleasant Walpeup Wayside Stop Community Park. Bluebec picked the mid-city restrooms outside Melbourne’s GPO on Elizabeth Street – but they’re not the most accessible. The narrow stairs are annoying, but the toilets themselves are spacious, clean, and sufficient enough that I’ve never needed to queue. The added bonus of the sitting area where you can redo your makeup or hair is also a really nice touch (and so old-fashioned).” On Twitter, Pat Armstrong praised the “amazing 80s po-mo [postmodern] toilet blocks” hidden around Sydney’s Darling Harbour, including one under the Pyrmont Bridge. “Every time there’s public works there I fear they’ll be ‘upgraded’ out of existence.” For commenter Choppernoodle, what matters is the upkeep. As a bowel cancer survivor and therefore user of toilet amenities at a moment’s notice, I just send out a big thank you to all of those who work hard to ensure that any toilet amenity is clean. I can’t tell you how much it means to desperately need a loo and find one that, though shabby, is at least clean. Thank you from the bottom of my heart (or the heart of my bottom!). Then of course there’s the quirkier loos, particularly those with an unbeatable view. Alan444 recommends stopping at Devil’s Kitchen campground on the Great Ocean Walk in Victoria. “There was a truly fabulous dunny built up on stilts at the edge of the forest overlooking the amazing Southern Ocean,” he says. Pickaname_Anyname has another in Victoria, at Macalister Springs on Mount Howitt. Single occupant with a Perspex front that looks out over a wilderness valley. The absolute definition of loo with a view. Used to be better before they installed the Perspex and it was just a drop dunny without a door, although you now don’t need to deal with cold swirly winds while your pants are ‘round your ankles.” For a scenic option in Tasmania’s south-west, try the high camp hut at Mount Anne, tweeted Tim Lyons. “[It’s] a long drop toilet with a Perspex back so you can sit (back to the door) and overlook the wilderness including Lake Pedder from most of the way up the Mountain.” Or you could visit the loo at Old Pelion Hut loo on the Overland Track in Tasmania, suggests Thorn001. “Been there for more than 100 years, no door, long drop, looks straight out [at] the mountains. Gold standard.” For ElstonGunston, you can’t beat the harbour views from a restroom on Sydney’s Cockatoo Island. A few years back I was camping on Cockatoo Island. I went into a mens there and was perplexed by the 4 foot high step up to the urinal … Never seen a urinal set up so high before. Take the step up and you have the best view of the Harbour Bridge from the west. Finally, not forgotten were the toilets that, while often unremarkable, were found just in the nick of time. Ivymantled says a number of toilets have been “thoughtfully installed” along the Larapinta Trail in the Northern Territory. Through 11-12 days of trekking over mountains and through gullies and canyons – even such basic facilities are appreciated. As Realto put it: “The best public toilet is the one that’s easily found when you’re desperate. Bonus if there’s a vacant stall, more points if it’s clean, stocked with paper and handwash soap.”In the middle of the night, four young Aboriginal men pitched a beach umbrella on the lawns opposite Parliament House and sat down. When dawn broke on 26 January 1972, a police officer came over to ask how long they intended to stay. “Until we get land rights,” one of the four, Billy Craigie, told the officer. Commissioner Gibson apparently laughed and said, “that might be a long time”. Craigie replied: “Well, we’ll be here a long time then.” It’s 50 years today since the Aboriginal tent embassy was born from that act of defiance. And its demands remain current. Above: Bobbi Sykes (with Gordon Briscoe) addresses a protest at the Aboriginal Tent Embassy, Canberra, July 1972. Below: The Aboriginal Tent Embassy, Parliament House in 1972. Images: Ken Whittington/National Archives Australia The embassy has formed and reformed over the years before becoming a permanent presence in 1992, and has remained a place of Aboriginal resistance in direct line of sight of the halls of power in Canberra. The name “tent embassy” was itself a statement that Aboriginal people were living in substandard conditions, treated “like aliens in their own land”, as Dr Gary Foley says in his 2014 book The Aboriginal Tent Embassy: Sovereignty, Black Power, Land Rights and the State. Paul Coe (on left) addresses Gough Whitlam at the Aboriginal Tent Embassy, Canberra, 1972. To Whitlam’s right, standing, is journalist John Newfong. Image: State Library of New South Wales/Search Foundation “That it has endured for decades as a potent symbol rejecting the hypocrisy, deceit and duplicity by successive Australian governments is a testament to the refusal of large numbers of Aboriginal people to concede defeat in a 200-year struggle for justice,” Foley writes. Billy Craigie’s altercation with the police – the first of many on that site – is recalled by Michael Anderson who, with Tony Coorey and Bertie Williams, made up the original four under the umbrella that morning. Michael Ghillar Anderson. Image: Juno Gemes Anderson says the impact of the embassy was “dynamite”. “In terms of the media, because they really had no idea, this was the first time they ever saw Aboriginal people confront the establishment on anything,” he says. “It made a significant difference. “The embassy was striking a chord that just seemed to be the right time. We had just had Woodstock, the Vietnam war. So it was all about change, and changing ideas and changing conceptions. I think we hit the right chord at the right time. And we brought everything to the attention of the world. I think [it was] very successful from that point of view.” Roxley Foley at the Crossroads Canberra. Image: Juno Gemes The site means many things to many Aboriginal people. Roxley Foley lived there as caretaker for three years from 2016 to 2019 (the “Abbott years”, he says, noting they saw a few prime ministers “in and out of the place” in that time). Foley remembers the embassy as a place of pilgrimage. “For a lot of my time out there it served so many different roles, not only being a place for education and confronting the government. It was very much a place that was holding our mob whenever they came to Canberra and they couldn’t get access to things,” Foley says. ACT police officers remove tents and bedding from the Aboriginal tent embassy on the lawns of Parliament House in Canberra, 20 July 1972. Image: Fairfax Media/Getty Images “It’s a place where people looked for networking into housing, into the health services, just to be listened to. The amount of old people we had travelling to that space as almost a pilgrimage, to heal something in themselves.” The next big milestone comes on 20 July, the anniversary of the day in 1972 when the federal government amended the law to allow police to march in and forcibly dismantle the embassy. Until then, there had been no actual prohibition on camping on the parliamentary lawns and for six months as the embassy grew, it caused the McMahon government intense embarrassment here and overseas. There was a second raid a few days later, by which time the number of embassy supporters had swelled – and continued to rise to more than 2,000 by 31 July. Anderson remembers the attempted eviction as a “bloody battle”. “I’ve been in some brawls in my time … but it was nothing like what happened back then. The record shows that there were about 36 policemen went to hospital and 18 of us went to jail. And so it was a bloody battle. It was one of the roughest I’ve been involved in.” The incident is depicted in the seminal 1972 film, Ningla A-na, which is being screened on site for the 50th anniversary this week. For now though, the Ngambri–Ngunnawal elder Matilda House says it is time to celebrate. “Our sovereignty is still alive and well,” House says. “[The embassy] is the continuation of how Aboriginal people have never forgotten, and the respect and the legacy [we leave] for the generations that are coming through.” Foley agrees. “I think the important thing is not to focus just on the embassy, but 50 years of resistance. And furthermore, 233 years of resistance.”The perfect pavlova. A macadamia, aniseed myrtle and bush honey trifle. Bread sculptures baked into the shape of Australian mammals. These are among the delights contestants are tasked with creating on the new season of The Great Australian Bake Off, which returns to screens on Thursday after a three-year absence. Bake Off is a global reality phenomenon that began in the UK and has since been adapted by 35 countries worldwide, travelling everywhere from Kenya to Morocco and Brazil. The format has remained more or less consistent around the world; what makes each version unique is the quirks of the local cuisine. Here in Australia, that means dishes created using native ingredients, classics ripped from the pages of the Australian Women’s Weekly Cake Book and, of course, the quest for the optimised pav. “I like it crunchy on the outside and soft and chewy on the inside,” says Matt Moran, chef and judge on the show. “But somebody else might like it a little bit more brittle.” Moran, together with fellow celebrity chef Maggie Beer, is tasked with assessing the creations dished up the show’s cast of amateur bakers each week. He believes Bake Off is so well loved because “it’s a show everyone can relate to, whether you’re a kid baking your first cookie or a retiree baking bread.” This year, though, there’s another reason viewers might tune in: the Covid effect. The pandemic has transformed many of us from kitchen luddites into keen bakers intimately familiar with the fine art of sourdough starter. For the TV executives behind Bake Off, renewed interest in kitchen creations has been a blessing. “We are absolutely aware of the enthusiasm Australians have for baking at the moment,” says Kylie Washington, general manager and creative director of BBC Studios Productions, who helped bring Australian Bake Off back to Foxtel after a change in production partners, then the pandemic, forced its hiatus. The baking craze also helped when it came time to cast this season. “It meant that we were really spoilt for choice,” Washington says. “We found a wonderfully diverse mix of people.” That included “a lot of males” – something producers have really had to search for in the past. As well as striking a better gender balance, this year’s cast ranges in age from 19 to 62, and includes bakers born in Zimbabwe, Afghanistan, Indonesia and Iran. Washington thinks the quintessentially “Australian flavour” of the cast is part of the show’s charm and what helps Great Australian Bake Off find an audience overseas. (It also airs in the UK, US, New Zealand and parts of Europe.) The show was also relatively lucky when it came to filming, getting in before the Omicron variant hit. Cast and crew had to rapid test every day before they entered the site but managed to avoid any on-set outbreaks. “In comparison to a lot of other shows, we actually breezed through Covid really well,” Washington says. But even if you’ve avoided the kitchen these last two years, Bake Off still scratches the pandemic itch for comfort viewing. Unlike the high stakes competition of cooking shows like MasterChef, Bake Off is friendly by nature. Contestants tackle three different baking challenges each week – first up is the signature, where bakers whip up tried and tested classics, then the technical, where more specialised skills are required. Last is the showstopper, home to incredulous feats of baking that this season will include everything from a hanging biscuit chandelier to a French choux pastry tower in the shape of a nun. One contestant is eliminated each week, but the show is never cruel in the way it goes about reaching its ultimate winner. “It’s soft competition, but it’s very supportive and loving,” says Washington. “The contestants are friends and they’re beautiful people. When they’ve finished their own bake, sometimes they go and help each other out. It’s about helping people achieve their personal best and bring their creations to life.” That means giving the right sort of feedback is something Moran is conscious of. “You can’t sugarcoat things but you’ve got to be constructive,” he says. “If you’re going to give criticism you’ve got to actually tell them why. You’ve got to be able to back it up as to why you didn’t like it and why it didn’t work. Otherwise they just think you’re a dick.” “But it’s not a show where we try to create drama,” he adds. “It’s real.” That’s not to say things never go wrong on Bake Off land – even if you’ve never seen the show, you’re likely familiar with a viral meme of British comedian James Acaster presenting his dish to the judges on the UK celebrity version, telling them that he “started making it, had a breakdown, bon appetit”. “There’s always a couple of things that crash and burn – literally burn, sometimes,” Moran says. “And things fall apart. But that’s the beauty of the show. There’s always drama when it comes to the actual bake itself.” While The Great Australian Bake Off is now in its fifth season, Washington doesn’t believe the core ingredients of the show have changed much over its run. “Bake Off has remained consistent pretty much all the way through. You know the saying – if ain’t broke, don’t fix it,” she says. “People like the fact that it delivers on the same thing every time. It delivers this wonderful spirit and sense of camaraderie and family. There’s no need to change any of that; it’s a beautiful show in the way that it exists.” And as we enter the third year of the pandemic, consistency is a valuable asset. “People just want comfort,” Washington says. “They want to know what they’re turning on to because the world is so unknown and so unpredictable at the moment. So slipping into your jammies, sitting on your couch, tucking into a good old series of Bake Off is exactly the tonic that we need right now.” The Great Australian Bake Off starts tonight at 8.30pm on Foxtel.Sue Gray’s inquiry into alleged lockdown breaches in No 10 could be released as soon as this week after the Metropolitan police said they would not stand in the way of publication. No 10 has said, subject to legal advice, that it would not block any publication, clearing the way for Boris Johnson to face damaging allegations about his conduct and the behaviour of his staff amid the new police investigation. Johnson does not believe he broke the law, his spokesperson said. The government had indicated it had expected Gray’s report to be delayed – as per the terms of reference – given the Met police inquiry. But sources said Gray would proceed if there was no legal objection. The Met did not raise any objection on Tuesday to the publication of Gray’s report, separate sources with knowledge of its discussions said. The latest moves emerged after hours of confusion following Cressida Dick’s surprise announcement that the Met had launched a criminal inquiry into a number of alleged Downing Street and Whitehall parties. Initially, No 10 told reporters it could publish the aspects of Gray’s findings that related to gatherings that were not being investigated by the police, while the Met was carrying out its work. “My understanding is that she can publish those elements that are not subject to further work,” a No 10 spokesperson said. But later the spokesperson said discussions between the inquiry team and police were ongoing on what could be published from the Gray inquiry and that there was no intention to block publication. Speaking to MPs on Tuesday, Johnson said he welcomed the Met’s investigation and that the internal inquiry had involved sharing information. “That process has quite properly involved sharing information continuously with the Metropolitan police, so I welcome the Met’s decision to conduct its own investigation because I believe this will help to give the public the clarity it needs and help to draw a line under matters.” Asked if the prime minister was willing to be questioned by the police, Johnson’s spokesperson said: “Anyone asked to will cooperate fully, as you would expect.” Pressed on whether Johnson believes he had broken the law, he replied: “It’s fair to say he does not.” The prime minister had been forewarned about Dick’s announcement, Downing Street conceded, but he did not inform cabinet colleagues, instead using this morning’s cabinet meeting to urge them to “go further and faster in driving forward the government’s reform agenda”. The news broke during a cabinet meeting after which it emerged Johnson had been told about the impending announcement from Dick but had not told his cabinet. Asked why cabinet ministers were not told about the police investigation, the prime minister’s spokesperson said: “From what I understand it’s important not to pre-empt a police statement on this sort of issue at any point. “That was the judgment the prime minister made. It was at that stage unclear exactly at what point the Met would make that statement and obviously the prime minister will continue to discuss any relevant issues with his cabinet.” The spokesperson added: “I think it’s understandable that, given the sensitive nature of what the Met were due to announce, it’s right that wasn’t pre-empted in any way.” Tory MPs lined up to defend the prime minister during an urgent question on the investigation, asked by Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner. The Conservative MP Giles Watling described the urgent question as a “vexatious waste of everybody’s time” but was forced to withdraw his claims by the Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, who decides urgent questions. Sir Edward Leigh said: “When Europe stands on the brink of war and there is a cost of living crisis can we please have a sense of proportion over the prime minister being given a piece of cake in his own office by his own staff.” ITV News reported on Monday night that up to 30 staff gathered in the cabinet room with picnic food from M&amp;S to sing happy birthday to the prime minister and give him birthday cake in June 2020. The event, which No 10 has denied was a party, was attended by his wife, Carrie, and the interior designer Lulu Lytle.AILING BY Watford are currently plummeting down the swanny at great velocity, so perhaps it’s no surprise that they’ve selected waterway enthusiast Roy Hodgson as their new manager. A master of long-term planning and leaving nothing to chance, Mr Roy famously went on a day cruise down the River Seine during Euro 2016 instead of scouting Iceland, and the in-depth stream-based observations gleaned on that crucial fact-finding mission will undoubtedly stand him in good stead for Watford’s upcoming battle against the current. Land ahoy! Cap’n Roy has been away from football since bailing out of Crystal Palace at the end of last season. At 74, you could be forgiven for thinking we’d seen the back of the salty sea dog, and that he’d be taking the opportunity to plan another, longer cruise, perhaps with Ray Lewington again, a high-jinks episode of the Love Boat we’d pay top dollar to see. But that’s not Mr Roy’s true calling, and so he’s back, baby, eagerly clutching his compass, $extant, and the nautical and tactical charts that have navigated him from Halmstads to Malmö, to Örebro to Neuchâtel Xamax, to the Swiss national team. Oh he’s got methods up the yin-yang. While fans of the Hornets frantically buckle in for a wild journey of wonder, they’ll spare a thought for the departing Claudio Ranieri, whose reign at Vicarage Road seemed doomed from the start, just like those of Gianfranco Zola, Giuseppe Sannino, Óscar García, Billy McKinlay, Slavisa Jokanovic, Quique Sánchez Flores, Walter Mazzarri, Marco Silva, Javi Gracia, Quique Sánchez Flores again, Nigel Pearson, Vladimir Ivic, Xisco Muñoz and Cap’n Roy. Factoring in an upcoming trip to fellow strugglers Burnley, the way Roy started at Palace with three straight defeats, and the hair-trigger patience of the Pozzo family, our shipping forecast is two months tops. All aboard! LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray from 7pm GMT for hot Afcon MBM coverage of Morocco 2-0 Malawi. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I went to see where the people lost their lives and you see it’s a gate. That gate was supposed to be open. Because if it was open, they would have walked through and it was closed for inexplicable reasons” – Patrice Motsepe, president of CAF, says the crush in which eight people died and another 38 were injured outside the Olembe Stadium in Yaoundé, before Cameroon’s Afcon win over Comoros, was caused by an access gate being shut. FIVER LETTERS “Dear Mr Pozzo, I’m sorry to hear you’ve parted with your fellow countryman Mr Ranieri, but I always think it’s an ill wind that blows nobody good, and hence my letter. Recently I’ve had some problems holding down a permanent job, what with Covid and Brexit and some personal issues that need not detain us, so I reckon I’m well qualified for the vacant manager’s position at Watford. To be honest I don’t really know much about football, but again, as an optimist I think that means I might fit in well at your organisation. Also I’m only looking for something for three to six months. I look forward to your response” – LR Williams. “Is this all part of your STOP FOOTBALL campaign?” – Sam Easterbrook. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Sam Easterbrook. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Wim Jansen, the former Feyenoord and Netherlands defender, who also won the Scottish Premiership title as Celtic manager, has died aged 75. “Johan once said, ‘Wim is one of only four men in the world who are worth listening to when they talk about football’’’ said a tribute from the official Johan Cruyff Twitter account. Fiorentina fans have made death threats to Dusan Vlahovic in a series of offensive banners put up outside the club’s Artemio Franchi stadium. The Serbian striker is set to join Juventus with the clubs agreeing a €75m (£62.8m) fee. Ralf Rangnick’s big Old Trafford clearout is gathering pace, with Anthony Martial set to join Sevilla on loan. Crystal Palace and Valencia are keen on Donny van de Beek, but Rangnick is reluctant to let the lesser-spotted Dutchman join another Premier League side. England midfielder Jill Scott has joined Aston Villa on loan from Manchester City. “When we heard of Jill’s availability it was a no-brainer,” cheered manager Carla Ward. Duncan Ferguson insists the Everton job will still interest elite managers despite their recent woes. “This is an attractive club for somebody but the first thing we need is to get results,” he roared. The new chairman of Hull City has swiftly ushered manager Grant McCann through their door marked Do One. “I understand the timing may look odd, after two good wins, but I wouldn’t be fair or honest if I merely waited for a defeat to change manager,” honked Acun Ilicali. A transfer coup for Danish side Lyngby, who have signed Mohamed Salah. Not that one. And Wrexham have broken their club record by splurging £300,000 to sign AFC Wimbledon striker Ollie Palmer. The gang buys their way out of the National League. STILL WANT MORE? David Hytner on the pressure being ramped up by Antonio Conte on Daniel Levy to spend some serious wonga on strengthening Tottenham’s squad. Will Derby County be saved? Ben Fisher has your primer on the Rams’ mess. More misery, further down the pyramid, with Dover having almost clocked up a year without a win, as Paul Doyle details. Richard Foster on why a good night’s kip is as important for players as training well. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! PAGING FIVER INNUENDO EDFrancis Bacon: Man and Beast is a frequently grim but endlessly fascinating parade through the Royal Academy’s main galleries. Room after room – all oxblood and indigo – track the artist’s development from the mid-1930s, with his early, Picasso-ish Crucifixion, to the end, with his last, somewhat unsuccessful and schematic 1991 painting of a bull. It looks like the artist’s heart wasn’t really in it; his use of spray-can shadowing and flicked-on dust doesn’t really help. As well as all the human intrigue, occasional tenderness and persistent cruelty, Man and Beast also looks at Bacon’s interest in animals, and how interchangeable one species becomes with another. A human head with an ape’s shriek or aggressive smile, the dance between bullfighter and bull, a study of two owls on a branch (one of the few genuine surprises in the show, though there isn’t much surprise in that it isn’t very good), Bacon’s monsters and monstrous Bacons confront us at every turn. I want to run away, I can’t stop looking. With their theatrical painterliness, their flat planes and gnarly eruptions, Bacon’s painted situations and entrapments are nothing if not dramatic. And then there are the screams and the animal cries, the vulnerable and distorted bodies, the flung paint, the arrested high-speed blurs, the slashing grass stems and the rumpled sheets. Sometimes it’s as if all the air has been sucked out of Bacon’s paintings, leaving a dog panting somewhere off an Egyptian highway, with cartoonish cars beetling along the coast road in the background, and the pope on his throne in his cloistered solitude, gasping for air. Is His Holiness all right in there, you ask. Bacon’s figures are invariably in a bit of a state, squirming on the sofa, burying their heads in flowers, naked in the undergrowth, caged in their human zoos. It is what we expect. Should bodies ever be so bendy? I’d have a little scream myself, in rooms done up like that, the light so flat and strong, the colour scheme so ghastly, the spaces between things so empty and so full of threat. Bacon is a manipulative painter, getting us up close then pushing us away. Teasing us with something familiar – a plainly painted doorknob and the key in the lock, a bit of bedframe, a plain acre or two of carpeting, the dangling light-pull, a tweed coat, a stage prop or two of modernist furniture, with the mess of a human or animal form in some sort of paroxysm rearing up in the middle of it all. Bacon is good at this sort of stuff. We are forever being accompanied by silent screams, human and simian dental-work, tongues and lips, bulging calf muscles and cheeks and forearms, the convex and concave meetings of shoulders and neck, prow-like jawlines, twisted physiognomies and ears so well sculpted by his brush, so contoured and thrown into relief you could stick your finger down there and it would go all the way in. Great at ears, and the tender naked soles of the feet, great at asses, toilet plumbing, pleated curtains and furniture, he could never do hands and his Baconised heads became an awful mannerism. Bacon is always arresting, but not always very good. His paintings can flail terribly. The best are when he keeps things straightforward. His 1961 Paralytic Child Walking on All Fours (derived, like many of his images, from a late 19th-century series of photographs by Eadweard Muybridge of humans and animals in motion) is genuinely shocking, in the way the child crosses the room beyond an open window frame that juts in on the right, keeping us at bay. The dog pausing by the drain in the gutter, its owner no more than a shadow of legs, is a wonderful moment of everyday abject silence. But when Bacon paints his late lover George Dyer seated, one leg pooling away on to the floor like a puddle of Silly Putty, the effect is merely absurd. Bacon’s bullfights (all three of them bought together here, for the first time) might be all swerve and torque and slew, an attempt at bravura, but the crowds half-seen through a gap in the sliding wall – like a Nazi rally in a nearby room – feel overcooked. Bacon’s 1944 Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion (not in the show) is a great piece of late surrealism, but the second 1988 version here is suave and silly, as is his 1981 Triptych inspired by the Oresteia of Aeschylus, with their wiggly, unbelievable sci-fi forms. The caption to Bacon’s study of his ex-lover Peter Lacy, curled up and burying his head in the couch, says it might be an image “of pain or remorse”. Or maybe he’s waiting for a good seeing-to, in their fraught S&amp;M affair. Bacon didn’t want stories, but his paintings are full of them, and life, fame and gossip leaked out of Soho and caught up with his obfuscations and the misdirections he gave in interviews. I look forward to the day (it won’t be in my lifetime) when someone who couldn’t possibly have known Bacon or his milieu can look back and evaluate his art without all the trappings, the overheated talk of “man’s inhumanity to man” and all the rest of it. We are still lumbered with all the baggage, all the heavy breathing. Francis Bacon: Man and Beast is at the Royal Academy, London, from 29 January to 17 AprilJimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel kicked off the week with troubling evidence from the Trump White House in the days after the 2020 election. Over the weekend, Politico obtained and published a draft executive order from 16 December 2020 which ordered the defense secretary to seize voting machines in battleground states. The author of the draft order remains unknown, though “Trump himself has been ruled out because there’s no dipping sauce on any of the pages,” Kimmel quipped. The militarization of the election “was a last-ditch effort to keep Trump in power”, he noted. “A Sieg Hail Mary, if you will.” The draft order was part of a cache of documents given to the House’s committee investigating 6 January, after the supreme court ruled that Trump could not shield himself from oversight on grounds of executive privilege. In other 6 January fallout news, Trump has expressed fury that the House committee intends to interview his daughter Ivanka. As he said in a statement: “They’re using these things to try and get people’s minds off how incompetently our country is being run. And they don’t care. They’ll go after children.” “He knows Ivanka is 40, right?” Kimmel laughed. “I mean, I know he missed a lot of birthdays, but … you can’t call them children and also put them in charge of peace in the Middle East. It’s one or the other.” Stephen Colbert On Late Night, Stephen Colbert checked in on Russia’s movement to amass troops on the Ukrainian border, which has prompted Joe Biden to consider deploying thousands of troops to eastern Europe and the Baltics. “That headline reads way too much like a game of Risk,” said Colbert. “Let’s have some headlines that sound like we’re playing a nicer board game, like ‘Hippo hunger remains insatiable’ or ‘New York City’s biggest landlord: this thimble’.” The US isn’t the only country making moves. Denmark deployed F-16 planes to Lithuania, France has prepared to send troops to Romania, and Spain is sending four fighter jets to Bulgaria. Why all the posturing? On Saturday, the British government accused Moscow of scheming to install a pro-Russia government in Ukraine. “Oh Ukraine, you don’t want that,” said Colbert. “We just got rid of our pro-Russian leader, and he was a disaster.” Colbert then touched on the draft executive order, which Trump tried to keep hidden from the public, outlining plans to seize voting machines after the 2020 election. “In the attempt to overturn the election, the former president wanted the military to seize the voting machines!” Colbert exclaimed. “The only thing standing between us and authoritarian takeover would’ve been elderly poll workers. “Is this getting through to everyone here, that he was going to militarize the election, and seize the votes?” he added. The order would have given the voting machines to the defense department for a 60-day review, keeping Trump in power until at least mid-February 2021. “Man, he will do anything to ruin Black History Month,” Colbert noted. Seth Meyers And on Late Night, Seth Meyers decried the draft executive order evincing the Trump administration’s plan to overturn the election. “Sometimes I feel like we’re going to be hearing revelations like this one for the rest of our lives,” Meyers said. “Some day I’ll be sitting in a nursing home, looking out the window at my favorite tree, and a nurse will come in and say ‘did you hear? Trump was training an army of rats to chew the wires out of voting machines.” The draft order cited two classified documents, suggesting the author had access to information about sensitive government secrets. “Wow, so it could’ve been a high-level government executive, or a general, or literally anyone at Mar-a-Lago,” Meyers said. “So whoever wrote this executive order was presumably someone who had access to government secrets, which is pretty crazy,” he continued. “This time, we just happened to get lucky, since Trump is too dumb to get his way and a bunch of people stopped him by threatening to quit. But what happens next time when a Republican politician wants to use the military to stay in power? “I would just like to point out,” he added, “to all the people who thought calling Trump’s plan an ‘attempted coup’ was hysterical, this latest executive order is just more proof that the threat was very real.”English cricket has come under fresh criticism for its attitudes towards racism and “outdated” stereotypes after the chairman of Middlesex, Mike O’Farrell, told parliament that the sport’s lack of diversity was down to black players preferring football and rugby and the Asian community prioritising education. Azeem Rafiq and Ebony Rainford-Brent were among those to express their disbelief after O’Farrell suggested to a digital, culture, media and sport select committee hearing that it was not cricket’s fault that more players from ethnic communities were not playing the game. “The other thing in the diversity bit is that the football and rugby world becomes much more attractive to the Afro-Caribbean community,” O’Farrell said. “And in terms of the south Asian community, we’re finding that they do not want necessarily to commit the same time that is necessary to go to the next step because they sometimes prefer to go into other educational fields, and then cricket becomes secondary. Part of that is because it’s a rather more time-consuming sport than some others. So we’re finding that’s difficult.” O’Farrell’s comments were similar to those made by the former FA chairman Greg Clarke, who was forced to resign after telling the same committee in 2020 that south Asian people choose careers in IT over sport. And they were immediately condemned by Rafiq, who gave explosive evidence to the same DCMS select committee in November where he described the game as “institutionally racist”. “This has just confirmed what an endemic problem the game has,” he tweeted. “I actually can’t believe what I am listening to #GiveMeStrength.” The former Yorkshire player later told Sky Sports: “Listening to some of his narratives, I’ve got a message for him: we all love cricket. This narrative that we’ve been hearing for a long time about the Asian people wanting to go study – that’s because we’ve not been made to feel welcome in our workspaces …” Meanwhile, the former England cricketer turned commentator Rainford-Brent, whose ACE Programme charity aims to engage young people of African and Caribbean heritage, described O’Farrell’s comments as “just painful”. “Honestly these outdated views in the game are exactly why we are in this position,” she added. “Unfortunately the decision makers hold on to these myths. ‘The Black community only likes football, and [the] Asian community is only interested in education’. Seriously, the game deserves better.” O’Farrell later apologised, saying he was “devastated” that the lack of clarity and context in his answers had led to the “conclusions some have made”. “I was aiming to make the point that as a game, cricket has failed a generation of young cricketers, in systematically failing to provide them with the same opportunities that other sports and sectors so successfully provide,” he said. “Cricket has to take responsibility for these failings. We at Middlesex are no different. We have an academy side that contains in excess of 60% British-born Asian and black young cricketers, and we must take responsibility for ensuring that the route into the professional game is as accessible and appealing as other sports or opportunities.” Earlier, during the hearing, another senior cricket executive, the Hampshire chairman Rod Bransgrove, was forced to deny allegations he had played down the racism furore in the sport. Kevin Brennan MP had told him he had heard an allegation that, at a 19 November chairs meeting at the Oval, Bransgrove had said: “The trouble is that they’ve forgotten the value of white men.” Bransgrove was also alleged to have said: “I know what racism is like. I’m a white man over 60.” However, he said in response: “Absolute nonsense.” MPs were also told that, in some cases, clubs were “overachieving” on tackling discrimination – prompting more disbelief from Rafiq, who tweeted: “Overachieving? Am I hearing this?” The ECB also faced difficult questions about its response to the resignation of Leicestershire’s Mehmooda Duke, who had been the only female chair before leaving the county in November. The chair of the committee, Julian Knight MP, told the ECB that he had spoken to Duke, and intimated that she had resigned because of cricket’s failure to tackle racism. “Do you think that it’s rather disturbing that at a time when you talk about extra diversity on the board, the one person who is a chair from an ethnic minority decides to leave as a result of inaction in this area?” Knight said. “That’s a hammer blow to the ambitions of the ECB.” The ECB refused to answer that question and another from Brennan over whether Duke felt “intimidated, coerced, and manoeuvred by the ECB?” – citing confidentiality in both cases. However, when the deputy chair of the ECB, Barry O’Brien, was asked whether Duke was “unhappy in any way with any of your personal dealings with her in the way that you’ve handled her concerns?” he replied: “Yeah. She may have been.” Meanwhile, the ECB chose Tuesday to confirm that Clare Connor will lead a review into dressing-room culture in professional men’s and women’s cricket as part of a bid to tackle racism and discrimination. Connor, the ECB’s managing director of women’s cricket and a former England captain, will begin her review in February and make recommendations “to address discriminatory attitudes and behaviours”. The ECB has already published a five-point plan, including “12 tangible actions”, and pledged £25m over five years to combat the issues of race and discrimination.Scottish office workers will be allowed to return to their desks from Monday 31 January after Nicola Sturgeon lifted strict guidance urging non-essential staff to work from home. The first minister asked employers, in an update to MSPs at Holyrood, to begin a phased return to work by introducing hybrid working next week after a continuing decline in Omicron variant cases in Scotland. Sturgeon also announced an easing of face mask rules from Friday, to allow people not wearing face coverings, such as church ministers, to stand 1 metre away from other people rather than 2 metres. Adults will also no longer be required to wear face coverings for parties or indoor events for children under five from Friday. School pupils must still wear face coverings in class, however, despite calls from the Conservatives and others for that regulation to be lifted. Sturgeon said cases numbers among children under 15 had grown 41% in Scotland since the return of schools, despite significant reductions in all other age groups. Sturgeon has faced pressure from businesses and opposition parties to lift Scotland’s stricter Covid measures, which heavily hit spending in shops, bars and restaurants during the Christmas and Hogmanay holidays. While the first minister said the tougher rules were proportionate and had helped suppress the Omicron wave far more effectively than in England, business leaders estimated they had cut spending by £1bn and were unnecessarily strict. Sturgeon said: “We would not expect to see a wholesale return to the office next week – indeed, given that the level of infection, though falling, remains high, a mass return at this stage is likely to set progress back. But we know there are many benefits to both employees and employers, and to the economy as a whole, in at least a partial return to the office at this stage.” Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, said Sturgeon was still unnecessarily controlling what people could do. “While some people will still want to work from home, why doesn’t the first minister leave that decision up to employers and workers?” he asked. “What does she think this means for the many businesses who rely on workers being in the office and back in our town and city centres?” Sturgeon told MSPs that while coronavirus was unpredictable, the latest data showed the Omicron surge had clearly subsided. On Monday strict caps on numbers for outdoor events, a ban on nightclubs and requirements for face coverings, 1-metre distancing and table service in bars were lifted. In the week to 21 January, 704 people were admitted to hospital with Covid, compared with 1,026 in the previous week. The number of Covid-positive people in intensive care had fallen to from 49 from 59 people last Tuesday.Alabama Republicans illegally discriminated against Black voters when they drew the state’s seven new congressional districts last year and must quickly redraw the plan, a federal court has ruled. The ruling is hugely consequential, a blunt assessment of the way lawmakers use their power to draw district lines to dilute the influence of Black and other minority voters. Pending lawsuits in North Carolina and Texas similarly allege that lawmakers illegally drew districts on the basis of race. About a quarter of Alabama’s population is Black but there is only one congressional district in the state where Black voters make up a majority. Plaintiffs who sued in September argued it was possible to draw a second district where Black voters made up a sizable enough portion to elect the candidate of their choice. A three-judge panel agreed on Monday, saying the state plan probably violated section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. That provision of the law outlaws voting practices that discriminate on the basis of race. “Black voters have less opportunity than other Alabamians to elect candidates of their choice to Congress,” Stanley Marcus, a judge on the US court of appeals for the 11th circuit, wrote for an unanimous panel. “The appropriate remedy is a congressional redistricting plan that includes either an additional majority Black congressional district, or an additional district in which Black voters otherwise have an opportunity to elect a representative of their choice.” Marcus, who was appointed by Bill Clinton, was joined in the opinion by Anna Manasco and Terry Moorer, both nominated by Donald Trump. The Alabama attorney general, Steve Marshall, a Republican, said the state would appeal to the US supreme court. The panel ordered state lawmakers to come up with a new plan in 14 days, and pushed back the deadline for qualifying for the ballot from 28 January to 11 February. If Republican lawmakers cannot come up with a new plan in that time, the court said it would appoint a special master to draw one. The seventh congressional district in Alabama, which stretches from Birmingham to the rural Black Belt, has consistently elected a Black Democrat to Congress for 30 years. Nearly 56% of the voting-age population in the district is Black. The state’s other six districts have all been represented by white Republicans. The plaintiffs in the case, including four voters, two state senators and several civil rights groups, argued that Alabama Republicans packed as many Black voters into the district as possible – about a third of Alabama’s Black population – in order to weaken their influence in other district across the state. The new map also split Black communities elsewhere in the state, to dilute the influence of Black voters. “It’s past time for Alabama to move beyond its sordid history of racial discrimination at the polls, and to listen to and be responsive to the needs and concerns of voters of color,” Tish Gotell Faulks, legal director for the American Civil Liberties Union of Alabama, said in a statement. The case is likely to be the first redistricting case the supreme court considers in this redistricting cycle, a process which occurs once every 10 years. While the supreme court has said it can do nothing to stop partisan gerrymandering, district plans that make it harder for minority voters to elect the candidate of their choosing remain illegal under the Voting Rights Act. Nicholas Stephanopolous, a professor at Harvard who studies redistricting, tweeted that the case offered a “textbook” example of the kind of discrimination outlawed by the Voting Rights Act. “If this doesn’t violate section 2, nothing does,” he said.In the offices of Altcointurk, a cryptocurrency hub tucked away in a sidestreet in Istanbul’s bustling Kadıköy neighbourhood, two wall-mounted TV sets showed the live value of currencies bitcoin and Ethereum, both graphs sloping downwards. Altcointurk’s all-male inhabitants were not worried – in the chaotic world of cryptocurrency, their fortunes could soon change. “A lot of people come here, some are rich, some are poor. But the target is always getting rich – although a lot of people think that if they invest a hundred dollars, they will get a million,” said one founder of Altcointurk known only as Shark, who pointedly added that he has trademarked his nickname. “Other people come here to take their first lessons in the technical side of crypto, and then start to trade,” he said. Altcointurk was founded to teach Turkish citizens about how to invest in cryptocurrencies, which provide a digital, decentralised alternative to the mainstream financial system. Cryptocurrency trading has boomed in popularity in Turkey during a financial crisis that halved the value of the lira last year, while inflation recently surged above 30%, a two-decade high. While most Turkish citizens looking to avoid the devaluation of their savings in lira tend to reinvest in dollars or gold, an increasing number of younger investors see cryptocurrencies as the way forward. This has drawn the ire of the government, particularly President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who declared that “we are in a war against Bitcoin” and recently unveiled a programme to encourage Turkish citizens to switch their savings to lira and stash the cash in the banks. To cryptocurrency believers, the increasing lack of trust in government solutions is proof that digital currencies are the best alternative to Turkey’s embattled lira. Yet whether cryptocurrencies genuinely provide an opportunity to get rich is unclear. Evangelists such as the Altcointurk founders say that if the influx of unknowing investors risk falling prey to scams or simply wasting their money, it is the fault of the individual. “People play at cryptocurrency trading like they’re gambling, like betting,” said Shark. I ask if this means people are essentially trying to gamble in order to get rich. “Yes, yes. It’s exactly like betting,” he said, laughing. Shark declined to reveal how much money he has made through cryptocurrency investments, citing concerns that the government might suddenly swoop in and tax his gains. Altcointurk members – by their own estimates – have trained more than 300 people since the hub started five years ago, and more attend a weekly event they host to preach the wonders of crypto. But they are careful how they operate in an uncertain regulatory environment, sticking purely to teaching people how to trade rather than directly assisting or discussing the benefits of any one currency. “We’re providing a point of view,” said Shark. Cryptocurrencies exist in a legal grey area in Turkey. The government banned their use to pay for goods and services in April last year, while trading them is still permitted. Several exchanges, where citizens can trade lira or usually US dollars for cryptocurrency, have closed in recent months amid confusion over the trade’s legal status. Others have closed following high-profile scandals, such as the exchange Thodex, which shut down after the owner fled the country taking at least $2bn (£1.5bn) in funds with him. But for some, the sense that others are getting rich outweighs their own sense of risk. “The huge volatility encourages people, as well as the news that other people made profits from previous bull runs,” said one crypto investor, who asked to be identified only by his initials, BG. BG owns a digital media agency, and began investing in cryptocurrencies in 2017. “Even my mother is asking me to help her invest in Bitcoin now,” he said. “This started with the young, and now older people are interested. They give their money to their children or younger people and say: ‘Invest this for me, let’s see how it goes.’ “The risk is not investing itself, it’s because people might invest in unregulated exchanges without any protection from the government and end up losing all their money.” The true size of the cryptocurrency market in Turkey is hard to estimate as many of the figures are produced by the industry itself. Bitcoin.com, a news site associated with the cryptocurrency, said in December that Turkey had surpassed a million trades a day. An estimated 5 million people in Turkey currently operate cryptocurrency trading accounts, according to politicians seeking to regulate the trade. “While there’s clearly some segment of the market that can invest in cryptocurrency, I don’t think it’s for the average consumer to all hold a bit of crypto,” said Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj, an expert in the relationship between cryptocurrency and emerging markets at Warwick Business School. Viswanath-Natraj pointed to the appeal of cryptocurrency in countries such as Turkey or Venezuela where inflation is high, but added that consumers are more likely to benefit if they choose so-called stablecoins, whose value is pegged to external factors such as the dollar. “The day-to-day fluctuations in Bitcoin are in the order of 10%, it’s high, so I wouldn’t advocate a complete reshuffle of savings to speculative cryptocurrencies,” he said. Following a steep drop in the value of the lira last December, Erdoğan announced a new financial scheme to encourage citizens to deposit their money in Turkish banks to raise the value of the currency. The scheme has attracted 90bn lira (£4.7bn) in deposits, but little of this has reportedly come from foreign currency as intended. “It’s a win-win opportunity on paper,” said BG. He said he declined to participate, as the programme requires long-term investments. Others, he said, felt it was simply too risky to trust the government. “People opposed to the government, those that support the [political] opposition, they have trust issues,” he said. “Once you have trust issues, you don’t convert your money and enrol in a government campaign like this. It’s a good idea on paper but fundamentally it won’t solve any economic problems. Long-term, it’s not going to help anything.” As the government attempts to encourage lira investments, Turkey’s parliament is drafting a law to regulate cryptocurrency markets, currently the subject of fierce debate among crypto enthusiasts. Some fear undue regulation in an industry where freedom is prized. Others say that limited regulation is necessary to protect consumers from predatory exchanges. Professional traders such as Bünyamin Emeç were dismissive of the government’s attempts to regulate the industry. “They have no clue what they’re doing, and decisions will be made by people who don’t understand how cryptocurrency works,” he said. The appeal of engaging with an industry without government interference is also seen by some like Emeç as a reason to invest. “I call on people to move towards these liberating [trading] platforms – this is my mission, basically. It’s a way of life,” he said. Emeç said continuing to invest in cryptocurrency was the only way for him to recoup $10m in digital currency trading losses and a Bitcoin scam that cost him more than $1m. “It’s a very volatile market, so I can only get that amount of money back through the same market,” he said. Additional reporting: Gökçe Saraçoğlu • This article was amended on 25 January 2022. The name of the cryptocurrency hub in Istanbul is Altcointurk, not Altcoin as stated in an earlier version.With Boris Johnson reeling, the House of Commons was a stormy place at prime minister’s questions last Wednesday. The impact on the prime minister’s fate was minutely scrutinised. As a result, a separate exchange during that session has had less attention than it deserves. In one of his questions, Keir Starmer began talking about the contrast, widely highlighted in the media beforehand, between the Queen sitting alone, obeying Covid rules at her husband’s funeral, and staff at No 10 ignoring the rules while partying with colleagues the previous evening. You might think this was a reasonable point for a parliamentarian to make. But no. For at this point the Commons Speaker Lindsay Hoyle intervened and told MPs: “We normally would not, and quite rightly, mention the royal family. We do not get into discussions on the royal family.” Reprimanded, Starmer moved on to his next question. Why did the Speaker do this? Why do “we” – the House of Commons – normally not mention the royal family? And why is this restraint, in the Speaker’s view, apparently “quite right”? Here, surely, is a conversation this country should have. The convention is dubious, absurd and not a little hypocritical. It is ripe for reform. We should be clear. What the Speaker told Starmer last week was not some idiosyncratic assertion. His intervention was institutional, not personal. He was restating established practice as set out in the Commons procedural bible, Erskine May. Hoyle was also saying exactly what three former Westminster clerks had told me a few days earlier that he would say if an MP ever tried to ask a question about either the monarch or the royal family – or specifically challenged the behaviour and official standing of Prince Andrew, the Duke of York. Erskine May is an accumulation of procedural evolution and convention – not a law book. It states that to use the Queen’s name to influence a decision is “unconstitutional in principle and inconsistent with the independence of parliament”. The rule extends to mention of other members of the royal family too. If a royal has expressed an opinion – as Prince Charles has often done – then comment “in appropriate terms” is permitted, but as the Speaker showed last week, the boundaries are carefully policed. The ostensible justification for what the Speaker said was that questions to ministers can deal only with matters of ministerial responsibility. Since no minister answers to parliament for the royal family, the subject is off-limits. And yet it wasn’t always like this. In 1809 – before Erskine May was codified – the Commons held an inquiry into the conduct of another Duke of York, who resigned as commander in chief of the army as a result. Nor does it mean, even in 2021, that no minister has responsibility for the royal family. Because they do. In reality, the prime minister has that role as the Queen’s chief adviser (arguably the chancellor of the exchequer and the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster have responsibilities too). The prime minister advises the Queen on all sorts of subjects, including the royal family itself, and ultimately he or she will advise her on her own conduct. Examples in fairly recent times stretch from what is still the most dramatic of them all, the abdication of Edward VIII in 1936, through Princess Margaret’s relationship with Peter Townsend in the 1950s, the royal divorces in the late 20th century, the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, and whether Prince Charles should marry Camilla Parker Bowles. Prime ministers have been involved in advising on all of these cases. In one or two cases, they have even given brief statements to the Commons about them. Indeed it is a reasonable bet that Johnson will have advised the Queen on both the withdrawal from public life of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex in 2020 and the handling of Prince Andrew’s position in the Virginia Giuffre case in recent weeks. It is strange but true that the partying prime minister is likely to have given his advice, or had his advice sought by the Palace, on whether the partying prince should be stripped of his honours. Yet why not? Andrew’s conduct raises the danger of reputational damage to the royal family and to the constitutional monarchy, and thus to Britain’s standing. A prime minister ought to be concerned about that. So, by the same yardstick, ought MPs. They should therefore be able to ask the prime minister about his role and advice, and to express their own views. These are, after all, matters of public interest as well as matters of interest to the public. All of this raises a much larger question for British democracy. Since we are a constitutional monarchy – and proud of it, in the majority of cases – how can it be that our parliament is gagged – and is gagging itself – from talking about how that constitutional monarchy is actually working? The effect is self-important self-censorship. A lot of this is about deference to the 95-year-old Queen, who is hugely respected. Yet once the Queen dies the same deference may not be seamlessly carried forward. It may even disappear. The idea that in the “new” monarchy, after the Queen’s death, the public will continue to feel constrained from talking about the royal family in the same way is likely to be false. We should all – parliament included – prepare to have these conversations more openly. We are adults, entitled to discuss the kind of constitutional monarchy under which we live, entitled to discuss what it stands for (not least in terms of the established religion), and who is and is not part of it. This happens in other monarchies, but not ours. It ought to start here too, and now, because decisions about the slimmed-down firm that is reportedly planned by Princes Charles and William will in many cases have been taken already. Even if Charles was to announce such changes on his accession, the Speaker would probably still be advising that MPs could not express their views. This is plain silly. The Speaker is wrong. It is time for parliament to stand up for itself. It is time for the party leaders and senior backbenchers – people such as Peter Bottomley, Harriet Harman, David Davis and Joanna Cherry – to get together and find a way to let the sunshine in. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistDora Black, who has died aged 89 of cancer, was a pioneering child and adolescent psychiatrist who voiced a much-needed refrain, “but what about the children?”, in situations where young people’s emotional needs were not being considered. She became an international expert in helping children where one parent, nearly always the father, had killed the other. Dora began to receive such referrals in the 1980s, eventually becoming involved in about 700 cases. Many of the children had witnessed the killing and were able to describe to her the traumatic events, sometimes through pictures. Assessment of these troubling cases demanded an approach encompassing the many parties involved. They included not only the guilty parent, but also grandparents and the criminal law and child protective services, all of which were directly impinging on the children’s lives. Dora ensured that the child’s interests remained paramount in this traumatic web. Despite the very large number of children referred, she was able to extend individual attention to each child, sometimes accompanying them to visit the surviving parent in prison. Dora’s interest in bereaved children had begun earlier, in the 1970s. Up till then, Cruse, the National Charity for Bereavement Care, had focused on helping widows. She initiated the inclusion of bereaved children and widowers, and served as the charity’s vice chair (1975-90). Granted a Winston Churchill travelling fellowship in 1993, she studied trauma services for children in the US. Then, in 1995, with Dr Stuart Turner, she established the Camden NHS traumatic stress clinic in central London. Its unique feature was the inclusion of all family members – children as well as adults who had been affected by traumatic events. Although describing herself as a clinician, Dora published widely and lectured all over the world, especially on the management of bereaved children. A second edition of her multi-authored seminal book, When Father Kills Mother (1983), was issued in 2000. She was invited in 1999 to become a member of the Home Office review of prison mother and baby units. While material needs such as nappies and baby milk were well supplied, the often troubled mother-child relationship was neglected. Among her contributions was the appointment of nursery nurses in all these prisons. Born in north London, Dora was the elder daughter of Rachel (nee Saetah) and Philip Braham, a manufacturer of tubular steel furniture. Together with her mother and sister, she was evacuated in 1940 to New York, later joining her father, then a liaison officer between the RAF and the Royal Canadian Air Force, in Canada. Returning to London in 1945, she attended Hendon county grammar school, where she met Jack Black, her husband-to-be, when both were aged 15. She was the first in her family to attend university. Determined to read medicine, despite the government’s instructions in 1947 to increase the tiny number of female medical students she still had to make 21 applications before being accepted at Birmingham University medical school, from which she graduated with honours in 1955. This experience led her to a lifelong involvement with the Medical Women’s Federation. After junior medical and surgical appointments, she trained in psychiatry at the Maudsley hospital, London. She chose to practise child and adolescent psychiatry, which enabled her to work part-time until 1984. Her first consultant post was in St Albans and Watford in 1966. Two years later she moved to Edgware general hospital, where she became one of the first child psychiatrists to establish paediatric liaison services. Moving to a full-time consultant post at the Royal Free hospital in 1984, she extend her clinical activity and drive to helping children who had been traumatised, and established the first children’s trauma clinic in the UK. With increasing national recognition, Dora began to receive referrals from the whole UK of, often young, children, from families where one parent had killed the other, leading to the establishment of the traumatic stress clinic. After retirement from the NHS in 1997, she continued to work as an honorary consultant at the traumatic stress clinic until 2005. She then extended her work as an expert witness in family court proceedings until her final retirement in 2013. Dora ascribed her capacity to cope emotionally with the many harrowing situations she encountered to her own settled childhood; the indispensable teams with whom she worked; the fact of making a positive change to children’s lives; and to the constant support of Jack. Dora had a forceful personality. When she was 17, her headteacher’s report read: “Dora still does not suffer fools gladly but she now lets them down more lightly.” However, what marked her out was her unremitting concern for children’s wellbeing, which she achieved through her determination, tenacity and energy. As part of her persuasive personality, she was an inspiration for others. Her warm, caring nature and love towards her family and lasting friendships were laced with humour and a zest for life. She married Jack, by then a solicitor, in 1955, and they had three children. While actively engaged in their own careers, Dora and Jack were an inseparable unit, collecting honorary grandchildren as they travelled the world, often to each other’s conferences. They read avidly together and enjoyed theatre and music, which was a passion in the household. She was happy to see their only grandchild, Matthew’s, passing out parade at Sandhurst. Dora is survived by Jack, their children Andrew and Sophie, and grandson, Matthew, and her sister Elaine. Another child, David, died in 2010. • Dora Black, psychiatrist, born 2 July 1932; died 16 December 2021According to new research, student gambling addicts are spending an average of £30 a week on betting. In a survey of 2,000 students, conducted by YGAM youth gambling charity and Gamstop, 80% said they gambled, with 35% of those admitting they have borrowed money in order to do so. We would like to hear from university students aged 18 and over about their experiences of gambling. How old were you when you started? Have you lost money? Do you consider your gambling to be a problem? Has the pandemic had any impact on your experience? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.On Monday evening on the dot of 7pm people emerged from dimly lit side streets and gathered on the Oberkirchplatz square in Cottbus for what has become a weekly ritual in towns and cities across Germany: a protest against coronavirus protection measures. The demonstrations have grown in strength as cases of the Omicron variant have surged, and in recent weeks a looming decision on bringing in a vaccine mandate has become the focus of protesters’ ire. More than 2,000 rallies were held nationwide on Monday, drawing tens of thousands of participants. In Cottbus, a university city south-east of Berlin, a familiar pattern played out. Moments after the protest started, police declared over megaphone that it was illegal – the participants did not wear masks or physically distance from each other. Groups then broke away and began the Spaziergänge, walks that snake in a variety of directions and are designed to overwhelm any police response. Dressed in padded coats and woolly hats, the protesters were an inconspicuous crowd. “We are just having an evening stroll,” one woman smirked amiably from under a red woollen beret. “Exercising our right to stretch our legs.” The gentle click of heels and umbrella studs on wet cobbled stones was quickly drowned out, however, by a man who bellowed “Frieden, Freiheit, keine Diktatur!” (Peace, freedom, no dictatorship) then “Widerstand!” (Resistance). A woman nearby took up the cry with “Wir sind das Volk!” (We are the people) – the chant that echoed around cities across communist east Germany in 1989 before the fall of the Berlin Wall. Those willing to talk mostly said they wanted to show local and national politicians they had had enough of restrictions. Several said they were not vaccinated; some refused to say. Hardly any were willing to reveal their names. “I just want my freedom back,” said one elderly woman. Another younger woman said she was trying to stop the government from forcibly vaccinating her nine-year-old, though there is currently no plan to oblige parents to have children vaccinated. A physiotherapist, one of the few protesters who was wearing a mask, said she was fearful of losing her job if she refuses to get vaccinated under plans for a mandate for medical staff, due to be introduced next month. Asked why there was need for resistance, Maik, a landscape gardener who refused to wear a mask – calling them “chin nappies” – said: “When injustice becomes law, resistance is our duty.” There is growing evidence that the protests are being manipulated behind the scenes by rightwing populists and far-right groups, who see issues such as restrictions on gatherings, insistence on the wearing of medical masks as well as a possible vaccine mandate for adults as topics ripe for political exploitation. Zukunft Heimat (Future Homeland), a far-right group founded in 2015 at the height of the refugee crisis that spreads a nationalist, anti-refugee message, coordinates much of the activity around demonstrations in the state of Brandenburg, including Cottbus. Ahead of Monday’s rallies, it posted a message from one of its co-founders, Christoph Berndt, a dentist who is also the parliamentary leader of the far-right populist AfD in Brandenburg and has been a speaker at anti-refugee Pegida rallies. He called on people to “defend our freedom and our democracy …” against a government which is “treating its citizens with disdain”. Berndt has previously questioned whether anyone has died of Covid, said he does not believe the virus exists, and refused to wear a mask because it is a “symbol of suppression”. On chat rooms and in conversations on messaging apps about the rallies, people talk about wanting to topple the government, comparing the administration to a dictatorship. Those who once rallied against the former chancellor, Angela Merkel, over her refugee policy now rail against her successor, Olaf Scholz, and his health minister, Karl Lauterbach. Some refer, online and in person – with what generally appears as glee – to a conspiracy theory called Tag X (Day X) that predicts Germany’s “entire system” will collapse due to critical infrastructure being disabled by quarantine measures. Rally participants are encouraged to “put sand into the cogs of a system” already perceived to be on its last legs, and lighthearted references are made to a “civil war mood”. At the time of the refugee crisis, rightwing extremists linked to the far-right Identitarian movement, the rightwing-focused advertising agency One Per Cent and the thinktank Institut für Staatspolitik (IfS) built a digital map, showing the location of anti-Islam protests across Germany. People could put in their postcode and find their nearest rally. A similar map has been produced for the coronavirus “Spaziergang” movement, created by the far-right association Filmkunstkollektiv, whose members and supporters include Identitarians, members of the IfS, and One Per Cent. Filmkunstkollektiv is also known to have produced film material for the AfD, recently accompanying its youth wing on a “vaccine strike” in Berlin. It also has an association with the far-right Compact magazine, whose latest cover depicts a young man with needles and syringes embedded in his body, under the title “Vaccine dictatorship – being boosted to death”. Much of the wind for the protests has come from neighbouring Austria, where plans for a vaccine mandate and the fightback against it are more inflamed. There, the founder of the Identitarian movement, Martin Sellner, has referred to vaccine passports and fines as “totalitarian instruments”. This mindset was reflected in some of the protesters on Monday night, even those who declared themselves “apolitical”. In a chat group on an instant messaging service that provides a running commentary of the Monday protests, an unvaccinated woman wrote that since she has had to to abide by rules that ban those not vaccinated or recovered from many non-essential activities, “it is possible to put oneself in the shoes of Jews who suddenly had their basic rights removed from them during the Third Reich”. Such remarks have been widely condemned. Experts on Germany’s constitution have warned that the victimhood narrative expressed by many of the protesters is in danger of being exploited by extremist elements. They cite the murder last September of a petrol pump attendant shot by a man after he refused to serve him for not wearing a mask as proof that they are not exaggerating. Less than an hour into the rally in Cottbus on Monday night, the several hundred peaceful protesters were playing a game of cat and mouse with the police, who managed to kettle in one group next to a Glühwein kiosk. There were some wild theories doing the rounds. A primary school teacher called Brigitte, walking with a group of friends towards the old market square, said she gave credence to a theory that the vaccine campaign is “an attempt to thin out the world’s population”. The 73% of Germans who are vaccinated are supposed to die, she said. “If this is the case, then I am one of the 26% who will live to make this nation great again.” Asked what the source for the theory was, she replied she “read it on one of my newsfeeds”. • This article was amended on 25 January 2022 to replace the main image, which had been incorrectly captioned as showing anti-vaccination demonstrators; the people photographed were in fact a group of counter-protesters.Unlike most city grandees, Paul Myners was a consistent advocate of social change. Last year a small group of us, volunteers campaigning to protect the BBC and public service broadcasting, went to him for help and advice, and he agreed to chair the British Broadcasting Challenge. The venture benefited immeasurably from his incisive intelligence, the speed of his decision-making, and his conviction that the government had to be stopped from wrecking a great British institution. He was fearless, asking embarrassing questions in the House of Lords and using freedom of information (FOI) inquiries with relish. He thought it was the right thing to do and we miss him very much.Time to wrap up.. here’s today’s main stories. Goodnight. GW Back on Wall Street, stocks remain bogged down. The S&amp;P 500 index has stuck in the red all morning, now down 1.86% or 82 points at 4,328 points. The tech sector is leading the selloff, followed by consumer discretionary stocks, communications, materials, and industrials. Only energy is higher. Walid Koudmani, market analyst at financial brokerage XTB, sums up the situation: “Markets are increasingly uncertain as contrasting signs continue to emerge and add to the already noticeable volatility perceived across a variety of asset classes. While one of the main concerns continues to be rising inflation and the imminent monetary policy decision due from the Fed on Wednesday, rising tensions on the Russia-Ukraine border and some disappointing earnings in this latest Wall Street season have added fuel to the fire and caused even bigger moves. While the instability seen across indices and stock markets may appear to be a technical correction, there is a risk that there might be more to come if these complex situations are not addressed in the appropriate manner.” Other European markets have also closed higher tonight, but it’s a very modest recover. Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC have gained 0.75%, after falling around 4% in yesterday’s stock rout. The pan-European Stoxx 600 is 0.8% higher, after falling to its lowest since October last night. David Madden, market analyst at Equiti Capital, says: The markets have seen a lot of volatility in the past two sessions as mounting tensions about a possible war between Russia and Ukraine, along with chatter the Federal Reserve will issue a hawkish update tomorrow has been driving sentiment. European stock markets suffered major losses yesterday as the possibility of an invasion of Ukraine rocked sentiment. The DAX and the CAC have pulled back some of the ground that was lost yesterday, but today’s gains are very small when compared with yesterday’s declines – which underlines the muted buying appetitive. While the headlines persist about a possible conflict in Eastern Europe, German, French and Italian markets might find it difficult to retest the peaks that were registered at the start of the month. The prospect that the Federal Reserve reaffirm its hawkish position tomorrow, and plan to hike interest rates several times this year, is worrying investors, he adds: It is widely believed the Fed will hike interest rates this year, but traders remain divided over how many rate hikes we might see, some predict three hikes, while others are forecasting four increases. There are concerns that if the Fed adopts an overly hawkish strategy, and raise rates too high too quickly, it could put pressure on the economic recover. Here’s Naomi Rovnick of the FT: The UK stock market has managed a modest recovery after its worst day in two months. The FTSE 100 has closed 74 points higher tonight at 7371 points, up 1% -- which only claws back less than half of Monday’s 2.6% slide. Online grocery tech business Ocado led the risers, up 5%. Oil companies also rallied, with BP up 4.3% and Shell gaining 3.6%, tracking the recovery in crude prices. Financial stocks also had a good day, with Asia-Pacific focused bank Standard Chartered (+5%), asset manager Abrdn (+4.5%), HSBC (+3.5%) and NatWest (+3.4%) higher. The FTSE hit a two-year high earlier this month, before being caught up in anxiety that the US central bank will withdraw its stimulus measures rapidly to tame inflation. Oil has rebounded from yesterday’s losses, with Brent crude up 1.3% at $87.43 per barrel. That takes it back towards last week’s seven-year highs, over $89 per barrel, lifted by rising geopolitical tensions and higher demand. Investment banks are predicting that oil will keep climbing this year, which would add further inflationary pressure to the global economy. Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at OANDA, explains: Oil got caught up in the sell-everything panic at the start of the week, sliding more than 3% at one stage before recovering a little. There wasn’t much sense behind the move, but the fact that the dollar was strengthening and crude was already seeing profit-taking after peaking just shy of $90, probably contributed to it. The market remains fundamentally bullish and conflict with Russia does nothing to alleviate supply-side pressures. If anything, the risks are tilted in the other direction, not that I think it will come to that. Nor does the market at this point, it seems. Still, it was only likely to be a matter of time until oil bulls poured back in and prices are up again today. The correction from the peak was less than 5% so that may be a little premature, but then the market is very tight so perhaps not. After that early dive, stocks on Wall Street are recovering a little ground. The Dow is now down 1.2%, or 435 points, while the tech-focused Nasdaq is 2.3% lower. So not a turnaround - but another volatile session. American Express has jumped 7.3% after beating profit estimates in the last quarter, while IBM are up 2.2% after posting its best sales growth in 10 years last night. Big tech are weaker, though. Microsoft, which reports results after the closing bell, are down 2.8% while Apple are 1.8% lower. US consumer confidence has ebbed, in another sign that Omicron and rising inflation have knocked the economic recovery. The Conference Board’s consumer confidence index has declined this month, after three months of gains, with Americans’ growing less optimistic about short-term economic prospect. The index dipped to 113.8 this month, from 115.2 in December. The Present Situation Index—based on consumers’ assessment of current business and labor market conditions—improved to 148.2 from 144.8 last month. The Expectations Index—based on consumers’ short-term outlook for income, business, and labor market conditions—declined to 90.8 from 95.4. Lynn Franco, senior director of economic indicators at The Conference Board, explains: “The Present Situation Index improved, suggesting the economy entered the new year on solid footing. However, expectations about short-term growth prospects weakened, pointing to a likely moderation in growth during the first quarter of 2022. Nevertheless, the proportion of consumers planning to purchase homes, automobiles, and major appliances over the next six months all increased. Meanwhile, concerns about inflation declined for the second straight month, but remain elevated after hitting a 13-year high in November 2021. Concerns about the pandemic increased slightly, amid the ongoing Omicron surge. Looking ahead, both confidence and consumer spending may continue to be challenged by rising prices and the ongoing pandemic.” Here’s a video from the IMF explaining how supply chain disruption and rising energy costs are hitting growth and pushing up inflation: The US stock markets has fallen sharply at the start of trading, after Monday’s turbulent session. All three major indices are deep in the red, having rebounded from heavy losses yesterday. The Dow Jones Industrial Average: down 782 points or 2.3% at 33,581 points S&amp;P 500: down 122 points or 2.8% at 4,287 points Nasdaq Composite: down 414 points or 2.99% at 13,440.27 Anxiety that the US central bank will tighten monetary policy sharply to rein in inflation is sweeping Wall Street again, with the Ukraine crisis also a key worry. Raffi Boyadjian, lead investment analyst at XM, says traders are concerned that the Fed could hurt the recovery, which may already be faltering: The US Federal Reserve starts its two-day monetary policy meeting today and although no change is expected at tomorrow’s announcement, speculation is running high that Fed chief Powell will flag a sharp removal of accommodation at the next meetings. Markets are now in no doubt that policymakers need to act quickly to get a grip on inflation. But there are worries that the Fed has fallen so behind the curve, it won’t be possible to bring inflation back under control without choking off growth. Yesterday’s flash PMIs out of the US have already raised question marks about the strength of the economy as they pointed to stagnating growth in January. The IMF has called on the UK government to consider more support for the poorest households who face a big increase in their energy bills when the price cap is next lifted in April. “Very targeted, well-targeted support is important,” IMF deputy managing director Gita Gopinath said at a news conference today when asked if Britain’s government should provide more support for low-income households. Presenting the Fund’s latest growth forecasts, Gopinath explained: “This should be well-targeted support to highly vulnerable households who are having to face very high cost increases ... That would be useful. These energy costs are going to go up in April further.” Analysts have predicted UK energy bills could rise by 50% in April, following the surge in wholesale gas and electricity prices recently. The International Monetary Fund says it cut its forecast for British economic growth this year due to disruptions from the Omicron variant of the coronavirus and supply constraints, but raised its estimate for growth in 2023. The IMF said it now expected British gross domestic product would expand by 4.7% in 2022 and by 2.3% in 2023, compared with its previous forecasts - made in October - of 5.0% and 1.9%. The new forecasts were made in an update of the IMF’s World Economic Outlook. The cut to Britain’s expected growth rate in 2022 was the smallest among the Group of Seven economies with the exception of Japan. “In the United Kingdom, disruptions related to Omicron and supply constraints - particularly in labour and energy markets - mean that growth is revised down.” The International Monetary Fund has sharply cut its growth forecast for 2022 with a warning that higher-than-expected inflation and the Omicron variant have worsened the outlook for the global economy. In a quarterly update to predictions made in October 2021, the IMF said it anticipated growth of 4.4% this year – down 0.5 percentage points – and emphasised the risks were of a weaker performance. The Washington-based organisation blamed the downgrade on rising cost pressures and the rapid spread of Omicron, and said while the 2022 outlook was markedly worse for the world’s two biggest economies – the US and China – few countries would be spared a slowdown. The UK is expected to grow by 4.7% in 2022, a cut of 0.3 points to the IMF’s forecast in its October 2021 World Economic Outlook. Despite the reduction, the IMF anticipates the UK growing faster this year than the other six members of the G7 industrial nations – the US, Japan, Germany, France, Italy and Canada. “News of the Omicron variant led to increased mobility restrictions and financial market volatility at the end of 2021. Supply disruptions have continued to weigh on activity”, the IMF said, noting bottlenecks had shaved between 0.5% and 1% off global growth in 2021. “Meanwhile, inflation has been higher and more broad-based than anticipated, particularly in the US. Adding to these pressures, the retrenchment in China’s real estate sector appears to be more drawn out, and the recovery in private consumption is weaker than previously expected.” In the shipping world, the Baltic Exchange’s dry bulk sea freight index has dropped again today, for the 13th session running. That shows that the cost of transporting cargoes has dipped again. It could be a sign that supply chain problems are easing. After an extraordinary rebound yesterday, Wall Street stocks are on track to open lower in an hour’s time. Union has vowed to fight Royal Mail’s plan to axe 700 managerial jobs. Unite says its members were being made the scapegoat for the bosses’ failure to maintain deliveries during the pandemic. The threat of an industrial action ballot was now on the cards, it warns. Mike Eatwell, Unite national lead officer for the CMA sector, says: “Unite managers were no more immune from the risks of the pandemic than anyone else, but that did not stop them helping on delivery rounds when postal operatives numbers were severely depleted. The current leadership team’s fixation on headlines to shore up the share price is behind this latest attack on our members’ job security and we need to respond accordingly.” General Electric has missed Wall Street’s sales expectations, as supply chain problems hit the conglomerate which is splitting itself into three. GE, which announced break-up plans last November, reported that revenues fell 3% year-on-year in the last quarter of 2021 to $20.303bn, below forecasts. Although its Aviation division posted a 4% rise in revenues, healthcare revenues fell 4%. Its renewable energy arm saw a 6% drop in revenues, and a 23% tumble in orders, which GE blames on “production tax credit uncertainty delaying investment in U.S. Onshore Wind equipment”. GE made a pre-tax loss of almost $3.5bn in the last quarter, compared with a profit of $2.58bn a year ago. But on an adjusted basis, earnings were 92 cents a share in the period, more than the 84 cents predicted by analysts. Chairman and CEO Lawrence Culp, who is splitting GE into separate jet engine, hospital equipment and power machinery businesses, says: “2021 was an important year for the GE team, marked by significant strategic, operational, and financial progress. We delivered solid margin, EPS, and free cash flow performance in 2021, exceeding our outlook. Orders for the year were up double digits, supporting faster growth going forward, while supply chain challenges, commercial selectivity, and uncertainty surrounding the U.S. wind production tax credit impacted our top-line. GE also forecast that organic revenues and adjusted earnings will growth this year, partly due to a commercial market recovery in aviation. But it also predicts continued inflation challenges, with the most adverse impact expected in Onshore Wind. Earnings news: credit card operator American Express has beaten expectations, after seeing record spending by its customers. American Express has posted net income of $1.7bn, or $2.18 per share, for the last quarter, up from $1.4bn, or $1.76 per share, a year ago. That exceeded expectations of $1.87 per share. Stephen J. Squeri, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, says: “Our investment strategy enabled us to reach record levels of Card Member spending, maintain customer retention and satisfaction above pre-pandemic levels, increase new Card acquisitions, grow our loan balances, and deepen our digital engagement with customers, producing revenue growth of 30 percent in the fourth quarter and 17 percent for the full year. UK factories are planning to raise their prices by the most since 1977, fuelling the cost of living squeeze, after being hit by surging costs and shortages of skilled labour. The CBI’s latest industrial trends survey has found that UK manufacturing sector continues to face intense cost and price pressures. Firms reported that their average costs in the quarter to January grew at their quickest rate since April 1980, and they don’t see any let-up soon -- with costs expected to grow at a similar pace over the next three months. As a result, the balance of firms expecting to hike domestic prices this quarter, rather than lower them, rose to 66% - the highest reading since April 1977. The export prices expectations balance was the highest since January 1980. Rain Newton-Smith, CBI chief economist, warns: “Global supply chain challenges are continuing to impact UK firms, with our survey showing intense and escalating cost and price pressures. Manufacturers also raised prices sharply over the last three months, close to the previous quarter’s record pace. Factories are also being hit by staff shortages -- the share of firms saying skilled labour shortages will limit their output next quarter hit the highest level since October 1973. Tom Crotty, group director at chemicals producer INEOS, says: “It is no surprise that manufacturers remain acutely concerned about the impact of labour shortages on their business. Alongside this, manufacturers continue to face rising energy costs and broader inflationary pressures amid ongoing supply chain disruptions. The government must work together with businesses to tackle these challenges as we begin to feel the effects of the cost-of-living crunch. There was a small fall in the proportion of firms saying shortages of materials and components would limit growth, but it remained elevated by historical standards. UK manufacturing output volumes in the quarter to January grew at a slower pace than in December, though growth remained firm compared with the long-run average. Output increased in 10 out of 17 sub-sectors, with headline growth mostly driven by the food, drink &amp; tobacco sub-sector. A majority of manufacturers expect output growth to increase in the next quarter. Bloomberg are reporting that tech giant Nvidia is preparing to abandon its purchase of UK chip designer Arm, after struggling to win approval for the deal. Here’s the story: Nvidia Corp. is quietly preparing to abandon its purchase of Arm Ltd. from SoftBank Group Corp. after making little to no progress in winning approval for the $40bn chip deal, according to people familiar with the matter. Nvidia has told partners that it doesn’t expect the transaction to close, according to one person, who asked not to be identified because the discussions are private. SoftBank, meanwhile, is stepping up preparations for an Arm initial public offering as an alternative to the Nvidia takeover, another person said. The purchase -- poised to become the biggest semiconductor deal in history when it was announced in September 2020 -- has drawn a fierce backlash from regulators and the chip industry, including Arm’s own customers. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission sued to stop the transaction in December, arguing that Nvidia would become too powerful if it gained control over Arm’s chip designs. The acquisition also faces resistance in China, where authorities are inclined to block the takeover if it wins approvals elsewhere, according to one person. But they don’t expect it to get that far. The deal for the Cambridge-based chip designer has also faced scrutiny in the UK. In November, the government ordered an in-depth investigation that could result in the deal being blocked. The “phase 2” investigation was ordered on public interest grounds, due to competition and national security concerns. European stock markets have pushed this morning, although anxiety over the Ukraine crisis and tomorrow’s Federal Reserve meeting are still high. The FTSE 100 is now up 60 points, or 0.8%, recovering around a third of Monday’s fall. Germany’s DAX (+1.2%) and France’s CAC (+1.4%) are also staging a moderate rebound. The pan-European Stoxx 600 hits its lowest since October yesterday, meaning some stocks now look more attractive. As Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, puts it: “Stocks are on sale and European traders and investors are bargain hunting. Demand for shares at discounted pricing is driving today’s mini rally after a cocktail of concerns around the Fed and geopolitical tensions sparked the worst day for European indices since June 2020. Although Wall Street staged an impressive comeback into the close last night, swinging from losses to gains, the positive energy failed to permeate the Asian session which saw the Shanghai Composite shed more than 2.5%.” Japan’s Nikkei also had a tough session, hitting its lowest levels in over a year. Wall Street is expected to open lower after first sliding then recovering yesterday. Investors are anxious to hear from the Fed chair Jerome Powell tomorrow - for details on how it plans to unwind its stimulus programme, and whether interest rates will probably rise in March. The European Union’s securities watchdog has warned that the “gamification” of the financial markets has introduced a new generation of retail investors who may not be aware there are few protections in assets like cryptocurrencies, Reuters reports: Gamification refers to using smartphones to trade, a trend which took off on Wall Street during the coronavirus pandemic with apps like Robinhood, and has spilled over into European markets. “We want investors to engage more in financial markets and not just keep their money under the mattress,” Verena Ross, chair of the European Securities and Markets Authority, told a Forum Europe financial services conference. But gamification also presents significant risks, creates speculation and leaves investors not realising there are protections when trading markets like cryptoassets, she said. Social media has also allowed the spread of unauthorised trading advice and the bloc is due this year to revamp its “retail investor” strategy to reflect the rise of digital finance, Ross said. “We are looking at how to raise awareness and warn investors what they are letting themselves in for,” Ross said. The bloc has already proposed banning “payment for order flow” in the retail market. More here: ‘Gamification’ in financial markets under scrutiny, says EU watchdog [Payment for order flow is the controversial process where market makers pay a fee to receive retail investors’ orders. It gives them a better view of the market, and allows retail trading apps to offer zero-commission, but regulators fear it creates conflicts of interest.] Royal Mail shares have jumped 5%, leading the FTSE 100 risers this morning. But the company should be careful not to go too far with its cost-cutting programme, warns Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell. Royal Mail’s latest update showed the firm is continuing to drive efficiencies with plans to cut a further 700 management jobs. “The decline in parcel volumes year-on-year is only to be expected given tough comparative figures to beat as a year earlier nearly all retail stores were shuttered thanks to Covid restrictions, meaning demand for online orders soared. “Perhaps more important is the fact the company maintained its share of a highly competitive market and it remains confident that, as we emerge from the pandemic, the amount of parcels being sent will remain permanently higher, thanks to a structural shift in the way people buy goods. “It’s not all positive news. Royal Mail has seen a substantial increase in the number of complaints as deliveries have faced big delays in recent weeks. “In fairness at least some of this can be attributed to a factor entirely out of its control as the Omicron variant left many of its workers sick and unable to work. “In streamlining the business, Royal Mail needs to ensure it doesn’t go too far and diminish its operational capability or spark widespread industrial action, the threat of which has hung over the business in the past. “Outside of the UK, Royal Mail’s GLS international parcel courier division continues to make solid progress, and perhaps at some point suggestions that this part of the group might be spun off could be revived.” Germany still risks falling into a recession, despite the pick-up in business confidence this month. Germany’s economy is expected to have shrunk in the final three months of 2021, and could stagnate, or worse, in January-March too. Carsten Brzeski, global head of macro at ING, says: The German economy went into hibernation at the turn of the year. When the first official estimates are released on Friday, it will require a small miracle for them not to show a contraction in the economy in the final quarter of 2021. And despite today’s improvement in sentiment, the risk of Germany being in an outright recession has not disappeared. Even with some temporary relief from exports and industrial activity, the Omicron wave in Asia and the Chinese New Year clearly argue against a steep short-term improvement in supply chains. Consequently, global supply chain frictions, the impact of the current social restrictions on leisure, hospitality and retail, and the impact of high energy prices on private consumption do not bode well for the short-term outlook for the German economy. However, such a technical recession would be mild and short-lived and is unlikely to harm the labour market, he adds [although the Ukraine crisis does also threaten the recovery]. On the contrary, we stick to our view that the German economy will stage an impressive comeback in the spring. Admittedly, geopolitical risks could still spoil the growth party but the end of social restrictions and significant relief in global supply chains should combine to give the German economy an enormous boost. German business morale improved in January for the first time in seven months, in a sign that Europe’s largest economy could be turning the corner. The IFO institute’s business climate index has risen to 95.7 this month from an upwardly revised 94.8 in December, with company bosses more upbeat about the outlook. Ifo President Clemens Fuest said. “The German economy is starting the new year with a glimmer of hope.” Yesterday’s survey of German purchasing managers showed that the supply chain problems that have hurt factories for many months have started to ease. Jobs are also being cut at Unilever. The Marmite maker Unilever has just announced it plans to cut around 1,500 senior and junior management roles as part of a global restructuring plan. The FTSE 100 company, known for brands such as Dove soap, Hellmann’s mayonnaise and Ben &amp; Jerry’s ice-cream, announced the cuts as it comes under mounting pressure from a US activist investor and other shareholders to improve its performance. Unilever employs about 150,000 people worldwide, including 6,000 in the UK and Ireland. The chief executive, Alan Jope, has been under pressure for months to revive sales growth as the company missed its profit margin targets. In recent days it emerged that the US activist investor Nelson Peltz has built a stake in the troubled company. Unilever says it will reorganises its operations around five Business Groups: Beauty &amp; Wellbeing, Personal Care, Home Care, Nutrition, and Ice Cream. The proposed new organisation model will result in a reduction in senior management roles of around 15% and more junior management roles by 5%, equivalent to around 1,500 roles globally. Changes will be subject to consultation. We do not expect factory teams to be impacted by these changes. Jope says the move will create ‘crystal-clear accountability for delivery’: “Our new organisational model has been developed over the last year and is designed to continue the step-up we are seeing in the performance of our business. Moving to five category-focused Business Groups will enable us to be more responsive to consumer and channel trends, with crystal-clear accountability for delivery. Growth remains our top priority and these changes will underpin our pursuit of this.” Back in the markets, the Russian rouble has stabilised after a rocky Monday. The rouble is 0.15% stronger against the dollar at 78.66, after hitting a 14-month low of 79.50 yesterday. Overnight, US president Joe Biden insisted there was “total” unity among western powers after crisis talks with European leaders on how to deter Russia from an attack against Ukraine, as Downing Street warned of “unprecedented sanctions” against Moscow should an invasion take place. Bethany Beckett, UK economist at Capital Economics, says: Stronger tax revenues were just enough to offset big rises in debt interest costs in December. But we don’t expect this to last: further rises in inflation will mean borrowing soon overshoots the OBR’s forecast. Even so, our forecasts suggest the Chancellor still has enough fiscal space to cancel April’s rise in NIC taxes. The government borrowed almost £17bn to balance its books last month – the fourth highest December total on record – as the public finances felt the impact of sharply rising inflation. Rising tax receipts were partly offset by a surge in interest payments on the £2tn national debt, swelled by the emergency measures to support the economy over the past two years. Prompting a warning from the chancellor of the need to reduce government borrowing, debt interest payments rose to a six-month high of £8.1bn after the sharp rise in inflation. Repayments on some of the UK’s borrowing is linked to the cost of living. Despite the arrival of the Omicron variant, the Office for National Statistics said the UK’s budget deficit was £7.6bn lower at £16.8bn than in the same month a year earlier and came in below the £18.5bn expected by the City. Tax receipts in December rose by £6.2bn compared with a year earlier, including a rise in corporation tax, stamp duty, income tax, VAT and fuel duty receipts. Britain’s Royal Mail has announced plans to cut 700 managerial jobs as part of a reorganisation plan. Royal Mail says it is engaging with unions on the proposals, which will cut costs by £40m per year. It says: We intend to further simplify and streamline our operational structures to ensure an improved focus on local performance, and devolve more accountability and flexibility to frontline operational managers. The £70m cost of the restructuring means Royal Mail now expects adjusted operating profit for this year to £430m, down from £500m before. Royal Mail also says it is “confident there has been a structural shift in parcel volumes since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic”. Domestic parcel volumes in the last quarter of 2021 were 33% higher than two years ago, although 7% lower than in 2020, with 439m parcels handled during the quarter. Covid-19 test kits accounted for around a mid-single digit percentage of total parcel volume since last April, it says. Royal Mail also reveals the impact of the Omicron variant on its operations. Staff absence peaked at around 15,000 in early January, which disrupted service levels in some areas of the country. In the City, shares have opened higher after Monday’s heavy losses. The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has risen by 50 points, or 0.7%, after shedding 196 points yesterday. Rising inflation means the cost of servicing the national debt is likely to keep increasing in the coming months, undermining the recovery in the public finances, says Laith Khalaf, head of investment analysis at AJ Bell: “Money flowing out of public sector continues to comfortably exceed the cash coming in, to the tune of £16.8bn in December. Despite the high figure, the dials are generally heading in the right direction from the peak of the pandemic, albeit not as quickly as the Chancellor might like. “Central government tax revenues rose by 10% year on year, boosted by low levels of unemployment, even in the aftermath of the furlough scheme. Meanwhile expenditure came in lower than last December, but only just, because interest payments on government debt trebled compared to last December, to £8.1bn, a record for the month. “That’s because higher inflation has pushed up the cost of government bonds that are pegged to RPI, costing the government £5.5bn in December 2021. With price rises still coming down the track, inflation is going to continue to bump up the coupons paid by the government to holders of RPI linked bonds, so this won’t be a flash in the pan. “To add considerable fuel to the fire, interest rates are rising, which means the government will have to pay more interest on the £875bn of gilts held with the Bank of England. And if that were not enough, gilt yields have shot up, to over 1% on the 10-year bond, which means the government will also be paying more for freshly issued debt than before the pandemic. The UK public sector finances fared better than expected in December following the identification of Omicron in November, says Richard Carter, head of fixed interest research at Quilter Cheviot: Net borrowing sat at £16.8bn, down from £17.4 billion in November, and £7.6bn less than in the same month last year. Tax receipts were up to £68.5bn. “As the impact of Omicron was not as bad as had been expected, growth was less negatively impacted than anticipated. This in turn increased the government’s tax take, therefore reducing the need to borrow, and resulted in a better debt to GDP ratio than might have been expected – 96.0% of GDP, 0.1% lower than in November 2021. “These figures could have been worse, but the Omicron variant proved less impactful than many had initially feared. While the government did opt to move to its ‘Plan B’, the UK avoided major public health restrictions such as lockdowns and we have since returned to ‘Plan A’. James Smith, Research Director at the Resolution Foundation, says chancellor Rishi Sunak has room to help cushion soaring energy bills: “As we await further evidence of the impact of Omicron on economic activity, today’s figures suggest that the latest wave has not had a huge effect on the public finances so far, with borrowing in December broadly in line with the OBR forecast. “Borrowing for the first nine months of the financial year is now £13 billion lower than the OBR’s October forecast, mainly reflecting the stronger-than-expected post furlough scheme labour market. This fiscal room for manoeuvre makes it inevitable that the Chancellor will set out a plan to deal with the cost of living crunch. “With soaring energy bills set to push around six over families into fuel stress, a targeted package to limit the rise in energy bills is the top priority, with the majority of gains from a delayed National Insurance increase going to the richest fifth of households.” Samuel Tombs of Pantheon Economics points out that December’s borrowing met the official forecasts, but that probably won’t stop the chancellor taking steps to ease pressure on households: On the public finances, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak says: “We are supporting the British people as we recover from the pandemic through our Plan for Jobs and business grants, loans and tax reliefs. “Risks to the public finances, including from inflation, make it even more important that we avoid burdening future generations with high debt repayments. “Our fiscal rules mean we will reduce our debt burden while continuing to invest in the future of the UK.” Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. UK government borrowing fell in December thanks to a rise in tax receipts, despite a jump in the cost of repaying the national debt. Public sector net borrowing, excluding state banks, dropped to £16.8bn last month, less than expected. That’s £7.6bn less than in December 2020, as the economy recovers from the impact of the pandemic. It’s the fourth-highest December borrowing since monthly records began in 1993 (the UK borrowed more in both December 2009 and 2010 during the economic downturn following the global financial crisis). Tax receipts rose by £6.2bn year-on-year, including a rise in corporation tax, stamp duty, income tax, VAT and fuel duty receipts. Government spending fell by £1bn, as the furlough job protection scheme and support for self-employed workers wrapped up last autumn. Borrowing so far this financial year is still running below forecasts. The UK has now borrowed £146.8bn since April, £129.3bn less than a year ago and £12.9bn less than the official Office for Budget Responsibility forecast. That could intensify calls for the government to make a dramatic U-turn on its planned national insurance tax increase, as the cost of living crisis worsens. Yesterday, former Conservative cabinet minister David Davis threw his weight behind calls for the tax increase due to come in from April to be scrapped. However, the interest payments on UK government debt tripled year-on-year in December, due to rising inflation. Interest payments on central government debt hit £8.1bn in December 2021, a December record and £5.4bn more than in December 2020. That’s due to the jump in the RPI inflation rate, which pushed up the cost of repaying index-linked gilts (government bonds, whose interest rate is fixed to RPI). Overall, the UK’s national debt was £2,339.9bn at the end of December 2021 or around 96.0% of gross domestic product -- the highest ratio since March 1963 when it was 98.3%. Reaction to follow..... Also coming up today Global stock markets remain on edge, after a dramatic day’s trading on Monday. Asia-Pacific markets have dropped, amid fears that Russia could invade Ukraine and worries that the US Federal Reserve would wind down its support for the economy faster than expected. European markets slumped yesterday, but after joining the rout, Wall Street staged a rapid late recovery to finish slightly higher. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: Yesterday’s declines in European markets had more to do with events on the Ukraine, Russia border than with any other factors that have dominated sentiment over the past two weeks. It appears that the penny has finally dropped with financial markets that events in eastern Europe have the potential to get even worse, after NATO announced it is putting additional ships and aircraft on standby for mobilisation, and that the US is considering sending troops to shore up its Baltic defences, in response to requests from the likes of Estonia for a greater US presence to deter a potential Russian escalation. European shares are expected to open higher today, but the New York market is currently forecast to drop when it reopens. More volatility ahead. The agenda 7am GMT: UK public finances for December 9am GMT: IFO survey of German business climate 11am GMT: CBI’s industrial trends survey of UK manufacturing 3pm GMT: US consumer confidence report for DecemberA Boston-area hospital said it will not perform a heart transplant on a patient who refuses to get a Covid-19 vaccination. DJ Ferguson, 31, was previously prioritized for a heart transplant at Brigham and Women’s hospital, but is no longer eligible as he refuses to get vaccinated, said Ferguson’s family, according to a report by CBS Boston. “It’s kind of against his basic principles – he doesn’t believe in it,” said David Ferguson, his father. “It’s a policy they are enforcing and so, because he won’t get the shot, they took him off the list [for] a heart transplant.” Brigham and Women’s explained its reasoning in a statement: “Like many other transplant programs in the United States – the Covid-19 vaccine is one of several vaccines and lifestyle behaviors required for transplant candidates in the Mass General Brigham system in order to create both the best chance for a successful operation and also the patient’s survival after transplantation.” Other medical experts have declared their support of the hospital’s policy, noting that the immune system is extremely weak after a transplant, making vaccinations all the more important. “Post any transplant, kidney, heart whatever, your immune system is shut off. The flu could kill you, a cold could kill you, Covid could kill you,” said Dr Arthur Caplan, the head of medical ethics at NYU Grossman School of Medicine, told CBS Boston. “The organs are scarce: we are not going to distribute them to someone who has a poor chance of living when others who are vaccinated have a better chance post-surgery of surviving.” Ferguson’s family have said they are unsure of what to do next given his refusal to receive the Covid-19 vaccine. They have considered transferring him to a different facility but acknowledge he might not survive the trip. “We are aggressively pursuing all options, but we are running out of time,” said David Ferguson. The family said that while had received excellent care at Brigham and Women’s, they do not agree with the policy. “I think my boy is fighting pretty damn courageously, and he has integrity and principles he really believes in, and that makes me respect him all the more,” said Ferguson of his son, who is a father of two children with another one on the way. “It’s his body. It’s his choice.”Cyber-activists opposed to the president of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko, say they have penetrated the state-run railway’s computer system and threatened to paralyse trains moving Russian troops and artillery to the country for a potential attack on Ukraine. Their goals include freeing political prisoners, removing Russian soldiers from Belarus and preventing Belarusians from “dying for this meaningless war”, a person involved in the attack told the Guardian. A member of the “Cyberpartisans” said the hacktivist group had so far encrypted or destroyed internal databases that the Belarusian railways use to control traffic, customs and stations, an action that could cause delays to commercial and non-commercial trains and “indirectly affect Russia troops movement”. They had so far avoided taking more drastic steps to paralyse trains by downing the signalling and emergency control systems, but said they “might do that in the future if we’re confident innocent people won’t get injured as a result”. The group has demanded that Belarus cease serving as a staging ground for a buildup of Russian troops and military weaponry, some of it just miles from the Ukrainian border. “We don’t want Russian soldiers in Belarus since it compromises the sovereignty of the country and puts it in danger of occupation,” the member of the Cyberpartisans told the Guardian. “It also pulls Belarus into a war with Ukraine. And probably Belarusian soldiers would have to participate in it and die for this meaningless war.” An unverified local report had said that the buildup may include nearly 200 trains with Russian troops and equipment (military exercises in 2021 involved just 29 trains), although the Cyberpartisans said they had not sought or found confirmation of that number in the hacked databases yet. To relinquish control over the Belarusian railways’ computer system, the group has also demanded the release of more than 50 political prisoners from Belarusian jails requiring medical assistance. The domestic human rights group Viasna has counted more than 995 political prisoners in Belarus following Lukashenko’s bloody crackdown on protests after elections marred by fraud in 2020. The latest hack highlights the prominent role that cyber-operations against infrastructure could play in an upcoming conflict in the region, and shows how Lukashenko’s domestic battles may follow him into his tightening alliance with the Kremlin. One key factor in the anti-Lukashenko protests that began in 2020 was opposition to plans for greater economic and political integration of Russia and Belarus under a “Union State”. Among Lukashenko’s staunchest opponents are the Cyberpartisans, a group of about 25 anonymous IT experts and other activists who have pulled off an impressive and embarrassing series of hacks against the government since they first appeared after the protests of 2020. That has included a daring raid on the servers of the Belarus Ministry of Interior Affairs, giving them access to data on thousands of serving police officers in a country where many had sought to hide their identities while brutally cracking down on civil protests. They have also obtained access to passport databases, secret files belonging to Belarusian KGB spies and security officials, police databases of informants, and prison CCTV networks confirming police brutality and torture. They have released hundreds of thousands of hours of wiretapped telephone conversations, including those of top officials. Recently, the group has expanded into targeting state companies and firms that serve as sources of cash for Lukashenko, using ransomware attacks to demand the release of political prisoners rather than money. “Since it became very dangerous for people to openly protest against the regime, we now became the only force capable of operating in Belarus,” said a member of the group, identified by the Cyrillic letter Ж (Zh). “We show real results of our work both by hacking and attacking government institutions and conducting physical impact operations.” To confirm access to a recent database of hacked records of border crossings, Zh sent a Guardian correspondent a full list of his travel records to Belarus going back to 2016. “We have it for sure,’ wrote Zh. “Just a sec.” That data would also allow the group to identify Belarusian and Russian spies crossing the country’s borders, Zh said, as well as “trips made by Lukashenko and his cronies and close circle, and would help reveal illegal activities and put sanctions on them. “We know now more about his assets, his lovers, and secret criminal schemes” because of the hacks, Zh said. “We think he only now realises how much information we were able to gather and how harmful it is for him.” The series of hacks has clearly shaken the government. The Cyberpartisans and two other pro-democracy groups were named as extremists this summer, and Lukashenko addressed the series of leaks by telling his top officials to write down information by hand instead. “If you cannot … protect information on your computers, then go back to using paper,” Lukashenko told his ministers at a meeting in mid-August. “Write by hand and put it in your desk.” Although members of the group remain anonymous (even to one another), their operations are still dangerous, they say, because they sometimes require insiders on the ground to take risks. To access the Interior Ministry network, “our people entered a regime’s facility and installed bridges that allowed us to connect to the MIA network remotely,” Zh said. Threatening to disrupt Russia’s military buildup near Ukraine is likely to force the government to redouble its efforts to track down the group. We are “concerned for our safety and to be honest, our lives,” wrote Zh. “The Belarusian government tries to infiltrate us but has not succeeded as of yet.”When Thierry Mugler finally permitted a museum to curate a retrospective of his work, it showed his exceptionally shapely contribution to fashion. The exhibition, which opened in Montreal, Canada, in 2019 and transferred last September to the Musée des Arts Décoratifs in Paris, was all about three-dimensional bodies with strong command and control, dressed to stress their voluptuousness and power. Even the photographs looked like sculptures. He did goddesses, empresses and superheroines. No gamines, waifs or ordinary women. For a decade from the early 1980s, Mugler, who has died aged 73, was a definer of the mood of the mode in extravagant ensembles, and even more in his staging. Paris couture had ventured out into catwalk presentation in the 70s, but Mugler introduced celebrity guests, big performances, filmed inserts and amplification borrowed from stadium rock concerts, for entertainment rather than to shift clothes; 6,000 Parisians bought tickets for his 1984 spectacle at the Zenith, the city’s biggest arena. Mugler’s designs connected with the capital’s cabaret tradition – later picked up by Broadway and Hollywood – of costuming showgirls as highly sexualised abstractions – woman as bird, animal, insect, car hood ornament. Musicians recognised that a Mugler outfit could astonish an audience at a first entrance. “You can wear a uniform,” sang David Bowie in Boys Keep Swinging, 1979, and one of the uniforms he wore for its music video was a pink dress by Mugler. Diana Ross, Madonna and Celine Dion commissioned stage costumes from him; he tussled with George Michael for control of the directing of the 1992 video for Too Funky, featuring models in Mugler outrage-wear. In a later generation, Lady Gaga and Cardi B chose gala appearance gowns from his archives, and after Beyoncé saw Mugler’s work in the 2008 Superheroes exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, she ordered 58 outfits for herself for her 2009 I Am … World Tour, plus gear for the rest of its cast, and asked Mugler to help stage the shows. He was free to make what pleased him rather than fretting about selling frocks because of a 1992 deal with the French multinational Clarins that had awarded him a 34% stake in his new perfume, Angel. Its overwhelming ingredient was synthetic ethyl maltol, which had previously added praline and jam aromas to confectionery, so Mugler models prancing in vinyl, leather and tyre-rubber dresses and plastic corsets smelt like a patisserie. This first gourmand perfume in its box of twilight blue is among the all-time scent bestsellers, and subsidised his last, epic, fashion pageant at the Cirque d’Hiver in Paris in 1995. Mugler had been creating his own theatre and movie-based fantasy world since his childhood in Strasbourg, where he was one of two sons of a local doctor and his fashion-passionate wife. He hated home and school, although after he started dance classes at nine he maintained strict self-discipline to keep at it until he briefly joined the corps de ballet at the city’s Opéra national du Rhin in 1965. Mugler’s real education came from a flea-pit cinema behind Strasbourg’s railway station, where he saw five films a day, many of them old Hollywood: the designer Travis Banton swathing Marlene Dietrich in leather and fur, Walter Plunkett glorifying Cyd Charisse into a rocket-thighed siren. Along with Mugler’s mother’s wide shoulders, Charisse’s form and poise were a lifelong inspiration, and he was thrilled when later she modelled in his shows. Mugler was too lanky to be cast as a ballet prince and too weird in his flea-market outfits to pass without unkind comment in Strasbourg. He rejected Maurice Béjart’s offer to join the Ballet of the 20th Century, because it was based in Brussels, another conventional city, and went to Paris instead. There his self-presentation was applauded and he earned money by selling designs to ready-to-wear firms. He did the same in Amsterdam, while living on a houseboat; he contributed to Tommy Roberts’s London pop art emporium, Mr Freedom; and he drove a van to Afghanistan and learned Kathakali dance in India. But Mugler never turned hippy, and back in Paris in 1971 he was not in accord with the gentle naivety of current fashion. He had developed, through ballet, ideas about the body in movement and wanted to clothe it with striking simplicity, in grand, rather than little, black dresses. In 1973, he started his own first label, Café de Paris, and in 1978 opened a boutique on the Place des Victoires, showing collections with other créateurs de mode who produced exclusive clothes outside the world of haute couture. Mugler’s were by far the most architectural, after the manner of the postmodern style, with cornice shoulders and girder heels, and the most raunchy, using pornographic tropes before body-consciousness was common, which provoked angry reaction from women who disliked his constrictions, restrictions and ideas about vulnerable female flesh encased in predatory shells (seen again in risque designs for a Las Vegas Cirque du Soleil cabaret in 2003). He was fearless; as photographer for his advertisements, he led luggage-laden expeditions of models to tough locations, and crawled along a ladder stuck out of a Manhattan skyscraper window to snap models on the edge of building chasms. The organising body of Paris couture formally asked him to show in 1992; he delayed a collection to tie in with the launch of Angel, and, inhibited by the rigid seasonal calendar, later dropped out. Mugler withdrew from fashion in 2002, just before Clarins, who had bought the rights to his name in 1997, closed his loss-making ready-to-wear brand. However, his retirement, funded by Angel, Alien and other perfumes, was busy right up to the current Thierry Mugler: Couturissime exhibition, its core project to remake and redesign himself. First, he reclaimed his birth name, Manfred, then practised yoga and meditation, and morphed his lean frame into massive body-built tattooed muscles. After a jeep crash and a motorbike accident, he had reconstructive facial surgery, designing bone grafts to transform him from a “thin, charming dancer” into “a warrior”. • Manfred Thierry Mugler, fashion designer, born 21 December 1948; died 23 January 2022A birthday party was held for the prime minister, Boris Johnson, with cake and singing in the cabinet room on 19 June 2020, it emerged on Monday, with up to 30 staff present for Johnson’s 56th birthday under lockdown restrictions. At the time, indoor gatherings were banned and pubs, restaurants and hairdressers remained shuttered. Meet-ups outdoors were capped at six people. The Metropolitan police announced on Tuesday it would be investigating the string of alleged Downing Street parties, after notification from Sue Gray, the senior civil servant leading the inquiry into Downing Street parties. Four people speak about birthday celebrations spent under tight lockdown restrictions. ‘I’m still incandescent with rage’ “I spent the day feeling so upset for her,” said Cathy Grafton about her mother, Kathleen, who turned 96 on 15 May 2020, the day the prime minister was pictured during a wine and cheese garden gathering at Downing Street. After testing positive for Covid in her care home, Kathleen was “alone, in isolation and bed-ridden” on her birthday. Grafton, who is a retired social worker from Whitstable, said the latest allegations brought all her anger back. “It’s taken me over the edge,” said the 67-year-old. “It’s like I can’t get closure because I keep getting reminded of how people like Boris Johnson were just ignoring the restrictions, when we, the public, were following the rules and making so many sacrifices. “Mum died in August 2020 and I can only imagine that she was very lonely, sad and depressed. We didn’t get a proper funeral. That’s not the death you want for your mother.” She feels the prime minister should “pay the ultimate price [of resigning] for his arrogance”. “I’m still incandescent with rage. He should be setting an example to people not walking all over them,” she said. “Some MPs are still defending him and asking why we need to keep talking about all these parties. We need to because they’re the epitome of everything that’s gone wrong.” ‘My son put a lot of work into organising his 12th birthday party’ Gail Head, whose son has a pre-existing health condition, was planning a big party for him on 18 April 2020. The previous three years, her son’s poor health had prevented a celebration with lots of school friends. But, for his 12th birthday, he was well enough to push the boat out. Fourteen children were invited to a Warhammer store to build, paint, play and eat pizza. “He was very excited, he’d put a lot of work into organising the party,” Head, 54, of Maidenhead, said. “He’d designed some invites himself” – comic book style – “printed them out on the computer and given them out to his friends.” But the party would never go ahead because of lockdown restrictions. On the day itself he was at home with his parents. The big party was replaced by a Zoom call with Head’s sister and his grandparents. There were moments of happiness, but “he was very subdued”, Head said. “We’d made him a lovely cake, and when he was cutting it he was quite upset. It was the first time he’d ever had a birthday cake with just the three of us.” Johnson’s seeming lack of regret irks Head most. “If it was any other prime minister, you would be so shocked that you wouldn’t be able to speak,” she said. “But the history of lies and obfuscations and apologies that aren’t actually apologies, it actually starts to not shock any more – and that’s worse.” ‘It was a pretty dull birthday for a 17-year-old’ On 7 June 2020, the same month Johnson celebrated his 56th birthday in Downing Street, Debbie Malpas’s son James celebrated his 17th birthday in their damp garden. “It was a bit miserable, it was grey skies, and then just after we began to eat it started to rain,” Malpas, 53, said. “It certainly didn’t cross our minds to do something inside.” Malpas and guests ordered pizza, ate chocolate cake with sprinkles and talked under one parasol and two umbrellas. James’s sister sat half in the doorway to avoid getting wet. The event stuck to the rule of six – James’s parents, sister and two friends – the rules for outdoor gatherings at the time. “It was a pretty dull birthday for a 17-year-old,” Malpas, from Cambridgeshire, said. But given how friends had missed out on all celebrations between March and June, “it felt pretty luxurious to be able to do anything”. Less than two weeks later, Johnson’s alleged 30-person gathering in the cabinet room was said to have taken place. When Malpas read the news, “you just roll your eyes and go, ‘Oh, it’s just another one’”, she said. “I don’t think it was a surprise, it was just confirmation of what we all guessed was happening.” ‘I remembered, oh, it’s your birthday, then let it slip by’ In the run up to his 50th birthday on 24 April 2020, David Welsh told his wife, Heather Armond, he did not want to celebrate amid so much death. “This is wrong, even in some kind of minimalist way,” he told her. “It feels obscene.” She was reluctant, but agreed – there would be no fancy meal at home, no bottle of wine, not even a card. “I found myself just disgusted and traumatised by the sheer number of people who were dying,” Welsh said. “The horrific toll that you’d hear in those ghastly press conferences day after day.” At the time, government data shows, the seven-day average was about 800 people dying with Covid a day. Welsh, who is an executive career coach, spent the day at home in London like any other. “Sitting at my kitchen table working away like everybody else.” He ate his typical lunch of soup, bread and fruit. Then while he was watching that day’s Covid briefing, “I just suddenly remembered to myself, ‘Oh, it’s your birthday,’” Welsh said. “And then I just let it slip by.” So when news broke of the prime minister’s parties during strict lockdowns, Welsh was angry. “The sheer brazenness of it was surprising,” he said. “And then we found it he was throwing a birthday party a few weeks after mine, it was really insulting. I said to my wife, ‘This is fucking embarrassing.’”Dear New Zealand, Kia ora! I guess by now you have received Omicron, the unwanted visitor that we in Australia hosted over the Christmas season (and beyond – the guest that stayed all summer!). No doubt you have been busy preparing for this guest – extending your isolation requirements, promoting booster shots and tightening restrictions. But a crucial form of preparation is the one you do in your head. Going from having very few Covid cases to thousands of cases a day in the community is a mental shift that is hard to prepare for – but having just had a summer of Omicron, I’m writing to tell you what may await. I’m not writing to instruct you – just to offer some solidarity, the advice I wish I’d been given, a glimpse from the immediate future. The first thing that happens is that you start to know people who become contacts. They get pinged after checking in somewhere where there was a Covid case and suddenly dinner plans or a weekend away is cancelled. Then it’s your turn. You’ll probably get an alert from somewhere unmemorable – like the time you ducked into the supermarket for a carton of milk. And then quite dramatically, a week after the first ping – your phone will go nuts with contact alerts. At least that’s what happened early on in Sydney. Hopefully you’ll be able get tested if you get pinged, but if you are unlucky, you’ll be in a situation where it’s difficult to get tested. This is the first mental challenge: the possibility of exposure to the virus and then the inability to get tested and know if you have it or not. In Australia, when Omicron arrived, the politicians’ mantra was “personal responsibility”. This can add to the mental load of dealing with the outbreak. How can you take personal responsibility if you can’t get tested? How to keep yourself sane, and others safe, if the state is unprepared? This virus is wildly infectious – and personal responsibility is not going to cut it. The next challenge is how to carry on your daily life when you and everyone you know is getting pinged. In Australia the settings for isolation were in flux. But you should be prepared to exit society for a period of time due to health orders. For us, this meant the possibility of missing Christmas or being unable to travel in the summer holidays to visit friends and family in parts of the country that were previously off limits. You may have dropped your guard and are just wanting to return to normal after almost two years of the pandemic. We understand the pain of uncertainty over here. After long lockdowns in Melbourne and Sydney, and children denied almost two full years of education, we crave certainty more than ever. But sadly this summer has not provided it. This phase of the virus is far from normal. It’s hard. Your friends and family will all have different levels of comfort being in the community around this time. Do not be surprised if your social life evaporates. People will go into self-imposed lockdown, preferring to wait out the Omicron wave in their homes rather than risk catching the virus. Be understanding and without judgment if somebody has a different capacity for risk than yourself. Keeping sane in this Omicron summer was different for everyone. Some people felt more secure withdrawing and keeping socialising to a minimum, others cancelled holidays and trips away. I moved the bulk of my socialising outside. It didn’t feel quite normal – but what does? This summer we occupied the strange twilight world of not-quite-lockdowns: takeaway food and picnics in the park, food shortages and cafe closures, empty supermarket shelves and scary headlines about case numbers and overstretched ICUs. But there was also the beach, and hot nights in Melbourne drinking in outdoor bars. It was all a bit surreal, to be honest. The third mental challenge is actually knowing people who have it. Like us, you’ve probably gone from being able to name many of your country’s Covid cases (we had “barbecue guy”, the “Sydney removalists” and the “limo driver”) to people you know testing positive for Covid. Six months ago this would have been very dramatic – but Omicron is not particularly exclusive and at its peak, many thousands of people a day catch it. But the first case among your circle can cause alarm. Will they be OK? What should you do to help? Have you caught it from them? The best thing to do here is not to freak out and help them through their illness by getting them groceries and helping them (via phone/text) monitor their symptoms. At the start of January, a wedding I attended turned out to be a super-spreader event. We all thankfully recovered. Much of the stress of this week while sick was being unable to secure a Covid test. Hopefully your government has used the extra time they’ve had to ensure that everyone who needs a test has one. The next mental challenge is when cases really begin to multiply and you see the effects of isolation and illness on broader society. Who really holds our society together? Omicron will tell you. It’s our hospital staff and paramedics, and people who work in supply chains, warehouses, abattoirs, on the docks, in restaurants, cafes and supermarkets. One day your town will be business as usual, and the next, after a wave has swept through, shops and cafes will be shut, supermarket shelves will be empty or sparse, local flights will be cancelled and you won’t be able to get an Uber for love or money. This is alarming because the disruptions allow you to actually see Omicron, and the havoc it creates. Just keep calm, don’t stockpile more than you need, and adapt to the new circumstances. It lasts no longer than a few weeks. The next challenge is when you wake up with a scratchy throat and a dry cough. After playing dodgeball with the virus for all these years, suddenly you think you might have it. But unless you have an underlying health issue, for the majority of vaccinated people this is also no cause for alarm. Stay home unless you’re going out for a test, and look after yourself. For many people, the worst passes within a week. But as we are seeing in Australia, hospitalisations and deaths do rise with the increase in cases. The reality is not everyone recovers quickly. So be calm, kind and try not to panic. This too shall pass. Brigid Delaney is a columnist for Guardian AustraliaFifa should tighten its proposed rules on intermediaries to limit the money made by super-agents, the influential Council of Europe will be told on Wednesday. A cap on the amount agents can make in any transaction and on the service fees they can charge are among the ideas to be put forward, alongside the creation of a solidarity system that would lead to money filtering from the biggest clubs in Europe to smaller leagues and teams. The recommendations form part of a report by the council’s committee on culture, science, education and media into football governance that, if adopted, would mean the council would be broadly endorsing the new rules while setting absolute limits on the money an agent can make on any deal. Fifa is trying to implement its reforms in the face of stern opposition from top agents. Lord Foulkes, who sits on the committee, will make the proposals on Wednesday, with Fifa’s president, Gianni Infantino, in attendance at a session of the council’s parliamentary assembly. Foulkes will be highly critical of the current system. A draft version of the report to be put in front of the assembly said the transfer market, despite its “fundamental importance” to football, had created a mechanism where “huge sums circulate among the elite clubs in a solipsistic economy of limited circulation of resources”. In his report, Foulkes says the need for agents to have “fair and reasonable” earnings must be matched against “avoiding conflicts of interest, protecting the players, avoiding pressure towards contractual instability and preventing abusive, excessive and speculative practices”. Therefore, he writes: “I believe we must insist in asking that all commissions and fees paid to agents are capped, registered, disclosed and monitored.” This would include capping the absolute amount payable to an agent acting on behalf of a selling club, with a suggested limit of $10m (£7.4m). Although the report is largely supportive of Fifa’s transfer reforms it does criticise the governing body in other areas, calling for the abandonment of plans for a biennial World Cup. The report also affirms ongoing opposition to the idea of a European Super League and calls for greater protection for the safety and rights of minors within the game. The Council of Europe is an international organisation comprised of 47 member states, including the UK, which exists to champion “human rights, democracy and the rule of law”. If the report submitted by Foulkes is approved by the parliamentary assembly, and a subsequent vote by a council of ministers, member governments will be expected to lobby for its implementation. Fifa is soliciting responses from around the game on the third version of its proposed reforms, with feedback expected to continue until the end of the month. It remains hopeful of implementing the rules this year. The Football Forum, an organisation created by the agents Mino Raiola, Jorge Mendes and Jonathan Barnett to “implement and develop the best professional practice of football agency”, has spoken out against the reforms. It was approached by the Guardian for comment.Aziz Ansari’s career has been dramatically carved in two since the sexual misconduct allegations made against him four years ago, which he denied. Before: a slick and optimistic comic with the world at his feet. After: an ever more downbeat and cynical act appraising how “shitty” we all are – especially as regards our hunger for celebrity gossip. Ansari’s new special Nightclub Comedian is the third of his shows that I’ve seen since the accusations, and the third that encodes in one routine after another (and even in a joke we hear performed by the preceding act) his unresolved feelings about the episode. Perhaps that’s understandable. There’s an argument that Ansari’s trial-by-public-opinion even enriched his comedy with colours that just weren’t there before. Nightclub Comedian’s 29 minutes have more considered social commentary than many acts manage in twice the duration. In a section on misinformation, which both mocks and deplores the mocking of vaccine sceptics, there’s a wicked routine envisaging the rapper Ice Cube having a colonoscopy. A strong closer – responding to anti-vaxxers’ fears of coming under microchip control – notes how robotically enslaved we already are to our smartphones. But it’s a world-weary show – the more so for the contrast drawn with Ansari’s younger self, footage of whom is intercut arriving at the same venue 20 years ago. The New York crowd is berated for squandering the idealistic energy that voted out Trump – which feels harsh, not least because Ansari now lives in London. This sit-down rather than standup special purports to show our host humbly reconnecting with no-frills club comedy, in contrast (he suggests) to the corporate empire-building of the likes of Kevin Hart. But this is humility as performed for Netflix, so claims to a newfound modesty ring hollow. Then there are the gags – notably, the one imagining Timothée Chalamet exposed to public disgrace for an incident with an Asian man and some bubble tea – that seem to address all over again Ansari’s own travails. It’s another glimpse, then, of a comic with technique and intelligence to spare – but not the slightest vestige of the gilded good cheer of old. • Aziz Ansari: Nightclub Comedian is on Netflix.Ivory Coast’s meeting with Egypt on Wednesday may only be the last 16, but it is a game that has a climactic feel. It is 14 years since they last met competitively, but memories of that game remain fresh. The image of Amr Zaki turning sharply in the box in that Cup of Nations semi-final, sending Kolo Touré running in the wrong direction as he powered by to score stands as the defining one of Egypt’s period of dominance when they won three Cups of Nations in a row under Hassan Shehata. Egypt won 4-1, a crushing victory over the Ivorian golden generation. That was a brilliant side, defensively ruthless with creative midfielders – Ahmed Hassan, Mohamed Aboutreika, Osama Hosny – and in each tournament a striker who hit form at the right time. They were also mentally tough: victory in Ghana in 2008 was the first time a north African side had won a Cup of Nations in sub-Saharan Africa, a feat they repeated in Angola two years later. The present squad have the best player Egypt has produced, one of the best players in the world, in Mohamed Salah, but it has nothing like the same depth of quality. Progress through World Cup qualifying – they face Senegal in a play-off in March – has been functional. Away from home, playing on the break, they were able to open up a little, but four goals scored in three home games felt underwhelming, as did Carlos Queiroz’s reluctance to be bullish about Egypt’s chances at the Cup of Nations. From his days coaching Portugal’s youth sides 30 years ago, Queiroz has favoured a cautious, possession-driven approach. That hasn’t changed in Cameroon. Egypt had the sixth-most possession in the group stage but only the 11th-most shots. Every game finished 1-0 – a defeat to Nigeria and wins over Guinea-Bissau and Sudan – a plodding qualification that has only increased the criticism of Queiroz, who has started to demonstrate frustration, dismissing a “kick the ball forward, kick the ball forward” approach. For him the biggest problem has not been the general play but the finishing, despite the presence not only of Salah but also of Omar Marmoush of Stuttgart and Mostafa Mohamed of Galatasaray. “Look, I promise you they are going to be doing finishing exercises from the morning until the afternoon,” Queiroz said after the win over Sudan. “They just need to score more goals. To only play good football is not enough – we need to build up more goals and with that be more relaxed in the game. We always have intention to score and it only takes one small mistake, one rebound, and something can happen.” That Mohamed El-Shenawy was named best goalkeeper of the first phase is a double-edged compliment. Yes, he has been impressive, but in that group Egypt would have hoped he did not need to be. Certainly Egypt’s goalkeeping situation is a lot less complicated than Ivory Coast’s. Having lost their first-choice Sylvain Gbohouo, when he failed a doping test in the week before the tournament (Ivory Coast have said he was prescribed medication by a doctor), their second-choice, Badra Ali Sangaré, suffered the death of his father the morning after the second group game, when he had donated Sierra Leone an equaliser as his knee plugged in the dreadful Douala pitch. Sangaré insisted on playing in the final group game, though, and excelled in the 3-1 win over the reigning champions, Algeria, in the final group game in by far Ivory Coast’s best performance in the competition. With Arsenal’s Nicolas Pépé excelling on the right of a fluid front three, the Ivorian trio of Jean Michaël Seri, Franck Kessié and Ibrahim Sangaré dominated against a midfield that capitulated for a crucial period just after half-time. That was a surprising failing from the African champions – if one they had also suffered late on against Equatorial Guinea – and it is hard to imagine a Queiroz side collapsing in the same way. “The game will be a tactical one,” said the Ivory Coast manager, Patrice Beaumelle, “and we have a plan to stop the danger our opponent poses.” With Egypt offering little in the way of creativity that has essentially meant stopping Salah. But stopping Egypt has rarely been the problem for opponents; the problem is being stopped by them. If Ivory Coast’s midfield can impose themselves as they did against Algeria, there should be chances again for Pépé, Sébastien Haller and Max Gradel. If not, the likelihood is for a tight, tense game that will be settled by one of Queiroz’s small mistakes or rebounds. That may not be how Egypt fans want to play, but it is how Queiroz has always done it.I read Peter Walker’s piece about changes to the Highway Code with interest (Common myths about what UK Highway Code changes will mean, 24 January). I have long thought that the vast majority of the Highway Code’s content could be wrapped up in one simple piece of advice that all road users would do well to remember: “Do as you would be done by.” Steve Gooding Director, RAC Foundation • The picture Yotam Ottolenghi paints isn’t quite accurate (Yotam Ottolenghi on the most important ingredient in any kitchen: diversity, 22 January). We had pomegranates as children in the 1950s and 60s. They were from an ordinary greengrocer – I remember eating the pips using a pin. And hummus was definitely here well over 25 years ago. I first bought it from a Safeway supermarket in the mid-1970s. Christine Brooman Bristol • I also use up old vegetables and savoury leftovers in soup with the addition of Marmite and tomato puree, although I draw the line at a friend’s mother-in-law’s variation that involved scraping visitors’ plates into the boiling mixture. I’ve never yet had the willpower to come by old cake (Letters, 24 January). Trish Durrant Bristol • To the nominations of the British institutions that we should be proud of (Letters, 24 January), I would add the Open University, set up by the Labour government in the 1960s. Harold Wilson often talked about it as his proudest achievement as prime minister. Those were the days. Matthew Ryder Buckden, Cambridgeshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Many of the complaints that Royal Mail has received (Report, 25 January) are from my Hornsey and Wood Green constituents, as for the second year running our community has been one of the hardest-hit by postal delays. I have had countless distressing emails from residents who have missed urgent cancer referrals, not received death certificates for loved ones, or spent Christmas alone and isolating without a single card or gift arriving. Royal Mail reported pre-tax profits of £315m in the six months to the end of September, up from £17m a year earlier. It has a near monopoly on letter deliveries, but where’s the investment in enough temporary staff to deal with the backlog and support our hard-working posties? I’ve already written to Ofcom to urge it to use its regulatory powers to act. Residents and small businesses deserve better. Catherine West MP Labour, Hornsey and Wood Green • Could this be the most delayed Christmas card this year? First-class stamp, date-stamped by Royal Mail in Southampton on 23 December; received 15 January in Manchester. John and Judy Watson Manchester • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In March 2021, for my 74th birthday, I went to a local park with my 88-year-old husband (Report, 24 January). We bought takeaway coffees and warm Portuguese custard tarts to remind us of a holiday in Lisbon. We found a bench overlooking the river and sat down to celebrate. A park keeper apologetically told us it was illegal for us to sit down and that we had to stand up and move on. That was a birthday party to remember. Carrie Hill Bath • On 19 June 2020, Boris Johnson’s fiancee throws a party indoors for his birthday in breach of the rules. On 20 June, our son visits to celebrate his birthday; my son, wife and I sit in the garden at a distance. Then 21 June is my birthday; my wife and I spend the day alone. David Freedman London • On my second birthday as a widow, in May 2020, I celebrated with an online party, organised by my family. We had great fun until I remarked that the only living beings I was allowed to touch were the dogs being walked in the park. Val Mainwood Wivenhoe, Essex • Why was Lulu Lytle in Downing Street? For almost half of the first lockdown, I nursed an ailing washing machine until I was able to welcome repairers into my house. But then I did not have to suffer the discomfort of dull wallpaper. Rosemary Jenkins London • Can Carrie Johnson explain why Marks &amp; Spencer food is acceptable for a birthday party, but John Lewis furnishings at No 10 are not? Richard Ehrlich London • Some of us in the US are watching Boris Johnson’s latest scandal with bemusement. But could you stop calling it “partygate”? You are falling into the lazy habit of America’s hackneyed appending of “-gate” to anything that smacks of impropriety. It’s tired, trite and banal. Surely there is a more quintessentially British word – how about “partyhenge”? Dave Mackmiller Saint Paul, Minnesota, US • Might the term “party politics” take on a new meaning? David Davidge Odiham, Hampshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Simon Jenkins (Britain should stay well out of Russia’s border dispute with Ukraine, 20 January) claims that Russia’s “border disputes” with Ukraine have “nothing whatsoever to do with Britain” – but it has everything to do with the more than 20,000 diaspora Ukrainians and Britons of Ukrainian descent who live in the UK, of whom I am one. Mr Jenkins appears to be of the opinion that Ukrainian sovereignty is less important than the desire of those who govern Russia not to be humiliated on the international stage. This is incorrect. Ukraine is not and has never been an integral part of Russia: it is an independent nation with a separate language, history and religious and political traditions. It was, for centuries, under the colonial rule of Tsarist Russia (or the Habsburg empire, depending on the region) and then of the Soviet Union, suffered unspeakably at the hands of the Soviet government in the 1930s and was subjected to extreme cultural suppression in the 19th century. It is inexpressibly disappointing and hurtful to see that in 2022 there are Guardian columnists who have apparently bought into 19th-century Russian imperial propaganda. Christopher Jotischky Lancaster • As an MEP in the 1990s, serving as vice-chair of the joint parliamentary committee with Poland, and attending meetings with representatives of other applicant states to the EU. I discussed with them why they also wished to join Nato, and tried to dissuade them. But they were clear that membership of Nato would protect them from again falling under Russian rule. Ukraine did not at that time apply for EU membership, but sent observers to joint meetings. I felt then that it was not wise to move too far to the east, but rather to build up good relationships with former Soviet states. I chaired a session at a local government conference for applicant states in Warsaw, and observers from Ukraine were keenly interested in developments being worked towards in Poland and other neighbouring states. On another occasion in Strasbourg I addressed a group of Ukrainian farmers about reform of the common agricultural policy; they seemed cheered at what I said about the need for reform. I give these as examples that already in the mid-1990s there were people in Ukraine looking west rather than east to Russia, with a view to developing a more open democratic society. This was not being pushed on them by the EU, which was not behaving triumphantly, but created a funding stream to help former Soviet states, including Russia, to develop democratic institutions. Veronica Hardstaff Sheffield • Simon Jenkins writes (24 January) of Nato’s post-cold-war expansion eastwards as though it was an invasion and occupation rather than a free choice by independent sovereign nations. That is also the reason why Ukraine seeks to join Nato; it is an independent, sovereign country with a distinct identity that wishes to find its own way in the world. Jenkins’ alternative – a grandiloquent world of “spheres of influence” – would have Ukraine permanently subservient to Russia. This year is the 100th anniversary of Irish independence. For those, like Jenkins, who find it difficult to understand why a country like Ukraine might wish to chart its own course, let him look over the Irish Sea at a close historical parallel. Or look north to Scotland, whose independence disappeared between 1603 and 1707, but whose sense of self, and now desire for self-determination, has not disappeared. Our support for Ukraine should be loud, unequivocal and unlimited: freedom is indivisible. Simon Diggins Retired colonel, Rickmansworth, HertfordshireA 25-year-old Black man sued two Nevada police departments for wrongfully detaining him in jail, after mistaking him for a white suspect twice his age. On 8 January 2020, Shane Lee Brown was driving in Henderson, Nevada, when he was stopped by police. According to his lawsuit, Brown did not have photographic identification but provided his name and his social security number and card. When the officers ran a record check under “Shane Brown”, an outstanding felony warrant for a firearm charge appeared. However, the charge was for Shane Neal Brown who, according to the lawsuit, was a 5ft 1in, 49-year-old white man with brown hair and a white beard. In addition to being 26 years younger, Shane Lee Brown was Black with black hair and stood 5ft 7in. Officers allegedly ignored repeated explanations about the mistaken identity and detained the younger man. Transferred to Clark county detention center two days later, Brown tried to explain the mix-up to officers with Las Vegas Metropolitan Police. But “despite being informed of this mistaken identity”, the lawsuit said, “none of the unknown LVMPD police or LVMPD corrections officers bothered to review [their] own records to determine whether Shane Lee Brown was the subject of the warrant. “Had any of the LVMPD police or corrections officers performed any due diligence, such as comparing Shane Lee Brown’s booking photo against the existing mugshot belonging to the white ‘Shane Brown’ named in the warrant, they would have easily determined that Shane Lee Brown has been misidentified as the subject of the warrant.” On 14 January, Judge Joe Hardy of Clark county district court confirmed at a hearing that Shane Lee Brown was not Shane Neal Brown – and released him. In addition to punitive damages, the lawsuit seeks damages of $500,000 under federal law and at least $50,000 under state law. Henderson police maintained that Brown’s arrest was lawful, as he was arrested for driving with a suspended license and failure to pay a warrant issued by Henderson municipal court. “The plaintiff in this lawsuit has not presented all the facts and circumstances behind his lawful and proper arrest by Henderson police, which will be further addressed in the city attorney’s response to the court,” the police department said. E Brent Bryson, Brown’s attorney, told ABC News that Brown told the police officers he was aware of his violations and had set a court date to address them. “They were going to let him go, except for the fact that when they ran [his name], it pulled up the wrongful bench warrant for the white Shane Brown,” Bryson said. “From one standpoint, yes, they could have arrested him … rightfully … for traffic. He was wrongfully detained and arrested, however, for the warrant out of the [Las Vegas metropolitan area] for the felony possession of a firearm.”Big Dog was having a bad morning. Normally he could rely on Grant Shapps to put up a spirited defence of any government lie, which is why he had been sent out to do the morning media round. But not even the transport secretary had been bothered to put a positive spin on the latest birthday party revelations. He had even made the schoolboy error of calling a party a party, when everyone knew that word was a no-no inside No 10. Nor had the usually reliable Nadine Dorries shown her face on Twitter after being ridiculed for claiming the previous evening that a birthday celebration for the prime minister in the cabinet room, organised by his wife, and attended by the interior designer, Lulu Lytle, clearly constituted a high-level work meeting. In fact, the only two MPs showing any public enthusiasm for him had been the always absurd Jacob Rees-Mogg and Michael Fabricant. Which was a mixed blessing as he haemorrhaged support every time they opened their mouths. Then had come the appearance of the Metropolitan police Commissioner, Cressida Dick, before a committee of the Greater London assembly. There she had announced that, after Sue Gray had forwarded some of the evidence she had gathered, a police investigation into some of the parties at No 10 would be a good idea after all. Dick had offered Boris Johnson some encouragement. For a start she had said she would only be investigating parties for which there was already plenty of evidence. Far be it from the Met to actually go to the effort of digging up any new evidence for itself. That would be a waste of police time. And she had seemed reassuringly slow on the uptake about the failure of the police stationed inside Downing Street to wonder what all the noise was and why so much booze had been smuggled into the building. It also appeared to have only just occurred to her that there might be CCTV footage of some of the parties. No, not parties. Work events. Even so, a police investigation wasn’t ideal. Big Dog sighed and poured himself a drink even though it was only just past midday. On the plus side, it might delay things for a few weeks or even months. That was always good news when your only gameplan for the past few weeks had been to find ever more creative ways of trying to hang on to your job till the end of the day. The downside was Sue Gray must have found clear evidence that he – and others – had broken the lockdown laws and the shit was sure to hit the fan sooner or later. His more immediate worry, though, was to find a Cabinet Office minister stupid enough to answer Labour’s urgent question on the latest party allegations and the police investigation. “Don’t worry, prime minister,” said Steve Barclay, chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. “I’ve got just the man. It’s Mike Ellis, the paymaster general. He’s already made himself look abject by doing two previous UQs on your parties …” “Please don’t call them parties,” said Big Dog. “It makes me nervous.” So it was that Oily Mike found himself up against Angela Rayner in the Commons for the third time in a matter of weeks. Labour’s deputy leader went in studs up. What part of the prime minister stuffing his face with a Colin the Caterpillar cake, which his wife had just happened to bring down – along with darling Lulu – from the upstairs flat to the cabinet room, where 30 of his staff had just happened to gather to sing Happy Birthday, did everyone not understand was against the rules that the government had itself imposed on the rest of the country? You hardly needed a police investigation for that, but hell, now that there was one we had better see it through. And in the meantime why didn’t Big Dog just resign? Oily Mike was momentarily taken off guard. What should he call the prime minister? The Accused? The Perp? The Defendant? No, that was it. The Suspect. MPs shouldn’t be so quick to pre-judge the Suspect. It was quite normal for the Suspect to drop in for a quick cup of tea with his wife. And the 30 guests were all waiting to debrief him on an important fraudulent Covid test-and-trace contract. And they were only singing Happy Birthday to wash their hands. And as it was a surprise party there was no way you could expect the Suspect to remember having been there. Otherwise it wouldn’t have been a surprise. As for the cake, the Suspect had a long history of thinking he could both have it and eat it. On previous occasions, very few Tories had come to the chamber to make idiots of themselves. But this time there was a hardcore of about 20 Boris loyalists. Edward Leigh raged that we were on the brink of war and the PM was about to be brought down by a piece of cake. Theresa Villiers was adamant that the Suspect should have an exemption because he had helped to organise the vaccination programme. Giles Watling moaned that all criminality committed by the Suspect was a vexatious waste of time, while Graham Stuart thought he could detect terror in the opposition benches. In the government benches maybe. Where do Tory selection panels find such idiots? Stuart Anderson reckoned the charges were destabilising the country and should be dropped, while Mark Jenkinson detected a media plot. To discover the truth. Richard Bacon thought the crimes were so minor they should just be forgotten and that we should have a 10-day celebration for the life and works of St Suspect. Back in Downing Street, the Suspect thought he had things nailed down for now. Maybe the Met would take so long to report back that everyone would forget he was a liar who had broken his own rules. That he could bring the country down to his level by implicating it in his nihilism and deception. That somehow we had got the government we deserved. People so disengaged they’d let anything go. Then came the unwelcome news that Sue Gray’s report would be published this week. Now the shit really might hit the fan. Even the Suspect thought it was touch and go whether he could talk his way out of this one.The leader of the Ulster Unionist party has survived a major political crisis after he won the support of the party in the face of a row over historical social media posts that had been called misogynistic and racist. The UUP deputy leader and chief whip, Robbie Butler, confirmed Doug Beattie had received the support of the party officers and Member of the Legislative Assembly group during meetings on Tuesday. In a statement he said: “I would like to report to you that he has the support of the MLA group and indeed the party officers and that is not to detract from the seriousness or how serious the party leader takes the incidents that happened and those things which are a matter of public record at this time. “What I would like to do is to pay tribute to the party leader for the manner in which he has responded and how serious he takes this issue and these events and those conversations I know he will be open to over this next while to redress the hurt that has been caused.” Earlier on Tuesday, Beattie said he was “deeply ashamed” about the “horrific” tweets that had emerged over the past 72 hours and said he would consult his colleagues over whether he should step down. The controversy started at the weekend, when he posted what he said was a joke involving the DUP Stormont minister Edwin Poots, his wife and a brothel. Poots said on Saturday the tweet was “incredibly hurtful”, and Beattie apologised and deleted it the following day. Since then, other messages dating back more than 10 years emerged, including comments about women, Muslims and Travellers. In one, Beattie posted an image of a woman with two Christmas pudding designs on her sweater, saying: “Don’t be wearing a jumper like this then complain when I stare at your boobs.” Another included a reference to English football supporters dressing in crusader costumes and referenced Muslims being “victims”. The political storm is a significant setback to the UUP, which is in contention to seriously dent the Democratic Unionist party as the largest unionist party in Northern Ireland in the assembly elections on 5 May. A former soldier with a distinguished record, he had taken over in May and saw the party’s political popularity surge among disfranchised unionists after repositioning it as a more progressive and socially liberal party than its rival. A survey at the weekend showed Sinn Féin in pole position to become the biggest single party at 25%, the DUP down one point at 17% and the UUP at 14%. Beattie, 56, admitted to the BBC’s Nolan Show that the tweets are “pretty horrific, pretty horrendous”. He said the tweets demonstrated a “clear failing in myself, I have to own up to that” and asked people to “look at me [as] the person I am now and maybe not judge me from 10 years ago”. “I am deeply ashamed, deeply embarrassed by it. I can apologise day and night about this, it won’t change what I did 10 years ago,” he said. “I think people can change. I want to effect change in Northern Ireland. I want to effect change in people and some of that change is within ourselves. I am not the person portrayed in these tweets today. I am not going to give any excuses for it.” He denied he was misogynistic or racist, and in a personal statement on Monday said he had striven to advocate for women ever since he entered politics. The SDLP deputy leader, Nichola Mallon, said his comments were not funny. “Those who shamelessly and loosely disrespect women only hold us back from equality. These comments are not funny. They are offensive and misogynistic and deserve condemnation,” she said.Boris Johnson has hinted that Germany may be concerned about the imposition of sanctions against Russia because of its dependence on Russian gas and told MPs diplomatic efforts are being made to persuade Berlin and others to go further. The British prime minister said that “European friends” had concerns about imposing the toughest possible sanctions on Russia if it invades Ukraine because of their “heavy dependence” on Russian gas – and also declared the UK would be willing to deploy more troops to eastern Europe if Ukraine was attacked. Johnson was giving a statement to MPs a day after an evening call between western leaders including the US president, Joe Biden, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the French president, Emmanuel Macron. “I think the house needs to understand that one of the big issues that we all face in dealing with Ukraine, in dealing with Russia, is the heavy dependence of our European friends in particular on Russian gas,” Johnson said. “It was clear in the conversations last night that, in this era of high gas prices, we are bumping up against that reality. So the job of our diplomacy now is to persuade and encourage our friends to go as far as they can to sort this out and to come up with a tough package of economic sanctions because that is what this situation requires,” the prime minister added. Johnson was responding to a question from the SNP’s Commons leader, Ian Blackford. The prime minister had initially said that western allies were still talking about cutting off Russia from the Swift banking global payments system in the event of an invasion. “I’m afraid it can only really be deployed with the assistance of the United States, though. We’re in discussions about that,” he added. However, over the weekend Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, had expressed doubts about the idea. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said Russia should be hit with “widespread and hard-hitting sanctions” that he said must include cutting its access to the international financial system. He also called on Johnson to prevent Britain being used to launder Russian money: “If we take our obligations to global security seriously we cannot go on allowing ourselves to be the world’s laundromat for illicit finance.” Other participants on the evening video call were the leaders of Italy, Poland, the EU and Nato. Germany relies on Russia for about a third of its gas supplies, while Johnson said the UK imported about 3%. The plan, Johnson said, was to impose “coordinated and severe economic sanctions heavier than anything we have done before against Russia” – and that efforts were going on in “finalising these measures as swiftly as possible in order to maximise their deterrent effect”. Sanctions would target prominent individuals and Russian companies, Johnson added in a later answer to Conservative MP Tom Tugendhat. Britain would also be willing to deploy more troops to eastern Europe if Russia were to invade. “We would look to contribute to any new Nato deployments,” the prime minister said. On Monday, the US said it would put 8,500 troops on high alert to deploy to Europe if necessary, while France said it was willing to send forces to Romania. In response, Russia said it was watching with great concern. The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, accused Washington of fuelling tensions over Ukraine – repeating Moscow’s line that the crisis is being driven by US and Nato actions rather than by its own buildup of an estimated 100,000-plus troops near the Ukrainian border. Earlier, Britain had warned that Russian elements were already laying the ground for an attack in Ukraine. James Heappey, a defence minister, writing in the Sun, said: “As I write, we are becoming aware of a significant number of individuals that are assessed to be associated with Russian military advance-force operations and currently located in Ukraine.” UK defence sources said the warning was based on intelligence, and was in addition to a warning made by the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, on Saturday of a Kremlin plot to install a pro-Moscow government in Ukraine. Advance-force operations is a US military term and covers any activity, from reconnaissance and surveillance to information warfare, aimed at softening a local population ahead of a potential attack.The US-focused shakeout in financial markets has at least given us clarity on one point: bitcoin is not “digital gold” or a “store of value”, to mention two grand claims made about the cryptocurrency when its price was going up. At $37,000, the late-afternoon level on Tuesday, bitcoin has fallen by 22% since the start of January and by 45% since recording an all-time high in early November. The crypto crew may have convoluted explanations for this setback, but the simplest one is best: bitcoin has always primarily been an instrument for pure speculation; when high-risk assets are out of favour, it will be clobbered. If anything, bitcoin is behaving like a souped-up proxy for the technology-heavy Nasdaq index in the US, down 14% since the start of 2022. So the parallel claim about “uncorrelated returns” doesn’t stack up either. Meanwhile actual gold, a real store of value on the evidence of a few thousand years, has been doing roughly what it is supposed to do during an inflation scare: it has fluttered sideways to gently upwards over the past few months. None of which precludes the possibility that bitcoin will rally when risk-taking appetites recover. But, if that happens, please let’s not hear a reheated version of the thesis (pushed by a Goldman Sachs strategist, bizarrely, only a few weeks ago) that bitcoin is competing with gold in “the store of value market” and thus could hit $100,000 if it grabs a 50% share. Come on, cryptocurrencies are not playing on the same pitch, asset-wise, as gold – and one doubts they ever will. Unilever’s plan B must be quick and slick It wasn’t Unilever’s plan B, which was probably just as well. Investors would be unimpressed if the sole response to the failed £50bn tilt at GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer products business was an organisational shuffle that will remove 1,500 management roles around the world. Tuesday’s “simplification” of the business model will have been planned for ages. Details of a big strategic rethink, one assumes, will come with next month’s full-year results. One can say, though, that the rejig should make it marginally easier for Unilever to churn its portfolio, which could be one part of the boardroom thinking that survives the GSK misadventure. Out goes Unilever’s “matrix” structure, a description of reporting lines arranged according to a mishmash of geographies and products. In comes a theoretically simpler division of responsibilities along purely product lines. So: beauty and wellbeing, personal care, home care, nutrition and ice-cream. The possibly important detail is the sub-division of food between the nutritious stuff and ice-cream. The latter, including Wall’s and Ben &amp; Jerry’s, looks an obvious candidate for disposal if the chief executive, Alan Jope, still hopes to sell assets to fund expansion in beauty and wellbeing. It’s hard to quibble with the organisational reform since it brings Unilever roughly into line with Procter &amp; Gamble, a company many shareholders wish their company could be more like. Jope promises the new arrangement will deliver “crystal clear accountability for delivery”. The buck, though, ultimately stops on his desk, as he will know after a bruising fortnight. His real plan B has to be slick. Arm’s awkward wrestle with reality Tech-obsessed officials at the London Stock Exchange need to be alert. Nvidia, the US semiconductor chip giant, is preparing to abandon its $40bn takeover pursuit of Arm Holdings, reported Bloomberg on Tuesday; and the UK company’s current owner, SoftBank of Japan, is said to be lining up a flotation, or IPO, as an alternative. Before SoftBank’s purchase in 2016, Arm was London’s strongest claim to seriousness in tech. A relisting would give scope for an uplifting “coming home” tale for a company born in a barn outside Cambridge whose chip designs became world-leading. It would be a shocker if SoftBank were to shove Arm towards New York. Mind you, an IPO anywhere would create a messaging headache for the Arm chief executive, Simon Segars. Here’s what he wrote last July in a blogpost that furiously defended the benefits of acquisition by Nvidia and tried to allay the regulatory and competition concerns that now appear likely to kill the deal: “We contemplated an IPO but determined that the pressure to deliver short-term revenue growth and profitability would suffocate our ability to invest, expand, move fast and innovate.” So, roll up, who wants to buy shares in a company where the boss says independence will feel like suffocation? Awkward.