A bridge collapsed in Pittsburgh just hours before Joe Biden was set to travel to the city to tout the $1tn bipartisan infrastructure law. Biden took a detour to visit the collapse site and made a point to speak about the 45,000 bridges in the US rated in poor condition. “That is simply just unacceptable,” he said. The New York mayor’s office is asking New Yorkers who came in contact with Sarah Palin to test for Covid-19 after she went out to eat at several Upper East Side restaurants despite her positive status. The former Alaska governor’s positive test delayed her defamation trial against the New York Times earlier this week. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack on Friday issued subpoenas to lead participants in an audacious scheme to send fake Trump slates of electors to Congress. The development comes as the panel seeks to learn whether the plan was coordinated by the Trump White House. The committee has also subpoenaed former White House spokesperson Judd Deere, per CNN. – Vivian Ho and Hugo Lowell Speaking with reporters as he deplaned this evening, Joe Biden said the US will move troops to Eastern Europe in the “near term”. Per the White House press pool, Biden said: “I’ll be moving US troops to Eastern Europe in the Nato countries in the near term. Not a lot.” A few days ago, Pentagon spokesperson John Kirby said it was possible that the US would deploy more than the 8,500 troops in Europe who were already on alert. “I’m not going to rule out the possibility that there will be more such direction given to additional units at home or even abroad in terms of their readiness posture,” Kirby said. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack on Friday issued subpoenas to lead participants in an audacious scheme to send fake Trump slates of electors to Congress. The development comes as the panel seeks to learn whether the plan was coordinated by the Trump White House. The fake certificates – which falsely declared Donald Trump the winner of the 2020 election, though the states had officially declared otherwise – are significant as they appear to have been a central tenet of the former president’s effort to return himself to power. The fake slates of electors were sent to Congress from seven contested states that were in fact won by Joe Biden. Trump and his allies might have hoped to use them as justification for having Biden’s wins in those states rejected. Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, said that he had authorized subpoenas to 14 Republicans who were listed as the chairperson and the secretary of each group of “alternate electors” in order to learn how the scheme was coordinated. The move by the select committee comes days after the deputy attorney general, Lisa Monaco, confirmed that the justice department had opened an investigation into the scheme, raising the stakes for the fake electors and any Trump White House aides who may have been involved. Thompson issued subpoenas to the two most senior Republicans who signed onto the fake certificates in Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, New Mexico, Nevada, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, including several prominent current and former state Republican party leaders. The subpoena targets included: Nancy Cottle, Loraine Pellegrino, David Shafer, Shawn Still, Kathy Berden, Mayra Rodriguez, Jewll Powdrell, Deborah Maestas, Michael McDonald, James DeGraffenreid, Bill Bachenberg, Lisa Patton, Andrew Hitt and Kelly Ruh. Read more: The House committee investigating the 6 January insurrection has reportedly issued a subpoena for former White House spokesperson Judd Deere, CNN is reporting. From CNN: The committee is seeking both documents and a deposition next month from former deputy White House press secretary Judd Deere, who helped with “formulating White House’s response to the January 6 attack as it occurred,” according to the panel’s letter. In its letter to Deere, the committee specifically said it wanted to speak with him about the January 5 staff meeting in the Oval Office with the President. The committee said it had obtained information that Trump repeatedly asked in the meeting: “What are your ideas for getting the RINOs to do the right thing tomorrow? How do we convince Congress?” The committee has already subpoenaed and met with former White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany, as well as others in Trump’s administration and inner circle. The Biden administration is monitoring the Nor’easter expected to move through mid-Atlantic states this weekend. “We will be actively monitoring the storm’s projected impacts and working closely with FEMA to ensure that we are prepared to support any needs for Federal assistance that may arise in your community,” said Dr Elizabeth Sherwood-Randall, homeland security advisor. Blizzard warnings have been issued for parts of Delaware, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Long Island, Massachusetts and Eastern Maine. Bette Midler had harsh words for the governor of West Virginia after he showed his dog’s backside at the end of his State of the State speech, in a bizarre rejoinder to the actor, singer and activist. Responding on Thursday to a tweet in which Midler called West Virginia “poor, illiterate and strung out”, the Republican Jim Justice said she could kiss his dog’s “hiney”. On Friday, Midler retweeted a picture of the stunt with the caption: “Here we can see a dog’s asshole. Right next to it is the butt of Jim Justice’s dog.” Midler also tweeted: “Here are the state rankings of all the areas and agencies for which the so-called ‘governor’ of West Virginia, Jim Justice, is responsible. Judging from these rankings, I’d say his dog’s ass would make a better governor than him!” The graphic, from US News and World Report, showed Virginia scoring poorly in healthcare, education, economy and other categories and 47th overall among the 50 US states. The state tends to score poorly in such rankings. Justice, 70, a coalmining magnate who was elected as a Democrat, is an eccentric figure who often uses his English bulldog, Babydog, as a political prop. His State of the State speech, at the capitol in Charleston, was delayed after he contracted Covid-19. Midler angered the governor with comments prompted by her own anger towards the West Virginia senator Joe Manchin. Manchin, a Democrat, recently sank Joe Biden’s Build Back Better spending plan, then stood in the way of Senate reform to facilitate the passage of voting rights protections. “What Joe Manchin, who represents a population smaller than Brooklyn, has done to the rest of America, who wants to move forward, not backward, like his state, is horrible,” Midler tweeted. “He sold us out. He wants us all to be just like his state, West Virginia. Poor, illiterate and strung out.” She later apologized to “the good people” of West Virginia. Read more: Agencies contributed to this reporting. A bridge collapsed in Pittsburgh, the city with the most bridges in the entire country, just hours before Joe Biden was set to travel to the city to tout the $1tn bipartisan infrastructure law that will fund the improvement of bridges and roadways across the country. In Pittsburgh, Biden took a detour to visit the collapse site and made a point to speak about the 45,000 bridges in the US rated in poor condition. “That is simply just unacceptable,” he said. The New York City mayor’s office is asking all New Yorkers who came in contact with Sarah Palin to test for Covid-19 after the unvaccinated former Alaska governor, whose positive test delayed her defamation trial against the New York Times earlier this week, went out to eat at several Upper East Side restaurants despite her positive status. The Bidens welcomed a pet cat named Willow to the White House. News of justice Stephen Breyer retiring from the supreme court is having a ripple effect on the Senate: For more on the leading contenders to succeed Breyer: Andrew Hitt, the former chair of the Wisconsin Republican party, has issued a statement saying he is will cooperate with a subpoena issued by the House select committee tasked with investigating the January 6 attack on the US Capitol: Joe Biden made a little slip in his Pittsburgh address when it came to Pennsylvania politics: Congressman Conor Lamb and John Fetterman, lieutenant governor of Pennsylvania, are among the Democratic frontrunners in the senate race. Even though his Pittsburgh trip began with a disaster of a bridge collapse, this address in the home state of Joe Biden was overall always going to be positive: there have been 367,000 manufacturing jobs created since Biden took office, something sure to go over well in a manufacturing town like Pittsburgh. And with the bridge collapse, Biden could hammer home the importance of the $1tn bipartisan infrastructure law, which has been one of the biggest achievements of his legislative agenda yet. “Right here in Pittsburgh, the future is being built on this city’s storied past,” Biden said. “We know what happens when we stop investing in places like Pittsburgh.” It’s a bit of a homecoming for Joe Biden in Pittsburgh, who grew up not far away in Scranton, Pennsylvania. The lack of fatalities and life-threatening injuries from the earlier bridge collapse has given him the opportunity to have some fun, and he’s taken on a jovial tone, joking with the crowd about the renamed “Joe Biden Way” expressway. “I’m coming home,” Biden said. “I’m coming home.” Joe Biden began his remarks in Pittsburgh by addressing the bridge collapse that took place earlier that day, noting that it had been rated in poor condition for more than 10 years. He pointed out that in Pennsylvania alone, there are “3,300 bridges here in Pennsylvania – some of which are just as old and in just as decrepit condition as that bridge was, including in Pittsburgh, the city of bridges.” “Across the country there are 45,000 bridges in poor condition,” Biden said. “That is simply just unacceptable. That is why your governor, your members of Congress and your mayor has been saying for years. He continued: “I’ve talked about it every time I’ve come to Pittsburgh, and we finally got it done: a bipartisan infrastructure law, including the largest investment in our nation’s bridges since Eisenhower put together the interstate highway system.” Joe Biden was originally scheduled to begin delivering his remarks on the economy and the $1tn bipartisan infrastructure law at Carnegie Mellon University about an hour ago, but his Pittsburgh trip has been upended after bridge collapsed just hours before his arrival. He made a trip to visit the collapsed bridge, which officials said had been in need of repair for some time. Under the new infrastructure law, Pennsylvania has $1.63bn of federal funds specifically earmarked for bridge improvements. The Guardian’s Jonathan Freedland and Julian Borger discuss Joe Biden’s strategy when it comes to potential war with Russia over Ukraine, as well as some potentially good news at home for the president as he gets the chance to nominate a liberal pick to the supreme court: Some more striking pictures from the scene of the Pittsburgh bridge collapse: Joe Biden visited the site of the collapsed bridge in Pittsburgh on Friday, hours after the structure fell while cars and a bus were traveling along it. Biden is on a pre-planned trip to Pittsburgh to promote his $1tn infrastructure initiative, which he signed into law in November after it passed through Congress with exceptionally rare bipartisan support. The president met with first responders and surveyed the empty space where the Forbes Avenue bridge once stood. There were no fatalities. “If this would have occurred an hour later, this is a road that gets probably about 15,000 cars on it a day, and if it was rush hour, we would be looking at a couple hundred cars down in that valley,” Corey O’Connor, a Pittsburgh city council member, said earlier in the day. “We got very, very lucky today, and hopefully those individuals at the hospital recover quickly and they’re home safe in the next couple days.” The $1tn infrastructure bill is designed to inject vastly needed resources into the repair of the country’s roads, railways, drinking water and bridges. Under the scheme, Pennsylvania is earmarked for $1.63bn of federal funds specifically for bridge improvements. Full report: Joe Biden has touched down on the tarmac at an airport on the outskirts of Pittsburgh, as he prepares to promote his infrastructure package hours after an early-morning bridge collapse just a few miles from where he is scheduled to speak. The president told reporters “we’re going to see the bridge,” after descending the steps from Air Force One. White House deputy press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre told reporters that the president spoke with Pennsylvania governor Tom Wolf and Pittsburgh Mayor Ed Gainey before taking off and offered federal support. “Our team remains in touch with state and local officials on the ground on updates and any additional assistance we can provide,” she said. Congressman Pat Fallon, a Republican from Texas, has introduced a joint resolution to implement term limits for Congress. Bloomberg is reporting that the Biden administration has been meeting with the the country’s largest banks on possible sanctions against Russia. As tensions continue to rise at the Ukraine border, members of the national security council and other senior administration officials spoke with executives from banks including Citigroup, Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co and Goldman Sachs Group. One focus of the discussions has been on a package that would include targeting Moscow’s ability to convert currency. Officials have also been voicing concerns about triggering a possible repeat of 2018, when sanctions against Russia disrupted the global supply chain for aluminum and sent prices for the metal soaring 30%. Defense secretary Lloyd Austin will host a joint press conference with joint chief of staff chair Mark Milley later today. A 2019 law allowing anyone in Pennsylvania to vote by mail is unconstitutional, a state court ruled on Friday. The ruling is likely to quickly be appealed to the state supreme court and will be paused as the body decides whether to take up the case. Nonetheless, it is a hugely significant decision in a key swing states where a record 2.6m people voted by mail in the 2020 election. Donald Trump has railed against mail-in voting in the state, even though there is no evidence of widespread fraud or wrongdoing. In a 3-2 ruling, judges on the Pennsylvania commonwealth court ruled that no-excuse absentee voting was prohibited by several provisions in the state’s constitution that outline the conduct of elections. One of those provisions lays out the specific conditions under which someone may vote absentee, cites absence from their home on election day, as well as illness, physical disabilities and a religious exemption. Another provision says “all elections by the citizens shall be by ballot or by such other method as may be prescribed by law.” The court ruled that those provisions meant that the state legislature could not make it so that anyone could vote by mail without an excuse. “A constitutional amendment must be presented to the people and adopted into our fundamental law before legislation authorizing no-excuse mail-in voting can “be placed upon our statute books,” Mary Hannah Leavitt wrote for the majority. But the two dissenting judges argued that the constitution does authorize the legislature to enact no-excuse absentee voting. The provision that says elections must be conducted by ballot “ or by such other method as may be prescribed by law,” authorizes it, they said. “The General Assembly is constitutionally empowered to enact Act 77 to provide for qualified and registered electors present in their municipality of residence on an election day to vote by no excuse mail-in ballot,” they wrote. The newly inaugurated conservative administration of Virginia continues to make waves, with the attorney general today issuing an opinion that public state universities cannot mandate the Covid-19 vaccine as a condition for enrollment or in-person attendance. Reminder that prior to the pandemic, public schools across the country have required some form vaccine for a number of illnesses, including measles, mumps and rubella. The New York City mayor’s office is asking any New Yorkers who came in contact with former Alaska governor Sarah Palin to get tested for Covid-19, the Gothamist is reporting. This comes after the unvaccinated Palin tested positive ahead of her defamation trial against The New York Times, postponing proceedings - and then went on to dine at multiple restaurants on the Upper East Side. In his State of the State address, Jim Justice, governor of West Virginia, told his haters - specifically, Bette Midler - to his kiss the “hiney” of his pet English bulldog, Babydog. He then picked Babydog up and flipped her around so he could flash her posterior to the crowd. “They told every bad joke in the world about us,” Justice said. “So from that standpoint, Babydog tells Bette Midler and all those out there: kiss her hiney.” Justice’s beef with Midler goes back to an angry tweet she sent out last month about Joe Manchin, the senator from West Virginia, when he refused to support the Build Back Better bill in Congress. “He sold us out,” Midler wrote. “He wants us all to be just like his state, West Virginia. Poor, illiterate and strung out.” She later tweeted an apology: Justice Clarence Thomas is facing calls for his recusal in the case over race-based affirmative action in college admissions that the supreme court agreed this week to hear. That’s because his conservative powerhouse wife, Ginni Thomas, sits on the board of the National Association of Scholars, which filed an amicus brief in support of the lawsuit accusing Harvard University admissions of being prejudiced against Asian students and stereotyping them as “uninteresting, uncreative and one-dimensional”. Read more here: The First Family has grown by a whisker: first lady Jill Biden tweeted today that the Bidens have fulfilled their promise to get a White House cat. Willow the cat joins Commander Biden, a purebred German shepherd puppy who the Bidens first welcomed to the White House last month. Commander’s German shepherd predecessors, Champ Biden, passed away in June at the age of 13 while Major Biden - a three-year-old rescue dog with two biting incidents under his collar - had to be rehomed permanently to a quieter environment. Update on the bridge collapse in Pittsburgh: while authorities are now reporting that three people have been transported to the hospital for non-life threatening injuries, there appear to have been no fatalities. As for the $1tn bipartisan infrastructure law that Joe Biden will be traveling to Pittsburgh to speak about later today: White House press secretary Jen Psaki has gone on Twitter to say that the White House is in touch with state and local officials regarding the Pittsburgh bridge collapse. Joe Biden will proceed with his trip to the city as planned, she said. Joe Biden is heading to Pittsburgh today to deliver remarks about supply chains, manufacturing jobs and above all, the $1tn bipartisan infrastructure law that will go toward improving roadways and bridges across the country. Hours before the president was set to leave Washington, a bridge collapsed near the city’s Frick Park. Though authorities say no initial reports of injuries , the collapse severed gas lines. No doubt the bridge collapse will bolster Biden’s stance for why the infrastructure law was so necessary - an American Road and Transportation Builders Association analysis of the Department of Transportation’s 2020 national bridge inventory found that more than 220,000 bridges across the country are in need of repair, with 45,000 considered structurally deficient. That’s 36% - more than a third - of all bridges in the US. But Punchbowl News is reporting that prior to the bridge collapse, Biden was focusing his remarks on economic growth, in particular on the 367,000 manufacturing jobs created since Biden took office. In talking about the infrastructure law, he was going to talk about how it has strengthened the supply chain. We’ll see how his remarks will change with the bridge collapse – and if talking about what has been a feather in his legislative agenda should help with his approval ratings. A new Atlanta Journal-Constitution poll had Biden’s approval was at 32-62 - not great.Edison Flores scored a late goal for Peru to earn a 1-0 away win against Colombia on Friday, boosting their chances of qualifying for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar. Flores, a half-time substitute, struck after 85 minutes to give Peru a priceless victory in Barranquilla. The DC United winger raced on to a through ball and fired a low, angled shot which David Ospina allowed in at his near post. The two sides began the game tied on 17 points. Though the home side made most of the running, they were hurt by their familiar profligacy in front of goal. Remarkably, Reinaldo Rueda’s side have now failed to score in their last six World Cup qualifiers. Peru had two shots at goal to Colombia’s 20 and their goalkeeper, Pedro Gallese, made some fine saves to keep his team level before Flores struck. Peru’s third consecutive qualifying win moved them into fourth place in the 10-team table, one point above Uruguay, who beat 10-man Paraguay on Thursday thanks to a Luis Suárez winner. Colombia slip to sixth place; the top four qualify automatically for Qatar with the side in fifth facing a play-off with a team from the Asian qualifiers. Brazil and Argentina have already booked their places and third-placed Ecuador are well-placed to join them. Peru’s next game is at home to Ecuador on Tuesday, while Colombia are away to Argentina the same night. Bolivia missed the chance to climb above Colombia as they lost 4-1 to the group’s bottom team, Venezuela. Earlier, Argentina put a major dent in the qualifying hopes of neighbouring Chile with a 2-1 away victory in Calama. The visitors rested Lionel Messi but still took the lead through Ángel Di María’s fine curling finish 10 minutes in. Blackburn’s Ben Brereton Díaz continued his rich vein of form with the hosts’ equaliser as he sent a fine looping header over Emiliano Martínez 10 minutes later. Argentina got the victory in controversial fashion, taking advantage of an injury to Claudio Bravo 11 minutes before half-time. With the Chile keeper preparing to be substituted, Rodrigo de Paul shot from long range and with Bravo only able to parry the shot, Lautaro Martínez followed up to slot home the rebound. “Everything is always much easier when Leo is here,” Di María said of his teammate, who is still recovering from Covid-19. The Argentina coach, Lionel Scaloni, also missed the game after testing positive. “Today we were without the best in the world and our coach, but we got the victory and this is also for them,” Di María added. Iran book World Cup place with win over Iraq Mehdi Taremi’s close-range winner sealed Iran’s third straight World Cup qualification as they beat neighbours Iraq 1-0 in Tehran. The Porto striker scored from Alireza Jahanbakhsh’s pass early in the second half as the AFC Group A leaders booked their place in Qatar. Despite the fast spread of the omicron variant of the coronavirus in Iran, the government allowed 10,000 spectators to attend the match. More than 2,000 were women – in line with Fifa’s demands that Iran allow female spectators to attend World Cup qualifiers. It marked just the second occasion that women have been able to watch a major football match in Iran.Joe Biden said on Friday that he will be moving US troops to eastern European and Nato countries “in the near term” as tensions rise over Russia’s military buildup on the borders of Ukraine. The Pentagon has already placed about 8,500 US troops on stand-by for possible deployment to Europe amid Russia’s military build-up near Ukraine’s border. “I’ll be moving troops to eastern Europe and the Nato countries in the near term. Not too many,” the US president told reporters on return to Washington from a speech in Philadelphia. The US already has tens of thousands of troops stationed across mostly western Europe, but the Pentagon is discussing sending a small number of reinforcements to the tense eastern flank. Biden has also threatened personal sanctions against Vladimir Putin should Russia invade. This week, spokesman John Kirby said 8,500 troops were on “heightened alert” for possible deployment to assist Nato. The deployment would be as much politically as militarily significant, bolstering US involvement in the brewing conflict. Ukraine is not a member of Nato, but Washington fears spillover into neighboring Nato countries if Russia attacks Ukraine. Moscow insists it does not plan to attack, but has stationed more than 100,000 combat troops on the borders and is demanding that Western powers exclude Ukraine from ever joining the Nato alliance, as well as other concessions. Biden warned in a press conference last week that a Russian assault on Ukraine would achieve the opposite of the Kremlin’s stated goal. “We’re going to actually increase troop presence in Poland, in Romania, etc. if in fact he moves,” Biden said. “They are part of Nato.”When 24-year-old Krai Saidee returned to his alma mater Chiang Mai University on 14 January, nearly two years after his graduation, he came not just to support his friends but to make a political statement. Painted gold, he held up a sign attached to a graduation gown: “You took my dream, and gave me this,” the message read. Krai is part of a growing number of young Thais who are refusing to attend their graduation ceremonies because they are presided over by members of the royal family. “The protests taught me a lot about the monarchy and how much money goes to the monarchy,” said Krai, referring to demonstrations that erupted in 2020 calling for reforms to the powerful monarchy. Two of Krai’s friends and fellow protesters were arrested during the January protest but released that same day after paying a fine. Many who speak out against the monarchy aren’t as lucky. Thailand’s infamous lese majeste law, which prohibits insulting members of the royal family, is punishable with up to 15 years in prison. Despite the risks, Krai said he would continue protesting against the monarchy, with another demonstration scheduled for March. “I’m planning to give some gifts to the graduating students,” he said, adding that he didn’t know what the gifts would be yet, but promised they would be “something political”. “It’s my duty to open the space for young artists and for my friends,” he said, claiming that some of his friends who felt they had to attend the January ceremony thanked him for speaking out. Paul Chambers, a lecturer at Thailand’s Naresuan University, said the arrests might make “martyrs” of the activists and therefore “could succeed in encouraging more students to boycott graduations overseen by royalty”. Freelance actress Panita Hutacharern, 26, who refused to go to her graduation in 2017, said: “There will be people who are more afraid but there will also be people that are more angry.” But it’s not just legal repression that activists have to worry about – many also face pressure at home. Chambers said that “people of all ages in Thailand are divided regarding monarchy” but “most Thais who venerate the monarchy do come from older generations”. “Parents tend to want to see their sons and daughters attend the rituals of graduation, but these have traditionally been overseen by monarchy so many parents do not mind if royals oversee the ceremonies,” Chambers said. “I argue a lot with my mother,” Panita said, because she was more pro-royalist. Panita said she identified as “anti-royalist” and that attending her graduation ceremony would have been “a waste of time”. “I don’t know why the royal family has anything to do with our graduation.” Luckily for Panita, she had a readymade excuse for her family, because her graduation ceremony took place the same day as her sister’s wedding rehearsal. In Krai’s case, his older sister had already skipped her graduation because of the cost. “I just told my family that it’s about the money,” he said. Graduation ceremonies can be expensive endeavours, with many students shelling out to hire a photographer, a make-up artist and a hair stylist and renting uniforms. The royal family also profits from the ceremonies. “The monarchy makes a great deal of money overseeing graduations so I doubt this practice will end any time soon,” Chambers said, adding that if the monarchy were to cave in to protester demands on this issue, it could “encourage the students to press more”. Boycotts of the graduation ceremonies appear to have picked up steam in recent years. When 35-year-old designer Sina skipped his ceremony more than 10 years ago, 90% of his peers attended, he said. In comparison, Krai said only around 50% of people attend the ceremonies today. “In that time people didn’t realise about all this, nobody talked about the monarchy,” Sina said. In response to the shifting tides, some royalist business owners tried to start a campaign encouraging people to refuse to hire recent graduates that can’t produce a picture of themselves receiving a diploma from the royal family. “I think that it’s good for those students that they are not going to work with those kinds of people,” Panita said, adding that she didn’t think the campaign would catch on. Sina agreed, saying: “They don’t know that people have already changed, that our culture has changed, so they just keep saying the same things that worked before, but it doesn’t work any more.” Using another example, Sina said that in the past, nearly everybody stood out of respect during movie screenings, when a clip played in honour of the king. Today Sina estimates that only around 10% stand. “More than 10 years ago the royalists would pour soda on the people that didn’t stand, but I don’t see any of that any more,” he said. “Now if you stand up, you would be like a person stuck in time.”The co-owners of the New York Giants wanted a head coach who new general manager Joe Schoen could work well with. In hiring Bills offensive coordinator Brian Daboll on Friday, co-owners John Mara and Steve Tisch got someone who Schoen has worked with well the last four years in Buffalo. “In the end, it was obvious Brian has spent his career preparing for this moment,” Tisch said. “He is creative, thoughtful, determined, and Joe and Brian are the perfect complement to each other. We will do everything we can to support their process as they build toward the 2022 season and well after that.” Daboll, 46, replaces Joe Judge, who was fired two days after the Giants finished a 4-13 season, their fifth straight double-digit losing season. Daboll was the first person Schoen interviewed being hired last Friday, and he quickly got a second interview Tuesday. “We interviewed several people who are incredible coaches and all of whom are going to enjoy much more success in this league in their current positions and as a head coach,” said Schoen, who was the Bills assistant general manager during Daboll’s tenure. “With that said, we – me and ownership – all felt Brian is the right person to serve as our head coach,” Schoen added. “Over the last four years, I have observed first-hand Brian’s strengths as a leader – he is an excellent communicator, intelligent, innovative, and hard working. Brian’s genuine and engaging personality is refreshing.” Daboll came to the Bills in 2018 after helping Alabama win its 17th national championship as the Crimson Tide’s offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach. The Giants interviewed six candidates for the vacant position, giving a second interview to Bills defensive coordinator Leslie Frazier earlier Friday. They also spoke to former Miami Dolphins coach Brian Flores; defensive coordinators Lou Anarumo of Cincinnati, Dan Quinn of Dallas and the Giants’ Patrick Graham. Mara said Daboll’s approach to coaching and team building was what the franchise wanted. The Giants last made the playoffs in 2016, the only time since winning their fourth Super Bowl in February 2012. “Brian has had tremendous experience in the NFL and has been part of multiple championship teams,” Mara said. “It is clear he used that experience to grow and develop into a dynamic leader, one that we are confident is the right fit as our head coach.” Daboll’s biggest job will be to help quarterback Daniel Jones improve in his fourth season and get one of the NFL’s worst offenses back on track. His immediate job is to assemble a staff that he wants to emphasize teaching and collaboration and put players in position to win. “That’s why all of us do this,” Daboll said. “To teach, to be successful, to develop talent, and to win. I have a pretty good idea where our fan base’s feelings are right now, and I get it. I promise we will work our tails off to put a team on the field that you will be proud to support and give us the results we all want.” Daboll’s offense excelled this past season as Buffalo won their second straight AFC East title with an 11-6 record with quarterback Josh Allen running the show. The Bills finished third in the NFL, averaging 28.4 points, and fifth with 381.9 yards a game. Allen was sixth in the league with a franchise-record 409 completions, seventh with 36 touchdown passes and eighth with 4,407 yards. Allen’s favorite target, wide receiver Stefon Diggs, caught 103 passes for 1,225 yards and 10 touchdowns. Daboll has 20 years of NFL coaching experience. He spent 11 seasons with the New England Patriots (2000-06, 2013-16) in a variety of roles and helped the franchise win five Super Bowls. Daboll began his coaching career at age 24 in 2000 – Bill Belichick’s first year with the team – as a defensive coaching assistant. He was promoted to wide receivers coach in 2002. Daboll left the Patriots to become the Jets’ quarterbacks coach from 2007-08. He has been an offensive coordinator for the Cleveland Browns (2009-10), Miami Dolphins (2011) and Chiefs (2012). Prior to entering the NFL, Daboll spent a year (1997) as a volunteer assistant at William &amp; Mary, That’s where he first met current Bills coach Sean McDermott. He also served two seasons (1998-99) as a graduate assistant for Nick Saban at Michigan State.Choral music wafted through the nave of the Cathedral of the Russian Armed Forces as Alexei Rozhkov, a visiting priest, considered the question: was Russia standing on the precipice of a new great conflict in Ukraine? “There won’t be a war – there can’t,” he said quickly, glancing up at the skylights of stained glass depicting Soviet medals and religious symbols on the ceiling. The cathedral was built recently as a testament to Russia’s pride in its military glory, ranging from the victory in the second world war to more recent conflicts. A mosaic on one wall glorifies the Russian soldiers who fought in Georgia in 2008 and Syria in 2015, as well as the “little green men” who annexed Crimea in 2014. But like others there, Rozhkov said he could not see what could motivate Russia to launch an attack on Ukraine today – despite Vladimir Putin’s public ultimatums to the west and the tanks, missiles and other weapons continuing to make their way to the Ukrainian border. “When Russia has gone to war, it’s gone to war for a reason,” he said. “And there is no reason for this bloodshed, there’s nothing worth it in today’s world. What would [people] be fighting for? … And how can you fight a war without people?” Despite warnings from the US that an attack could be imminent, one would have been hard pressed walking around Moscow to guess that something extraordinary was afoot. “Leaders need to talk tough, this is just hysteria,” said Konstantin Danilin, 36, who had brought his two daughters to go tubing at Park Patriot, an amusement park just outside Moscow opened by the Russian military. “Putin is aggressive: he takes risks, it’s possible he makes mistakes. But this is all just a negotiation.” Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 and support for the subsequent war in Donbas led to a mass mobilisation of Russian society. Pro-government and anti-war marches were held, and families and friends fell into bitter disputes about the conflict. Putin’s popularity rating rode the wave of patriotism to an all-time high. Russian volunteers, mercenaries and soldiers fought and died in the ensuing conflict. Now, as Russia approaches a perhaps even more fateful war, it feels as though the public has barely taken note, despite the warning signs coming from both sides. Denis Volkov, of the Levada Centre, an independent polling agency, said: “When this topic comes up in groups in the last two or three months, people say: ‘Oy, as soon as I hear the word [Ukraine], I just change the channel. I don’t even want to know what’s going on there. Ukraine again, war again, I don’t even want to get into it.’” Levada found in December that a majority of Russians did not believe there would be a larger war in Ukraine. In the same poll, two-thirds of respondents blamed the US, Nato or Ukraine for the escalating tensions. “Nobody wants [war] but they’re internally they’ve been prepared for this situation,” Volkov said. Some pundits have pointed towards the lack of a public frenzy in Russia as a sign that the government is not preparing people for a war, although Russia’s continued involvement in the Ukrainian and Syrian conflicts has also taken place with little fanfare. Volkov said the lack of enthusiasm for and attention paid to the conflict might also present the Kremlin with an opportunity. “It’s far more important that people are ready to accept whatever happens,” he said. “The majority will not protest. And that means the government’s hands are free … It’s apathy and how people will view Russia’s place in this conflict as justified that are important.” Tikhon Dzyadko, the editor-in-chief of the independent TV Rain channel, said he had noticed heightened concern among his circle of friends, many of whom had protested against the outbreak of war in 2014, that a new conflict was coming. But it was understandable why the public reaction could be muted, he said. First, the war has been going on in Ukraine for eight years and Russians have slowly grown used to it. And second, Russian society is so beaten down by the government’s repressive atmosphere that it is hard to imagine any protest taking place right now. On the other side, there is little in the Kremlin’s motivations to galvanise public opinion about the conflict. “Nobody understands why there’s been an escalation. And nobody understands who needs this,” he said. “The absolute majority of people I know don’t want this. It’s not some kind of sacred war against an aggressor that has attacked your country. It’s the realisation of some indescribable geopolitical interests, which may lead to the deaths of people.” There are signs too that even in elite business circles, which have benefited from access to the Kremlin, many people have grown unhappy with the situation. “While nobody wants war, don’t expect big business to stand up and voice their opposition,” an investment banker told the Moscow Times this week, speaking anonymously. “We have become passengers. The business community will only discuss war in their kitchens. Everybody will stay quiet in public.” Perhaps most surprising is the relative silence of Putin, who has largely vanished from the airwaves at a moment when so much depends on his coming decision. The Russian leader has barely addressed the Ukraine crisis since the new year, leaving TV anchors, pundits and Russian diplomats involved in negotiations to lead the nightly newscasts that inform the majority of the public. These shows have had a clear message, noted Volkov, by increasingly portraying the west as unhinged and Russia as the voice of reason. In a monologue this week on state television, the leading pro-Kremlin host Dmitry Kiselyov said: “They keep harping at us – you’re about to attack Ukraine. This isn’t about Ukraine. It’s about something much larger.”There is a long hidden path that runs through the industrial estate where I live. It’s as straight and narrow as a railway line and, 100 years ago, that’s what it was. Now it is dog walkers and cyclists with cold breath that steam through its dark tunnels, their vests as neon bright as the graffiti. Dog walkers, cyclists and me. I am particularly unwell at the moment, but all I want is to be outside. I love the path in winter: the stunted, skeletal trees that line it; all those gorgeous, branching fractals overhead. I like the mud; the dark other-worlds glimpsed in puddles; the deep browns of leaf litter pushed to the edges; the unexpected architectural shapes of scruffy hedgerow plants, frozen in decay. As the light dims, my boyfriend sets up my wheelchair with fleece-cosy and hot-water bottle, helps me into it, and pushes me along the path until it gets dark. Up and down: a slow, watchful locomotive. My vision isn’t great and I struggle to take it all in at once. Instead, I use my camera to focus in on small windows of interest, finding them by chance or directed by Fraser’s call. We find a hazel branch grown into a tight red knot; a sudden, thick carpet of cavernous green apples. The damp sawn stump of a tree glows like a headlight while clumps of orange fungus spatter its fallen trunk like fairy umbrellas. Blood-ripe berries hang on, silhouettes against the gloom, and the last of the light turns the odd yellow bramble leaf gold. I am enchanted, serenaded by robin song, preserving each detail: click. On our last walk, I decide to make a request. “Show me a nice bird today?” I call to the dark sky. I’d have been content with another robin, but it is a bullfinch that finds my lens, sitting still and watchful, bright as a bauble. Even in winter, in the urban gloom, even in darkness, nature is so generous. I take each photo to look at later, thankful, back in bed. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryHere’s Geoff Lemon’s report from Manuka Oval in Canberra: So Australia will resume tomorrow - frustratingly the last day - with a slim lead of 52, already two wickets down, thanks to the pre-lunch incisiveness of Katherine Brunt. They had an unsettling morning in the field, dropping a couple of catches and letting Knight and Ecclestone take their partnership to a hundred before Ecclestone was lbw to McGrath. Perry (3-57) dismissed Kate Cross, to leave Knight unbeaten on a magnificent 168. The loss of Healy (for a pair) and Haynes cheaply had added real spice to this game, but the weather has damp-squibbed it unless England can do something quickly with the ball tomorrow morning. We’ll be back then, hopefully without the clouds. Thanks for all the emails through the night, I’m heading back to bed. Have a great day, wherever you are. That’s it folks! Darn that rain. The brollies are up , Meg Lanning is wearing a cap and Heather Knight a shirt over her head... “We called our cat Gatting,” writes Chris Wright, “because he was always out. “ And, here is Katherine Brunt, shining as she should on the stats board. An avalanche suddenly in my inbox. “Hi Tanya,” Lovely to hear from you Penelope Cottier! “Just writing to emphasise how ridiculous it is that the women having ONE four-day Test. It’s like Scrooge was in charge of the women’s fixtures. I was at Manuka yesterday and it was shaping up for a great day today, with things really in the balance. No-one can be blamed for the rain today, but at least a five day Test might have allowed for a result. First time an English team has looked really competitive all summer.” I couldn’t agree more. If you can clear the decks for four days, you can certainly do it for five. The whole thing makes no sense -d’ya hear us ICC. Would you be keen to have a two or three Test series? I’ve heard mixed views from players on that. “At least there’s Ash Barty tonight!” Yes! What a talent she is. Imagine being a pro tennis player, giving it up because you want to be a normal teenager, meeting the Australian cricket team, thinking that looks fun, picking up a bat and being good enough to play in the first series of the Women’s BBL. Then returning to tennis and well, the rest is history. Wishing her much luck tonight. An email fights its way through the night from Robert Wilson: “My trio. All French (though rather like pigeons, all cats truly originate from Belfast). “Your father was a genius at dog-naming. Uncanny. Derek Randall fielded EXACTLY like a recklessly exuberant and over-excited mid-sized dog. Huge nomenclature props. “As for the awfulness of Canberra, I’ll say this. The pallid, haunted and trembling human wrecks who can’t take any more of ****ing Ottawa get sent to Canberra to recover.” I can’t quite work it out - is that a compliment to Canberra? Great to hear Ebony Rainford-Brent reference climate change in relation to cricket back in the studio in London. I don’t think we’ll see any action any time soon - TV pictures show grizzled grey skies, covers draped and floodlights on. The best guess seems to be that if they don’t come on by 5am GMT, they won’t come on at all. Send me your thoughts, insomniac or otherwise. Well, tea has come and gone and still we wait. Reports are damp: Hypocaust - what would we do without you? Heather Knight, scorer of the fifth highest % of runs scored in a completed women’s Test innings. “Morning Tanya,” Hello Martin Wright! “Hope the coffee’s doing the trick. The unseasonably warm night has woken me up here in not-so-wintry London – or possibly it’s the after effects of the evening’s Bloody Marys. “ Anyway, talking of bloody, much cheered to see the bloody-minded fortitude displayed by the England women, in telling contrast to the men’s ‘performance’. Perhaps the ECB could engage Knight and Brunt in providing bloody-minded-fortitude lessons to their male counterparts…?” Now, that’s an idea. Actually, I’d be very happy for Heather Knight to take over the top job at the ECB -much though England would miss her. Purr-fection! Any cricket-themed pets out there? Our first dog was called Rags after Derek Randall (my mum let my dad choose the name, only fair seeing as the dog just happened to arrive on one of the very few nights my dad was ever away...). And then of course, the lovely Bouncer from neighbours. Who could forget Bouncer’s dream? A first-hand weather report- thank you Caitlin Abbott! “Just walked home from Manuka. Is is most assuredly not raining and hasn’t been for a while. But by the time tea is over it probably will be.” Ah. It’s amazing what nuggets you stumble on in the middle of the night. So South Africa’s final Test series before suspension was against New Zealand women - and as late as 1972 - despite the ICC boycott in 1970? And an email arrives from Toby Miller. Cover your eyes inhabitants of Canberra, it is not flattering. “ I went to college in Canberra. It was a terrible, terrible place. Rain in summer was unknown, as were ideas, fun, pleasure, and every good thing. A Mancunian winter at its darkest much better, especially when clouds hover over the one semi-good English team doing their best….” Here is a little video of what Geoff was referring to earlier: I’m going to make myself a coffee to see me through. Anyone out there sitting in Canberra twiddling their thumbs? Can you give us some local knowledge - any chance of getting back on today? Weather watch update: The players will take tea as normal at 2:40pm local, 3.40am GMT so the earliest we’ll get back on is 3pm AEDT/4am GMT. Pet’s corner number one. Thank you Ravi! The television pictures briefly show us a damp Canberra but they’re not hanging around - don’t expect to get back on imminently. I’ve tuned into the ABC where they are talking about the process of collating their 20 best women’s Ashes moments - available to look at here, perfect browsing material for a rainy day. One of the commentators reports how difficult it was to find audio, tv or photos from matches even 20 years ago - eg Karen Rolton’s 209 not out at Headingley as recently as 2001. The rise of the women’s game really is one of? THE? cricket stories of the last decade and a bit. Hello from the black and quiet of Manchester at 2.40am. I’ve packed the teens off to bed so its just me and the dog. My daughter’s goodnight was that she’s done today’s Wordle in four - its pretty even in our head to head. Anyway, to the cricket where England have fought back valiantly through Heather Knight’s captain’s innings and Katherine Brunt’s continued brilliance. From the barrel of defeat, the fizz of anticipation. But then the pesky rain. Do get in touch through the dark hours. Alright. The radar looks no more promising - might be a gap long enough to get back on briefly, but more rain after that. As we expected for today I guess. My stint of Weather Watch has come to an end, and it’s Tanya Aldred’s turn to ponder precipitation. Kindly send her lots of emails so she has something to do. “I’m worried here Geoff,” writes Zak Baillie. “This game has the makings of a classic, but the stubbornness of CA and ECB to not schedule five-day tests might see it peter out in a draw.” Yep. We’ve been unlucky recently too: rain in Taunton in 2019, rain in Bristol in 2021, rain on the Gold Coast in 2021, rain in Canberra here. The last four women’s Test matches all affected. But they can’t keep denying the fifth day for much longer. There is literally no reason why women playing Tests should have different playing conditions to the men. I think we might be cooked. This is coming slowly from left to right. Which is west to east for the cardinally inclined. A nice moment here despite the rain: the ground announcer is introducing a number of past Australian players from the 1970s to 1990s. They come onto the ground one at a time with umbrellas against the drizzle. Frances Leonard, Jodie Davis, Raelee Thompson, Tina Macpherson, Karen Price, Marie Cornish, Glenda Hall, Julia Price, Mel Jones, Alex Blackwell and Sarah Elliott. They also mention the former players who are here but working and can’t come out: Lisa Keightley, Shelley Nitschke, Holly Ferling, Erin Osborne and Kristen Beams. “How is it that Canberra has such an understated, unassuming cricket ground for a capital?” asks Andrew Benton. “On a map, Canberra’s centre’s seems to be shaped like one big cricket ground, wondering if maybe the whole place was inspired by cricket.” It’s not a very big place, only about 400,000 people. A lot of the population of Canberra is transient, people go there to work for government bodies or the public service and then leave when they leave those jobs. So it doesn’t get big sporting crowds, and doesn’t get big events all that often either. This is only the second Test match here after the men’s game in 2019. But yes, lots of circles from the air: the many roundabouts of the Walter Burley Griffin design. A few readers in England have been finding this match all the more appealing by contrast to the other recent Ashes. “It’s so great to finally have an England Test match that is actually a proper contest and worth following. Hats off to Heather Knight,” says Toby Macdonald from London. “Only two and a bit days so far and already more fight shown by England women than in 20 days of the men’s Ashes,” writes Martin in Bucks. “Real shame that there are no TV highlights on BBC - as usual the impetus of The 100 for the women’s game is wasted. I fall in the category of those who by age and gender should be a firm men’s test follower but i really enjoyed The 100 and enjoy all forms of cricket.” As David Brooker notes by email, the Knight-Ecclestone partnership was (narrowly) England’s highest 9th-wicket stand in women’s Tests. Exactly 100 runs, going past the 99 put on by Janet Tedstone and Suzanne Kitson in 1992. It was very nearly the highest all time. Taniya Bhatia and Sneh Rana put on 104 for India last year in the Bristol Test, and Maureen Payne and Beverley Botha put on 107 for South Africa against NZ in Cape Town in 1972. Ramaswamy emails in. “Trying to read my tea leaves here, but India managed a 100-run stand both at Lord’s and at the Oval. And what odds on Healy copping a pair, in identical dismissals? Knight ended up with 56.565656% of the total, and assuming she doesn’t spend time off the field in the 3rd innings, will have seen action for all but 13 balls of this Test in the first 3 days. Hell of an endurance test...” Ok, I lied. The rain has settled in. We’re at the edge of a big front. If it does pass it will probably take a couple of hours. So if you’re staying up all night in the UK, it might be bedtime. A bit of rain starts to fall with four minutes to go until lunch, so the umpires head for shelter before Ellyse Perry has to face a ball. Just as well for Australia, those last minutes could have been hairy. The rain should pass quickly, it doesn’t look too dark out there. Hope we get back on, this has just become very spicy indeed. Another one before lunch! Brunt gets some movement in, takes the inside edge into thigh pad and spits off it sharply. Beaumont at short leg has little time but gets her left hand to it and hangs on. Brilliant from England! 4th over: Australia 10-1 (Haynes 4, Mooney 6) Shrubsole is making Mooney play with almost every delivery. Last ball of the over Mooney drives fluently, beating the dive of mid off for four. 3rd over: Australia 6-1 (Haynes 4, Mooney 2) Brunt booming another inswinger into the pads of Haynes, but there was bat on that. The bowler almost talks Knight into a review but not quite. Haynes defends well, soft hands into the ground to get through the over. 2nd over: Australia 4-1 (Haynes 2, Mooney 2) Anya Shrubsole sharing the new ball of course, finding swing immediately. Haynes and Mooney pick up a couple of runs with little drives but it looks fraught. 1st over: Australia 1-1 (Haynes 1, Mooney 0) Another belter beats Mooney two balls after she arrives. Will it be the Brunt show again? What a start! A pair for Alyssa Healy, and it’s Brunt who gets her again. In the first innings Healy chased one. This time the ball is angling in, Healy has to play, then it swings away and leaps off the surface to take the edge through to the keeper. Not much Healy could do about that. So ends a truly remarkable performance by Heather Knight. Cross runs off the field, leaving Knight to walk off solo and enjoy the spotlight on 168 not out, over 56% of her team’s runs. Sophie Ecclestone with 34 at No10 was the only other player to make over 15. Knight didn’t give a chance, barely made a mistake, and kept her calm through 103 overs of batting, taking the deficit from 333 when she walked in to 40 when she walks off. Well played. It’s all over! Not sure why Cross feels the need to take on a pull shot from Perry, especially just after clipping a high full toss through the leg side for four. But that’s what Cross does. Top edge to deep backward square. And here’s Darcie Brown again, so good across the ground. Dives forward and takes a belter of a catch. 105th over: England 292-9 (Knight 167, Cross 7) Apparently Cross was dropped in the previous King over. Edged a cut shot that Healy put down. She’s missed a few chances in this match. Knight in this over is looking to attack. Plays the reverse but straight to deep third and turns down the single. Tries to loft but hits it to mid on, and then mis-hits over short cover for a run. Cross says, I’ll show you how it’s done. Clatters a cut shot for four. 104th over: England 287-9 (Knight 166, Cross 3) McGrath to Knight, with Mooney standing at a very short straight mid-off, about halfway down the pitch. Not sure I would want Mooney standing in front of the bat like that with a broken jaw and no helmet. Knight cuts the second ball for a single. The field closes in for Cross, who wafts, then drives solidly for none. Ignores the final wide drag-down. The deficit is 50 runs. 103rd over: England 286-9 (Knight 165, Cross 3) Knight facing King, five in the deep protecting the boundaries. Knight tries to drop it softly enough towards deep midwicket that she can get back for two, but Gardner’s arm is a rocket and the throw lasers back to the keeper. Would have been a run out for sure. Cross on strike survives the last four balls though. 102nd over: England 285-9 (Knight 164, Cross 3) Knight takes on another big drive to the deep, fielded on the cover boundary. Two runs, then a single. McGrath gets four balls to work at Cross, two slips and a gully with a short cover and short midwicket catching. Can’t get her out. The field spreads for the sixth ball to offer her a single, but she misses a ball that goes off the thigh pad to slip. England trail by 52. 101st over: England 282-9 (Knight 161, Cross 3) Alana King comes on to bowl her leg-breaks, and Knight looks like she’s changing modes a bit here. Late cut down to deep third, where Sutherland fumbles over the rope. Steps down and lofts two runs over mid-off, then plays an aggressive sweep but it’s fielded in the deep. Drinks. 100th over: England 273-9 (Knight 152, Cross 3) Lovely start from Cross, clipping her first ball out through midwicket for three runs, just saved by a slide on the rope. Knight happily takes a single next ball. It could well be in England’s interest to get bowled out here. Get bowling in these conditions. The closer they get to Australia’s score, the longer Australia will have to bat before setting a target. McGrath delivers! Straight ball, cannons into the pad and Ecclestone reviews in faint hope but is wandering off the field before the decision is upheld. Hitting middle stump, three reds. 99th over: England 267-8 (Knight 151, Ecclestone 34) Knight squeezes a single from Jonassen through the leg side, then Ecclestone cuts, off the bottom edge, and the ball should bounce back onto her stumps but the spin she imparts from the edge of the bat makes the ball turn past off. She still looks dicey. Gets a single to raise the hundred partnership though. 98th over: England 267-8 (Knight 150, Ecclestone 33) Tahlia McGrath comes on, having not bowled since early in the day yesterday, and she has Ecclestone dropped at slip. Lanning again. That was a tough chance though, diving full length to her right. Can’t reel it in. No run from the over. 97th over: England 267-8 (Knight 150, Ecclestone 33) There’s the 150 up for Heather Knight, who enjoys it but only briefly acknowledges it. Clobbers Jonassen’s spin over wide long-on with the slog sweep. Two Test tons for Knight, both over 150. 96th over: England 262-8 (Knight 146, Ecclestone 32) Knight and Ecclestone cut the deficit down to 75 now, Knight hooking Perry down through fine leg before a couple of singles. 95th over: England 255-8 (Knight 141, Ecclestone 31) Another first-ball single, this time Knight glancing Sutherland, who follows up with a wide. Another Ecclestone prod outside the stumps evades an edge. Then another. Stop fishing! 94th over: England 254-8 (Knight 140, Ecclestone 31) Knight gets a single away, and Ecclestone plays a few swishes outside off stump. Looking a bit dicey, Knight might want to settle her down. 93rd over: England 253-8 (Knight 139, Ecclestone 31) We’ve seen several well timed cut shots this morning, but they’ve all gone behind point and been nicely stopped in the cordon. Sutherland finishes the over by cutting the ball into Ecclestone, banged on the front pad and the Australians send it upstairs. Looks a chance for sliding down to me, and the review says umpire’s call on leg stump. 92nd over: England 253-8 (Knight 139, Ecclestone 31) Ellyse Perry taking it back to the traditions of Test cricket, bowling an eight-ball over. A wide and a no-ball in there, as well as Ecclestone dropping a ball into the big gap on the leg side to scamper through. 91st over: England 250-8 (Knight 139, Ecclestone 30) Sutherland isn’t finding the outside edge per se, but keeps finding the outside half of Knight’s bat. A couple of shots sliced away behind point. Ecclestone spices things up by using the inside edge for a run. 90th over: England 246-8 (Knight 136, Ecclestone 29) Perry’s in, with that distinctive bound of hers. Three slips, gully, looking to force another mistake. Knight drives a single, Ecclestone survives the straighter ball. 89th over: England 244-8 (Knight 135, Ecclestone 28) Sutherland now, and Knight is beaten again twice on the trot. The second delivery prompts a bit of interest after a noise is heard. Lanning doesn’t review - good decision, there’s a gap between bat and pad. Knight then finds the boundary for the first time today with a wonderful cover drive and this partnership is now worth 75. 88th over: England 240-8 (Knight 131, Ecclestone 28) Here we go then. Lanning leads Australia onto the pitch under overcast skies at Manuka before Perry takes the ball and play resumes. Knight takes guard and there’s immediately two, nicely played off her legs into the gap on the on side. A single through the off side follows before Ecclestone is dropped in the slips by Lanning, who might be distracted by Mooney diving across her. A mistake from the Australians who have been very good to this point. Perry then delivers a beauty to beat Knight all ends up. An action-packed opening over. And here is the daily podcast with me and Isabelle Westbury if you’d like some more detail for quarter of an hour about how the day panned out. Have to say, we’ve had two outstanding days of Test cricket. Really hope the rain has less influence than projected from here. Here’s my match report from yesterday for you to catch up. Lots of conjecture about day three, starting some days ago. Yes, there BoM forecast still says there is a high chance of thunderstormy rain today. It also says that it should be an afternoon thing. It rained a bit here in Canberra last night, but this morning is rain-free and humid and cloudy, just like yesterday morning when the swing bowlers went so well. There is rain on the radar but it’s in patchy bits here and there, so who knows what will or won’t find Manuka. For now it looks like the day should start on time. Hello world. It is day three of the women’s Ashes Test, and we have a contest on our hands. England looked done and dusted yesterday at 120 for 6 in replay to 337 for 9 declared, but Heather Knight played her finest Test innings to reach 127 by stumps. She’ll resume this morning with Sophie Ecclestone on 27, and two wickets in hand, to try to narrow the deficit from its current 102. Don’t get me wrong, it’s still a dominant position for Australia. But instead of England being blown away short of the follow-on mark, the visitors could now at least push the hosts to make some difficult decisions about how to play the match from here.At this time of the year, the sun rises high enough to shine into my office shed at about quarter past nine; 10 minutes later it disappears behind the house, and then, later still, it sets. Generally those 10 minutes in the morning are all I see of the sun, except on the days when it doesn’t appear at all, which is most of them. I try to keep this moment of the day free in the event of a cloudless morning – it would be a shame to miss the only 10 minutes of sunshine in an entire working week because I got stuck on Wordle – but sometimes I’m not available for it. Sometimes, for example, I will find that my presence is required in the kitchen at that time, so that my wife can debrief me regarding certain domestic matters. “Just say that again,” she says. “If your normal collection day is Wednesday, then this week it falls on Friday,” I say. “Next week Thursday, and back to normal the week after.” “And you’re sure about that?” she says. “This is the council’s website I’m looking at,” I say. “I’m sure the neighbourhood WhatsApp said something different.” I look across the garden to see the last of the sun reflecting off the back of my empty office chair and, honestly, I’m torn. “Let’s just leave the rubbish out all week, and see what happens,” I say. “That’s your idea of a solution, isn’t it?” my wife says. “Are we done yet, please?” I say. “Because I …” “You didn’t put the dishwasher on last night,” she says. “I forgot,” I say. “I didn’t think it was too much to ask,” she says. “But perhaps it was.” “It’s too bad we can’t just put it on now,” I say. “Oh wait – we can!” “Not yet,” she says. “There’s more stuff to go in it.” “What luck!” I say. I glance across the garden, where my office is already shaded in gloom, and my heart sinks. “I thought you were in a hurry,” my wife says. “Not any more,” I say. Over the 30 years I have lived in the UK, I have more or less adopted the local approach to January, regarding it as a bleak and pointless interval fit only to be waited out. But I’ve now reached an age when that attitude seems a little extravagant. I may well end my days begging for a few more crappy Januaries to live through. My wife has also decided we need a weekly shared activity to avoid slipping into hibernation, something beyond a wet walk on nearby scrubland. This is how we come to find ourselves at a site of historical interest clear on the other side of London on a Sunday morning. My jaw has dropped at the sight of the entrance fee for two adults, and I’m just letting it hang there, hands in pockets, while my wife pays. The woman behind the till explains that if we were to purchase a joint annual membership to English Heritage, the ticket price would be refunded, with many other discounts and benefits instantly accruing to us, including free parking. “Actually that sounds like quite a good deal,” my wife says. “This is a very, very slippery slope,” I say, leaning close to her ear. Three hours later we are on our way back home. “That was an interesting outing,” my wife says. “Where should we go next week?” “This is just for January, right?” I say. “Yeah,” she says. “That’s why I didn’t get the membership. We might not do it again for a whole year.” “And in two years we’ll be 60 and everything will be free anyway.” “Don’t say that,” she says. “Free buses and free cake. I can’t wait,” I say. “I don’t think they give you free cake,” she says. “Some kind of voucher,” I say. “That you exchange for cake.” “I don’t want to talk about this,” she says. At some point just after the close of the month the sun will rise above the roof of the house at midday, shining into my office for an extended period. By that time I will have started drinking again, and life will have regained some of its former lustre. Until then I’ve got one more visit to an unnamed museum, gallery or historic property, followed by a further blighted two years in which I am forced to pay for my own cake. • The main image on this article was amended on 29 January 2022 to show the original Wordle game created by Josh Wardle. An earlier version showed an imitation game.Going Out : Cinema Parallel Mothers Out now Penélope Cruz (above) is on luminous form in her latest collaboration with the Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar, a unique blend of outrageous soap opera and melancholy meditation on the legacy of the Spanish civil war, also starring Aitana Sánchez-Gijón, stealing every scene as Cruz’s would-be actor mother. Taming the Garden Out now In an era when the actions of the super-rich edge ever further into self-parody, the film-maker Salomé Jashi documents the live transportation of massive trees from the coast of Georgia to one wealthy guy’s garden, in a premise that sounds like the first line of a parable about man’s hubris, but is in fact real. Sing 2 Out now From the former Radiohead music video director Garth Jennings comes the follow-up to his first animated children’s adventure about an impresario’s attempt to save his theatre with a singing competition. This time, the gang must attempt to lure a reclusive rock star out of hiding for one big show. South Out now All aboard one of the world’s first documentary features, which showcases Ernest Shackleton’s ill-fated 1914-16 Endurance expedition to the Antarctic. This timely digital remaster and rerelease from the BFI boasts a new score, courtesy of regular silent film accompanist Neil Brand. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs James Blunt 3 February to 15 February; tour starts Brighton Singer-songwriter turned Twitter comic James Blunt (above) tours in support of last year’s greatest hits album celebrating his 17-year (!) career. Expect a mass singalong to You’re Beautiful, lashings of banter, and a handful of songs you know but can’t name. Turnstile 29 January to 5 February; tour starts Nottingham Produced by Mike Elizondo (50 Cent, Fiona Apple), and featuring Blood Orange AKA Dev Hynes, the Baltimore hardcore band’s recent third album Glow On bolstered their status as the genre’s most experimental practitioners. This whirlwind tour features support from UK punk upstarts Chubby and the Gang. Michael Cragg Fergus McCreadie Trio, Justyna Jablonska &amp; Jyotsna Srikanth Royal Concert Hall, Glasgow, 30 January A fittingly diverse show for the Celtic Connections festival; Scots pianist McCreadie’s much-feted trio – a brew of northern European jazz, rock, funk and Celtic grooves – shares a bill with the contemporary-classical, Carnatic and electronic dialogues of cellist Justyna Jablonska and South Indian violinist Jyotsna Srikanth. John Fordham Bajazet Royal Opera House: Linbury theatre, London, 4 February to 12 February Vivaldi wrote more than 50 operas. Of the 20 or so that survive, none has a regular place in the repertory. So Adele Thomas’s production of Bajazet, a pasticcio first seen in Verona in 1735, is a real collector’s item. It’s conducted by Peter Whelan, with a cast including Gianluca Margheri and James Laing. Andrew Clements * * * Going Out: Stage The Glow Royal Court theatre, London, to 5 March A new play from Alistair McDowall, best known for cult theatrical hit Pomona. The Glow is about a spiritualist medium in the 1860s and stars Fisayo Akinade, Rakie Ayola, Tadhg Murphy and Ria Zmitrowicz. Expect the unexpected. Doubt: A Parable Chichester Festival theatre, to 5 February PPowerhouse actor Lia Williams directs Monica Dolan in a new production of John Patrick Shanley’s Pulitzer-winning play. Dolan plays a devout school principal alongside Sam Spruell’s progressive Father Flynn. Miriam Gillinson Mark Bruce Company: Phantoms Merlin theatre, Frome, 3 February to 5 February, then touring After Dracula, choreographer Mark Bruce continues in the dark, gothic vein in a new triple bill, taking on myths, folk tales and cinematic fantasies. Music comes from the White Stripes, folk singer Martin Simpson and jazz pianist Gareth Williams. Lyndsey Winship Leicester comedy festival Various venues, 2 February to 20 February The gargantuan comedy fest returns to the real world after last year’s virtual edition, with more than 560 shows. Highlights include the winningly eccentric Inbetweeners man Joe Thomas, the always boundary-pushing Alfie Brown and pod star Ed Gamble. Rachel Aroesti * * * Going Out: Art Francis Bacon: Man and Beast Royal Academy of Arts, London, 29 January to 17 April The great carnivore of modern British art, who saw bodies as meat, constantly compared humans with other animals. Apes scream in cages, dogs prowl in wastelands and beef is butchered in his claustrophobic canvases. By examining Bacon’s eye for nature, this exhibition (work pictured, above) promises a safari through his ideas and passions. Van Gogh Self-Portraits The Courtauld, London, 3 February to 9 May No artist saw himself more vividly than poor Vincent; not even his Dutch predecessor Rembrandt was a more searching self-portraitist. Even without his paintings, Van Gogh’s letters would be one of the greatest works of confessional literature. Here are his pictures of the man in the mirror: raw, relentless, true. British Art Show 9 Wolverhampton Art Gallery and Wolverhampton School of Art, to 10 April The brilliant painter Michael Armitage stands out in this interesting if over-curated and didactic ragbag of talents and tendencies in British art now. There’s everything you might expect from witty video installations to visionaries with important things to say. With Jamie Crewe, Alberta Whittle, Florence Peake, Joanna Piotrowska and many more. The Tudors The Holburne Museum, Bath, to 8 May The faces of Henry VIII and his gifted daughter Elizabeth I are as recognisable as modern celebrities. They and other members of the Tudor dynasty assiduously got their portraits put about. Henry even employed the Renaissance genius Holbein, whose influence lends power to these paintings of monarchs and their ministers. Jonathan Jones * * * Staying In: Streaming Pam and Tommy Disney+, Wed Downton’s Lily James metamorphoses into Baywatch-era Pamela Anderson (above) in this series chronicling the first internet-sensation celebrity sex tape. This is both a comedy crime caper (Seth Rogen plays one of the thieves) and feminist-slanted retelling of the video’s impact. The Righteous Gemstones Sky Comedy, Thur Danny McBride’s televangelist comedy combines epic familial saga with brutal, deliciously dumb humour - think It’s Always Sunny In Philadelphia meets Succession (plus Jesus). The cast is just as spectacular: season two returns with Jason Schwartzman and Eric Andre joining John Goodman, Adam DeVine and McBride himself. Suspicion Apple TV+, Fri Move aside, the British sitcom: Israeli dramas are fast becoming US TV’s go-to remake material. Here, Uma Thurman and The Big Bang Theory’s Kunal Nayyar star in an adaptation of the very clever nail-biter False Flag, about five ordinary people implicated in a high-profile kidnapping. Lazy Susan BBC Three &amp; BBC iPlayer, Tue A slew of British comic talent - James Acaster, Lou Sanders, John Kearns, Kiell Smith-Bynoe and more - accompany gently offbeat double act Celeste Dring and Freya Parker for this four-part sketch show, a highlight of BBC Three’s broadcast relaunch night. RA * * * Staying In: Games Pupperazi Out now, Xbox, PC, Mac This is a whimsical dog-photography game, which you can also pet the dogs. Surely that’s all you need to know? Dying Light 2 Out Fri, Xbox, PC, PlayStation A tense run-away-from-the-zombies game set in a ravaged city that offers tens to hundreds of hours of smashing the undead with a plank, if that’s your thing. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Alice Glass – Prey//IV Out now Canadian avant-pop artist Glass (above) finally unleashes her debut solo album, having previously been one half of noise merchants Crystal Castles. The record’s sonic template ricochets between Baby Teeth’s sugary electropop and the pure rage catharsis of the towering Fair Game. MØ – Motordrome Out now Denmark’s biggest pop export returns with her third album, her first since 2018’s muddled Forever Neverland. While that guest-heavy record suffered in the aftermath of the global success of 2015’s Diplo-assisted Lean On, the streamlined Motordrome – 10 tracks in half an hour – recalls the pulsating synthpop and punk spirit of her early singles. Eels – Extreme Witchcraft Out now Mark Everett, AKA E, returns with his 14th album under his Eels moniker, and his first with producer John Parish since 2001’s scuzzy Souljacker. Like that album, Extreme Witchcraft roughs up E’s lyrical storytelling, with songs such as The Magic and Amateur Hour lurching around galloping melodies. Pinegrove – 11:11 Out now Over the course of four albums, including 2020’s Marigold, their first via Rough Trade, frontman Evan Stephens Hall and drummer Zack Levine have turned their creaky indie-folk into confessional high art. That continues on 11:11, with Hall’s fragile voice pondering the strange limbo of Recent Times on the lilting single Respirate. MC * * * Staying In : Brain food Phat Tuesdays Amazon Prime Video, from 4 February Named after the weekly showcase for Black comics at LA’s Comedy Store throughout the 90s, this fascinating docuseries sees founder Guy Torry unpacking its star-making significance. Performers Regina King (above), Nick Cannon, Dave Chappelle and Tiffany Haddish relive their stage time. 99% Invisible Podcast For a decade and more than 450 episodes, Roman Mars’s podcast has drilled into the minutiae of design, exposing the lesser-known functionalities of our daily lives. Highlights include the sounds of TV sports and the reasoning behind alphabetical ordering. Simon Roper YouTube Archaeologist Simon Roper has spent recent years amassing a devoted following for his explainer videos on English speech throughout history. He translates academic rigour into entertaining ASMR linguistics, from geordie phonology to London accents in the 14th century. Ammar KaliaThe jumpsuit has shifted from an item favoured by only the fashion-committed to a staple loved by all. Frankly, this change is long overdue. There is only one downside to this versatile piece – having to disrobe to go to the loo. There are loads to choose from on the high street: the everything jumpsuit for work or play (Omnes); the event jumpsuit, which adds a bit of glamour (J Crew); and a casual one for when your day consists of sofas and box sets (People Tree). Renting a jumpsuit offers an opportunity to play with different eras, the kind that designers tend to reference. Thrifting is a mixed bag: you may be lucky and find a curio that has that retro feel. Buy now, dress up with jewellery, add shoes and – this is the genius of a jumpsuit – that’s it: you’re good to go. Lauren Cochrane Buy it Pink patterned, £210, jcrew.com Layer this satin style over a polo neck. Pink floral, £25, omnes.com Make a statement in all-over florals. Grey jersey, £66.50, peopletree.co.uk Super casual – and made from 100% organic cotton. *** Rent it Beige and belted, from £39 for one month’s rental by &amp; Other Stories from thedevout.com A utility-style jumpsuit is perfect for everyday wear. Pair with trainers. Denim, from £69 for one month’s rental by Alexa Chung from onloan.co Style a denim boiler suit with heeled ankle boots. Heart print, from £44 by Lisou from hurrcollective.com Printed silk puts a dressy spin on things. *** Thrift it Black, £50, cosresell.com A black long-sleeve style is an alternative to an LBD. Yellow silk, £150 by Ermanno Scervino, vestiarecollective.com Perfect for spring – wear with a jumper and sandals. Red embroidered, £40, rokit.co.uk Pair this 90s-style jumpsuit with a bomber jacket.1965 John Harris In 1988, Bob Dylan was inducted into the Rock &amp; Roll Hall of Fame by Bruce Springsteen. Springsteen made a speech that started by describing a single sound: the snare shot that began Dylan’s revelatory 1965 single Like a Rolling Stone, which propelled music somewhere new. It sounded, he said, “like somebody kicked open the door to your mind”. So 1965 was the year that pop gave rise to rock: music with a new depth, plus a sense of revolt and confrontation. The Who released I Can’t Explain and My Generation. The Beatles came up with Help!, Ticket to Ride and the pairing of We Can Work It Out and Day Tripper. Dylan’s new adventures were heralded by the Byrds’ reinvention of his Mr Tambourine Man. But if anyone distilled the year’s mixture of noise, intelligence and revolt into its purest essence, it was the Rolling Stones, then at the peak of a pop-art phase that produced an amazing trilogy of hits: The Last Time, (I Can’t Get No) Satisfaction and Get Off of My Cloud. If you want an idealised picture of life at the mid-60s cutting edge, the latter song should do it: “I live in an apartment on the 99th floor of my block / And I sit at home looking out the window, imagining the world has stopped.” In Detroit, Tamla Motown was producing records full of creativity and depth: Martha and the Vandellas’ Nowhere to Run; Smokey Robinson &amp; the Miracles’ The Tracks of My Tears; the Supremes’ Stop! In the Name of Love. In Charlotte, North Carolina, James Brown and his band recorded Papa’s Got a Brand New Bag, Parts I and II, which blazed a trail into funk. This was also the year that David Bailey took his celebrated portrait of Michael Caine; Julie Christie starred in Doctor Zhivago and Jean-Luc Godard released Alphaville). In 1965, the idea that stuff by and for young people had to be full of ideas and importance was so firmly established that it has endured ever since; if there was a year when popular culture was invented, this was surely it. John Harris is the author of The Beatles: Get Back, the official companion to the Disney+ series *** 1975 Kelefa Sanneh When I think about my favourite years, I think about times when things are changing, and no one quite knows how. I think, in other words, about 1975, when Smokey Robinson released Quiet Storm, a light-headed falsetto fantasia about a lovesick man who compares himself to “a butterfly caught up in a hurricane”. The song was not a huge hit (it went to No 61 in the US), but an imaginative DJ in Washington DC was inspired by its smooth sound, and soon the name of the song became the name of a show, then a radio format. For decades, so-called Quiet Storm stations thrived, playing a mix of plush R&amp;B and mellow jazz, an elegant counterpoint to the boisterous hip-hop that was just being born. Punk was being born, too: Patti Smith (her first album), the Ramones (their first record deal), the Sex Pistols (their first gig). And electronic dance music, in the dual form of sublime disco tracks (Silver Convention’s Fly, Robin, Fly; Donna Summer’s Love to Love You Baby) and electronic experiments (Kraftwerk’s Radio-Activity; Tangerine Dream’s Rubycon). It was the year of Ali-Frazier III, the Thrilla in Manila – a classic fight broadcast on an upstart network called HBO. And there were other new reasons to stay in the house: US department store Sears began to sell the first Atari video-game system. It was, I think, an unusually unpretentious year. It gave us crowd-pleasing classics such as Jaws and Monty Python and the Holy Grail, alongside a fistful of cult favourites: The Stepford Wives, Dolemite, The Rocky Horror Picture Show. Perhaps it was all a bit miscellaneous and confusing, especially if you were living through it. (I was not; I arrived the next year.) But that’s the thing about golden eras: they often don’t seem so golden at the time. Kelefa Sanneh is the author of Major Labels: A History of Pop Music in Seven Genres *** 1984 AS Hamrah If 1984 was the best year for pop culture, that landmark period was countered at every turn by lower-end work that showed Ronald Reagan’s US as dysfunctional or corrupt. The inevitable re-evaluation of Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four began things. Apple released the first Macintosh. Ridley Scott directed the TV ad, alluding to the book. Represented by a heroine who shattered “Big Brother” with a hammer, Apple framed itself as against conformity. Van Halen named their new album after the year. Bruce Springsteen’s Born in the USA was misinterpreted and exploited by Republican politicians. With Purple Rain, Prince showed that self-creation is harder to co-opt. The MTV Music Video Awards debuted; Madonna writhed in a bridal gown on a wedding cake, singing that she was beat, incomplete. New York once again seemed like the capital of pop culture, with the painters Keith Haring and Jean-Michel Basquiat, and Raw comics. Musician-performance artists Talking Heads and Laurie Anderson created a new, smarter, simpler pop aesthetic, and Run-DMC brought hip-hop to the world. At the movies, for every Footloose and Sixteen Candles, there was Jim Jarmusch’s Stranger Than Paradise or the Coens’ Blood Simple; for every Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, John Sayles’s The Brother from Another Planet. Eddie Murphy combined the two strains in Beverly Hills Cop, the highest-grossing film of 1984. It was pro-police or anti-cop, depending on your mood. There was a strong undercurrent in the US that things were not working. John Cassavetes made the disturbing Love Streams, while post-hardcore bands Hüsker Dü, Minutemen and Meat Puppets, recorded unpopular songs of anger and confusion, of what LA band the Gun Club called “Bad America”. The cinema of 1984 belonged to Harry Dean Stanton, who starred in Paris, Texas and Repo Man. He was also in Red Dawn, which US House minority leader Kevin McCarthy mentioned during his eight-and-a-half-hour filibuster speech last November. It was a reminder that at a certain level of American success, everything comes back. AS Hamrah is the author of The Earth Dies Streaming: Film Writing, 2002-2018. *** 1989 Hadley Freeman Look, I get that taste is subjective. But anyone who says that the best year in pop culture was anything other than 1989 is deluded or in denial. Let’s look at this question with the sober neutrality the matter requires: 1989 is when all the best genres of 80s movies peaked, and it is a scientific fact that the 1980s had the best movies and best genres of any decade ever, so this means these were the greatest movies ever created. In 1989, there was When Harry Met Sally … (the greatest ever romcom), Say Anything (the greatest ever teen movie), Bill and Ted’s Excellent Adventure (the greatest ever Keanu Reeves movie) and Batman (the greatest ever superhero movie and the movie with the greatest ever soundtrack because it was made by Prince). And you want to know something shocking? Prince’s Batman soundtrack was great, but it wasn’t nearly the greatest album that came out in 1989. What can a person even begin to say of a holy year that produced the Cure’s Disintegration and De La Soul’s 3 Feet High and Rising; two albums that have absolutely nothing in common, except that they remain as influential and modern-sounding as they were 33 years ago? Or one that birthed Janet Jackson’s Rhythm Nation 1814 and Neneh Cherry’s Raw Like Sushi? New Order’s Technique and Beastie Boys’ Paul’s Boutique? Pixies’ Doolittle and Tears for Fears’ The Seeds of Love? What albums have come out recently that will still be listened to in four decades’ time? Well, 1989 had about a dozen, while also gesturing at the best of the 90s to come, with the release of Nirvana’s Bleach and, on TV, the launch of The Simpsons. Taylor Swift didn’t name her most fun album 1989 for no reason, and Taylor ain’t no dummy. To close, four words for you: Madonna’s Like a Prayer. The defence rests, case definitively closed. Hadley Freeman is the author of Life Moves Pretty Fast: The Lessons We Learned from Eighties Movies *** 1997 Pandora Sykes You know that mindfulness tip for alleviating anxiety and grounding you in the present: to think of your “happy place”? My happy place is leading the conga line at my 10th birthday party in 1997, a dozen preteen girls in different Spice Girls crop tops wiggling along to Wannabe behind me. Come Christmas, we would be granted the cinematic triumph that was Spice World. An acid trip of a film featuring luminaries such as Richard E Grant, Bob Geldof, Elton John, Dominic West and Meat Loaf, it was slammed by the dreary critics, despite some frankly epic one-liners: “This dress is dry clean only, Melanie.” I was only vaguely aware that we’d entered the Blair Years, but even to my young mind things felt exciting – fruity, even – the air rich with optimism and excellent “chick flicks” (loathsome term) such as Romy and Michelle’s High School Reunion and My Best Friend’s Wedding. Most importantly, it was the year of Kate and Leo. Being just 10, I had to wait to watch Titanic on general release from the comfort of my blow-up chair, but my older sister went to see it at the cinema about seven times, contributing to the biggest box office release of all time (until Avatar came along 12 years later). I soon came to know Leo’s features better than my own, because my sister had not one, not two, but three Leonardo DiCaprio calendars. It is a year of seeing Leonardo’s perfectly greased blond curtains every single day. When I wasn’t lining up my £1.99 Spice Girls cassette singles like Pogs and rating the members of boyband 5ive in order of cuteness, I was dreaming about crystal chokers, matching crop top and miniskirt sets, and Gap-logoed everything. It was also, of course, the year that Princess Diana died, prompting a mass wave of public emoting that Britain had never witnessed before. For that reason, some might suggest it’s not the best year ever – but it’s inarguable that it’s among the most iconic. Pandora Sykes is the author of How Do We Know We’re Doing It Right? And Other Thoughts on Modern Life *** 1999 Chuck Klosterman To categorise any year as “great for pop culture” is different from claiming that it was positive for culture. A good year for the culture at large involves transformations in thought; a good year for pop culture means that thoughts are chaotic and transitory, and art mostly discussed for how it is presented and perceived. For the past four decades, most years have been better for pop culture than for non-pop culture. But in 1999 the most interesting things were assumed to be disposable on purpose. Was there still “real culture” in 1999? Of course. The Sopranos debuted and is frequently cited as the apex of its medium. Yet what’s most regularly noted about it tend to be ancillary details: its invention of prestige TV; and a growing generational discomfort with antiheroes. It was an excellent year for film, but its signature movies have become symbols of ideological projections: The Matrix (now seen as a way to describe a mediated reality); Fight Club (shorthand for toxic masculinity); American Beauty (an evisceration of white suburban parochialism); and Star Wars: The Phantom Menace (the prime example of nostalgia as futurism). There was a shift in the perception of anything commercially dominant. Content mattered less than analysis of that content. The first Britney Spears album was released two days after The Sopranos pilot. Everything about it was fascinating – Spears’s celebrity, the marketing, the presentation – except for the music, which was merely OK. That dichotomy felt deep. It was now essential to take someone such as Spears seriously even if her songs were the least important aspect of her celebrity. Christina Aguilera put out her own CD, and could sing the quills off a porcupine – but again, the music was less crucial than her persona (most notably, her role as Spears’s alleged rival). In almost any previous era, both acts would have been popular, but dismissed as unserious. They would have been marginalised as music for kids who didn’t care about music. Such thinking was over. In 1999, the fact that teen pop was unserious meant you needed to think about it more. Chuck Klosterman is the author of The Nineties: A Book *** 2003 Yomi Adegoke What was in the water in 2003? Its cultural output was so strong, it could nearly be forgiven for its disc belts and Von Dutch hats. The year saw Finding Nemo, two Christmas classics in Love Actually and Elf, and the first Pirates of the Caribbean film. And while we’re now sick to the back teeth of sequels, in 2003 they were still something to look forward to: Charlie’s Angels 2: Full Throttle, 2 Fast 2 Furious, X2: X-Men United, Bad Boys II and two Matrix sequels. The third Terminator film came out, as did the third American Pie movie and the final instalment of Lord of the Rings, which became one of the highest-grossing movies of all time. It was nominated for a whopping 11 Academy Awards (and won them all). It was a golden era for TV, too. We lost Dawson’s Creek but gained The OC. Chappelle’s Show hit screens in the US and so did NCIS. In the UK, Peep Show, Little Britain and QI were airing for the first time. BBC Three was launched, too. And let’s not forget: 2003 was the year reality TV came into its own. America’s Next Top Model aired, without which we wouldn’t have RuPaul’s Drag Race or Project Runway. Queer Eye for the Straight Guy was a watershed moment for LGBT+ representation. This era was the genesis of “rich bitch TV”, with Rich Girls following wealthy 18-year-olds Ally Hilfiger and Jaime Gleicher, and the much more famous offering The Simple Life, with Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie. Madonna and Britney Spears’s kiss at the VMAs sent the world into meltdown. Beyoncé blessed us with her Grammy-winning solo debut Crazy in Love and the Dangerously in Love album. 50 Cent dropped his debut In Da Club and followed up with Get Rich Or Die Tryin’. Girls Aloud’s first album Sound of the Underground topped charts. iTunes was launched and so was Myspace, arguably establishing social media as we know it. It was a blessed year: technology was advanced enough to usher in genre-defining TV and films, but still gave us an optimistic naivety we may never see again. Not all it pioneered was good: 2003 was the first year the UK scored “nul points” at Eurovision with Jemini’s Cry Baby, becoming the first English-language song to do so. That’s a trend I think we’d all be happy to see the back of. Yomi Adegoke is the co-author of Slay in Your Lane: The Black Girl BibleKrissie on Luke What were you hoping for? A good laugh and a story for my friends. First impressions? Smartly dressed, big smile … Unlikely to be an axe murderer. What did you talk about? Travelling. Movies. Family. Any awkward moments? When he looked me dead in the eye and said: “It’s OK, I only date older women,” and, “Don’t worry, you don’t look a day over 31.” Spoiler, I’m 31. Good table manners? 10/10 for eating ramen and edamame with chopsticks. But he suggested we choose each other’s drinks (I’d have preferred to pick my own) and kept forgetting what he’d ordered for me. Best thing about Luke? His self-confidence. Would you introduce him to your friends? Sure, but I’d remind them all to use a good night cream the day before. Describe Luke in three words? Friendly, warm, forgetful. What do you think he made of you? I don’t imagine I’m his dream woman, but hopefully I made him laugh. Did you go on somewhere? We attempted to go to a bar, but I feel we were both relieved it was closed. And … did you kiss? No, there was a polite wave goodbye. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? I wouldn’t have eaten such a big lunch. Marks out of 10? 6. Would you meet again? For a friendly gossip? Sure. Or when I’m next in need of a good ego-check. Luke on Krissie What were you hoping for? Someone who shares a passion for adventure. Failing that, someone who laughs at my awful jokes. First impressions? Confident and easygoing, and she looked stunning. What did you talk about? Our shared love of travel. The best heavy metal bands. And our experience with dating apps and terrible dates (I won’t share those stories here). Any awkward moments? It would take a lot for Krissie and me to get embarrassed! Though we were kicked out of the restaurant because we stayed past closing time. Good table manners? Absolutely – eating Japanese food can be a logistical nightmare and she was a seasoned veteran. Best thing about Krissie? I suggested we order each other’s cocktails all night. She was all for it. Would you introduce her to your friends? For sure, I think they would get on quite well. Describe Krissie in three words? Adventurous, unafraid, chatty. What do you think she made of you? I’d like to think she thought I was at least semi-bearable and kind of funny. Did you go on somewhere? We tried to go to a bar but had left it much too late to get in anywhere. And … did you kiss? Not this time. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? Maybe ordering less food to leave room for more drinks. Marks out of 10? 10. Would you meet again? We have exchanged numbers, so maybe. It will all depend on her Blind Date responses … • Luke and Krissie ate at Nanban, London SW9. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comBig Night of Musicals by the National Lottery 7pm, BBC One Jazz hands at the ready, it’s time for some razzle dazzle – and it’s all in the name of supporting the arts after live stage shows took a battering during the pandemic. Jason Manford hosts this recorded event at Manchester Arena, featuring stars of the West End belting out the hits of productions such as Tina: The Tina Turner Musical, Get Up Stand Up! The Bob Marley Musical, and Back To The Future. Altogether now … Hollie Richardson The Masked Singer 7pm, ITV We’re down to seven mysterious, costume-clad contestants. They will all sing their hearts out tonight, hoping not to be eliminated from the competition. As always, Jonathan Ross, Davina McCall, Rita Ora and Mo Gilligan are on judging duties. HR Michael McIntyre’s The Wheel 8.30pm, BBC One Taking a spin on McIntyre’s famous wheel to help tonight’s contestant win big money: historian Lucy Worsley, singer and former Strictly runner-up Ashley Roberts, cultural icon Peter Andre, the Rev Richard Coles, YouTuber Patricia Bright, comedian Rob Beckett and footballer John Barnes. What could possibly go wrong? HR Hidden Assets 9pm, BBC Four The Irish/Belgian crime drama about dodgy diamonds and coerced bombers wraps up with a tense double-bill. In Antwerp, visiting detective Emer (Angeline Ball) and grungy local cop Christian (Wouter Hendrickx) chase down suspects while whiteboard queen Norah (Cathy Belton) follows the digital money trail back in Shannon. Graeme Virtue The Super Bob Einstein Movie 9pm, Sky Documentaries “I think he’d get a kick out of the fact that I have to sit here and do this, knowing that I really don’t want to.” So says Larry David of his former Curb co-star, and subject of this celebratory documentary film, revered funnyman Bob Einstein. It’s cut with clips of his best work, with Jerry Seinfeld, Sarah Silverman and JB Smoove also sharing the laughter. HR The John Bishop Show 9.30pm, ITV Even if it currently lacks some polish, Bishop’s show is a welcome addition to Saturday night. With a mix of standup and sofa talk, guests need to be game. And you can’t fault the comedian’s enthusiasm: he established the series with an Adele-inspired ballad about turning 55. Henry Wong Film choices Apostasy, 11.30pm, BBC Two Daniel Kokotajlo’s devastating debut feature is drawn from his own experiences growing up as a Jehovah’s Witness. Ivanna (a performance of quiet desperation from Siobhan Finneran) and her daughters Luisa (Sacha Parkinson) and Alex (Molly Wright), who has a serious blood condition, are dutiful members of a religious group in Oldham. But when Luisa falls pregnant by her non-believer boyfriend, she is “disfellowshipped” – cut off from her family and community. This act, and a subsequent tragedy, pick away at Ivanna’s life of unquestioning devotion, as the rigid rules of the faith stymie her love for her child and sense of humanity. Simon Wardell The Truman Show, 6.55pm, Great! Movies Before the Big Brother house and WandaVision’s Westview there was Seahaven, a pretty US coastal town where Truman Burbank (Jim Carrey) and his wife Meryl (Laura Linney) live – watched 24 hours a day by 5,000 cameras. In Peter Weir’s prescient 1998 satirical drama, Truman is the unwitting star of a hit TV reality show (and has been since birth), his every move tracked and manipulated for our viewing pleasure. But reality comes crashing in, and Truman has to choose between the perils of the unknown and comfortable picket-fence conformity. SW Live sport Premiership Rugby Union: Newcastle Falcons v Gloucester 2.30pm, BT Sport 2 From Kingston Park Stadium. International Football: Africa Cup of Nations 3.45pm, BBC Two The opening quarter-final from Cameroon. T20 International Cricket: West Indies v England 7.30pm, BT Sport 1 The fourth match in the series, from Kensington Oval, Barbados.Abnormalities have been identified in the lungs of long Covid patients that could offer a potential explanation for why some people experience breathlessness long after their initial infection. The findings, from a pilot study involving 36 patients, raise the possibility that Covid may cause microscopic damage to the lungs that is not detected using routine tests. Breathlessness is a symptom in the majority of long Covid patients, but it has been unclear whether this is linked to other factors such as changes in breathing patterns, tiredness, or something more fundamental. According to Dr Emily Fraser, a consultant at Oxford university hospitals and a co-author of the study, the latest findings are the first evidence that underlying lung health could be impaired. “It is the first study to demonstrate lung abnormalities in [people with long Covid] who are breathless and where other investigations are unremarkable,” said Fraser. “It does suggest the virus is causing some kind of persistent abnormality within the microstructure of the lungs or in the pulmonary vasculature.” More work would be required to clarify the clinical significance of the findings, she added, including how the apparent abnormalities relate to breathlessness. Claire Steves, a clinical senior lecturer at King’s College London who was not involved in the work, said the findings would be of significant interest to anyone living with long-term breathlessness after Covid. “They suggest that the efficiency of the lung in doing what it is meant to do – exchange carbon dioxide and oxygen – may be compromised, even though the structure of the lung appears normal,” she said. “However, we really need to await the completion of the study to know whether these early findings are robust, and if so, how much they explain, and what the ramifications are in terms of potential treatments.” Fraser and colleagues are the latest to highlight physiological differences seen in people with long Covid, with research published this week pointing to an “antibody signature” that could help identify those most at risk. The latest study, which is aiming to recruit 400 participants, is using a specialised MRI imaging technique in which patients breathe in xenon gas while lying in a scanner. The gas can be traced as it moves from the lungs into the bloodstream, giving a reading of how the lungs are functioning. This contrasts with CT scans, which show just the structure of the lungs. The pilot compared three groups: patients diagnosed with long Covid who have normal CT scans, people who had been hospitalised with Covid more than three months previously and were not experiencing long Covid, and a healthy control group. The initial results, published on the bioRxiv pre-print server, show there is “significantly impaired gas transfer” from the lungs to the bloodstream in these long Covid patients, even when other tests are normal. Similar abnormalities have been detected in Covid patients who had been hospitalised with more severe disease. “These patients have never been in hospital and did not have an acute severe illness when they had their Covid-19 infection,” said Prof Fergus Gleeson, a radiologist at Oxford university hospitals NHS foundation trust and the study’s chief investigator. “Some of them have been experiencing their symptoms for a year after contracting Covid-19.” Gleeson said the team were now hoping to look at what proportion of patients with long Covid have abnormal scans, and determine the significance of the abnormality and whether it improves over time. Fraser said the findings did not undermine the relevance of rehabilitation programmes, such as breathing retraining for those with disordered patterns of breathing, for instance. “Rehabilitation strategies are really helpful,” she said. “We can make progress and set people on the right track, so people [shouldn’t] think ‘I’ve got lung damage and so there’s no point’.” Dr Louise Sigfrid, a public health specialist at the University of Oxford who was not involved in the research, said the findings highlighted the need for those who had continuing symptoms to be given comprehensive diagnostic assessments. “These early findings are really interesting, and in line with other emerging data on lung perfusion defects post-Sars-CoV-2 infection seen in adults as well as adolescents,” she said.A sweet-yet-sharp apple is the perfect accompaniment to wild game, and has a similar season from autumn to midwinter, when stored apples start to fade and the shooting season ends. An old apple still makes great cooking, though, and in today’s recipe I saute them with thyme and butter, then spoon over creamy braised pheasant. Like apples, pheasant is a humble ingredient that’s often wasted. Savills’ 2018 Game Meat survey found that only 48% of game shot on shoots is taken by game dealers, and suggested that a sustainable market needs to be created for this surplus meat. Game is nutritious and, from a good butcher, inexpensive, too. Pheasant Normandy with apples This classic French dish marries two humble and often wasted ingredients in a harmonious stew. The rich, creamy sauce and umami-savoury meat are cut and complemented by the sweet, tart sauteed apples, which finish the dish. A Countryside Alliance poll found that 85% of consumers had never bought pheasant or partridge, but a high percentage were up for trying it, not least because this game meat is economical, nourishing and delicious. Both birds have a subtle flavour and make a great introduction to wild meat, though the dish can, of course, be made with chicken or other poultry, if you prefer. Cider brandy is a wonderful aperitif, and adds a real depth of flavour to this dish, but it’s by no means an essential ingredient. If you don’t fancy drinking cider brandy or calvados, and don’t want to buy a bottle for this recipe alone, the cider alone will suffice; otherwise, deglaze the pan with another spirit such as brandy, whisky or vodka. (When I first made this, I didn’t have any cider brandy to hand, so used whisky instead, and it was delicious.) I’d suggest serving this with mashed potatoes and/or crusty bread. If you want to step your mash up a notch, boil some celeriac and/or jerusalem artichokes until soft, blend to a puree and stir into your mashed potatoes with plenty of butter and seasoning. Serves 2 For the stock 1 tbsp olive oil 1 large pheasant, jointed into 2 legs and two bone-in breasts, including the giblets 1 onion, peeled and grated 1 carrot, grated 1 stick celery, grated 3 garlic cloves, peeled and grated 6 parsley stalks 3 bay leaves 1 tsp juniper berries For the casserole 2 rashers smoked streaky bacon, cut into lardons 3 shallots, peeled and halved 1 tbsp olive oil ½ tbsp dijon mustard 50ml cider brandy, or calvados or other spirit (eg, brandy, whisky, vodka) 500ml cider 250ml pheasant stock (see above and method), or chicken stock 50ml double cream 20g butter 2 apples 6 sprigs thyme To serve (optional) Jerusalem artichoke and potato puree, or mashed potatoes, crusty bread, winter leaves First make the stock. Heat the olive oil in a heavy-based saucepan over a medium heat, then add the pheasant carcass, heart, gizzards and any other offcuts, season well with salt and saute for 15 minutes, turning occasionally, until coloured on all sides. Add water to cover, bring up to a simmer and scrape up any bits stuck to the bottom of the pan. At this point, if you have a slow cooker, transfer the pan’s contents to that and cook for four to eight hours on a low, trembling simmer; otherwise, simmer gently on the hob for at least two hours, and four ideally. Add the onion, carrot, celery, garlic, parsley stalks, bay leaves and the juniper berries, simmer for another hour, then strain through a cheesecloth or/and fine sieve and leave to cool. The stock will now keep, covered, in the fridge for up to five days. In a large casserole dish, saute the lardons and halved shallots on a medium heat until browned all over, then lift out and put to one side. Add a tablespoon of olive oil and the pheasant legs and breasts, then brown on all sides. Add the cider brandy, deglaze the pan, then return the lardons and shallots to the pot with the mustard and cider. Bring up to a simmer, cook for three minutes, then add the stock. Bring back to a simmer, lift out the pheasant breasts, then cover the pan and simmer the legs for an hour to 90 minutes, or until tender. Lift out the legs, turn up the heat and reduce the liquid by half. Stir in the double cream, return all the meat to the pan, return to a simmer and cook for five minutes. Take off the heat, cover and leave to rest. Meanwhile, melt the butter in a large frying pan over a medium heat. Cut the apples into wedges (core them, too, if you prefer), then saute with the thyme until golden brown. Scatter the apples and butter over the top of the pheasant and serve from the pot, with mash or puree, wilted greens and good crusty bread.Nasa wants help in proposing sustainable living techniques for a trip to Mars. On 18 January it launched the Waste to Base materials challenge: sustainable reprocessing in space on the crowdsourcing website HeroX. The challenge runs until 15 March, by which time entrants will have to submit their solution for how to turn waste materials into useful items for the mission. The four waste products Nasa is most keen for entrants to tackle are general trash, faecal matter, foam packaging and exhaled carbon dioxide. Nasa suggests that useful products could be propellants or feedstock for 3D printers. Any journey to Mars will last for at least two, maybe three years. As such, it will be economically impossible to keep resupplying the mission. Instead, astronauts will have to live in the most sustainable way possible. Nasa aims to develop a robust “materials ecosystem” so these missions can take less and recycle more. At the time of writing, 27 teams and 373 individuals have indicated an interest in pursuing the challenge. Judging the entries will take about a month, and the winners will be announced on 26 April. A total of $24,000 in prize money will be awarded across numerous entries.The US has warned a Russian invasion of Ukraine would be “horrific” for both sides, while calling for a diplomatic solution as tensions over Moscow’s military buildup on the border of the country continued to simmer. Speaking at the Pentagon on Friday, top US officials urged a focus on diplomacy while saying that Russia now had enough troops and equipment in place to threaten the whole of Ukraine. Any such conflict, warned the top US general, Mark Milley, would be “horrific” for both sides. “If that was unleashed on Ukraine, it would be significant, very significant, and it would result in a significant amount of casualties,” Milley said. “It would be horrific, it will be terrible,” the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff added. Speaking alongside Milley, US defense secretary Lloyd Austin said the buildup of Russian forces along Ukraine’s border has reached the point where Putin now has a complete range of military options, including actions short of a full-scale invasion. But Austin said war in Ukraine could still be avoided. “Conflict is not inevitable. There is still time and space for diplomacy,” said Austin. “Mr Putin can do the right thing as well,” he said. “There is no reason that this situation has to devolve into conflict. He can choose to de-escalate. He can order his troops away.” On Friday, US president Joe Biden said he would send a small number of US troops to eastern European and Nato countries “in the near term”. The Pentagon has already placed about 8,500 US troops on stand-by for possible deployment to Europe amid Russia’s military build-up near Ukraine’s border. “I’ll be moving troops to eastern Europe and the Nato countries in the near term. Not too many,” Biden told reporters on return to Washington from a speech in Philadelphia. It comes as Vladimir Putin gave his first public comments on US and Nato responses to Russian proposals to rewrite the post-cold war security architecture. Putin said the US and its Nato allies had ignored Russia’s main security concerns, but promised to continue talks with the west, in a call with Emmanuel Macron. The Russian leader said Moscow’s concerns about the expansion of Nato and the deployment of strike weapons near its borders had not been taken into account, according to a Kremlin readout of the phone call with his French counterpart. Macron told Putin that Russia had to respect the sovereignty of states, according to the Élysée. Putin agreed to continue talks, so there was a feeling that “things have moved”, a French presidency official said. More than 100,000 Russian troops have massed at the border with Ukraine, prompting Biden to tell Zelenskiy on Thursday there was “a distinct possibility that the Russians could invade Ukraine in February”. Asked about the call, Zelenskiy said he did not consider the situation more tense than before. “There is a feeling abroad that there is war here. That’s not the case,” he said. “I am not saying an escalation is not possible … [but] we don’t need this panic.” Europeans have taken a more cautious approach to predictions of a Russian attack than Washington. The head of Germany’s foreign intelligence service said on Friday that Russia was not yet fixed on an invasion, although it was prepared. “I believe that the decision to attack has not yet been made,” Bruno Kahl told Reuters. In a call with Macron lasting longer than an hour, Putin said the US and Nato had not taken into account Moscow’s “fundamental concerns” about the expansion of Nato and deployment of strike missiles near the Russian border. Washington and European capitals rejected Russia’s demands to veto Ukraine’s Nato membership, but set out proposals on other ways to improve security on the continent in the unpublished documents. “The key question was ignored,” Putin was reported to have said, according to the Kremlin statement. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and Russia’s relationship with Nato, the Russian president went on to say, were based on the principle that “no one should strengthen their security at the expense of other countries”. The Russian leader also promised to “carefully study” the US and Nato written responses and continue a “Russian-French dialogue on the entire range of European security questions”. Putin told the French leader Russia would continue talks in the so-called Normandy format that brings together representatives from France, Germany, Ukraine and Russia, following talks earlier this week between the quartet of countries. Putin told Macron that the French president was “the only one who he could have such serious discussions with”, according to the French presidency source. There was “disagreement, but agreement in the necessity for dialogue and that the Europeans and France are part of the ongoing dialogue”, said the French official. “Dialogue is difficult and there were no solutions from this call.” The French president has long called for dialogue with Russia, sometimes angering other EU member states that have preferred a more distanced approach. Late Friday, British prime minister Boris Johnson said he was planning to visit the Ukraine region and hold crisis talks with Putin next week. The Associated Press and Agence-France Press contributed to this reportMolly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereThe questions 1 What was “all this” in the headline “All this – and Everest too!”? 2 Which city has the most buildings more than 150 metres tall? 3 Carrie Nation wielded a hatchet in what cause? 4 Which two boxers fought both Ali and Tyson? 5 What began as the Pilton pop, blues &amp; folk festival? 6 Cria is the young of which animal? 7 Which traveller’s story was recorded by Rustichello of Pisa? 8 What award was set up to recognise “progress in religion”? What links: 9 Abraham Lincoln (1); Alfred Nobel (355); Thomas Edison (1,093)? 10 Paul Scofield; Jeremy Northam; Anton Lesser? 11 Afar; Amharic; Oromo; Somali; Tigrinya? 12 Radiant Baby; Barking Dog; Crack Is Wack; Ignorance = Fear? 13 1792; 1848; 1870; 1946; 1958? 14 Crane; flesh; horse; house; robber? 15 The House of Bernarda Alba; Daisy Pulls It Off; Steel Magnolias? The answers 1 Elizabeth II’s coronation in 1953 (Daily Express). 2 Hong Kong. 3 Prohibition/anti-alcohol. 4 Larry Holmes and Trevor Berbick. 5 Glastonbury festival. 6 Llama (and alpaca, vicuña &amp; guanaco). 7 Marco Polo. 8 Templeton prize. 9 Number of patents held. 10 Played Thomas More on screen: A Man for All Seasons; The Tudors; Wolf Hall. 11 Official languages of Ethiopia. 12 Artworks by Keith Haring. 13 Start of France’s five republics. 14 Flies. 15 Plays with all-female casts.Until the spring of 2020, Rebecca Handford’s then two-year-old daughter Eadie was happily spending three days a week being looked after by her grandparents, enjoying trips out, and going to cafes. But then came the first lockdown, and her world closed in overnight. The family, who live in a small village on the border between Cheshire and Derbyshire, felt lucky to have a garden for Eadie to play in – although, as Handford ruefully puts it, while she was trying to work from home “Mr Tumble did a lot of the heavy lifting”. Eadie is an only child, and her language came on in leaps and bounds due to spending so much time with her parents. But Handford worries that she missed out on learning to socialise. “If there’s a little gang of toddlers running around, she very much doesn’t want to take part. Even if we go to the park, if there’s another child on the slide she will go and play somewhere else until it’s free.” Eadie has grown more confident since starting preschool, but still prefers the company of adults. Like many parents, Handford and her husband wonder if this is temporary or whether the pandemic has in some ways shaped the person Eadie will grow up to be. Something similar is true for Emily Knight and her husband. They spent the first lockdown at home in Grantham, Lincolnshire, working from home while juggling a baby and a two-year-old between them. When restrictions lifted last summer, Knight, who works for an MP, discovered that after so long without seeing other people, her children found being in a busy supermarket overwhelming. “My youngest screams at the notion of going near a swimming pool. Stuff that you build up with very small children to get them used to it – they haven’t had that,” she says. “They haven’t really interacted with people who aren’t in their immediate family. I now have a four-year-old who cowers in fear when a shopkeeper says hello to him.” While many parents were initially concerned that Covid precautions such as constant hand-washing might have a psychological impact on children, Knight says these didn’t worry her children. “They’re always saying, ‘Don’t forget your mask, Mummy’ – that’s normal for them. And everywhere we go, they just hold their hands out to get some gel.” It’s returning to what adults consider normality that seems confusing for children who have grown up in the shadow of a pandemic. For many under fives, life before masks and hand sanitiser is but a faint memory. Babies born in lockdown, to mothers forced to go into labour alone while their partners waited helplessly in hospital car parks, will now be approaching their second birthdays. And while the last two summers have spelled a return to something like normality for these children, the winters have brought brutal setbacks. It’s perhaps only now, as restrictions lift again, that researchers are beginning to understand what this disorienting start in life may have meant for them. According to a YouGov survey [PDF] after last spring’s lockdown, British parents worry much less about small children catching the virus than about the impact of the pandemic on their development; a quarter thought it would set their language back, while half had concerns about emotional and social skills – things such as learning to share, take turns and make friends. Other fears pertain to how growing up in a climate of constant anxiety has affected their children’s mental health, or whether they’ll be behind when they start school. After the first Covid wave in 2020 – which saw nurseries closed to all but key workers’ and vulnerable children for up to six months – the Education Endowment Foundation, a social mobility charity, asked schools about the children who were starting reception that autumn. Three-quarters of the schools surveyed [PDF] reported that new starters were behind in speech, writing and number skills, as well as the ability to focus and behave in class. The big question, however, is whether “Covid babies” are young enough to shake off their strange early experiences, or whether their generation will in some sense be defined by it. *** On a chilly, clear winter’s day, a huddle of preschoolers bundled up in coats and bobble hats dig excitedly in the mud. Around them, toddlers zoom up and down on trikes. Since the pandemic began, staff at Old Station nursery in the Oxfordshire market town of Faringdon have encouraged them to play outside as much as possible. But that’s not the only way in which life has had to change. The nursery stayed open for all but the first 12 weeks of the pandemic, reopening in June 2020 stripped of any cushions, rugs and soft furnishings thought likely to harbour the virus. Even the sandpit was banned, although it has since made a comeback amid greater understanding of the way Covid spreads. One of the staff wrote a storybook, explaining what the children’s favourite character, Maisie Mouse, has to do to keep the “big bug” away. (They have been honest about the virus from the start, knowing the children would have heard their parents talking about it.) The children also played a game of smearing paint on their hands, pretending it was a bug, and noticing how it ended up on everything they touched. For staff, that initial reopening at a time when there was still no vaccine against Covid-19 was terrifying. “Everyone was saying: ‘Keep your distance.’ But how can you do that with a baby?” recalls the nursery’s warm and reassuring manager, Stephanie Dorling. But what mattered, she decided at the time, was trying to compensate for what the children had lost during lockdown. “We felt we had to fill that void. So we did the most crazy summer of events and themed weeks. We just got everybody involved, did lots of fancy dress, had barbecues, gave them the experiences they might not have been having at home. We thought, ‘If this is the only place they’re going, we’d better pack in lots of really exciting things.’ Nonetheless, she noticed significant changes in some children after three months at home. “Emotional detachment has been really hard – things like finding it difficult to leave parents. Some have been a little quieter, more withdrawn. There’s a lot more anxiety in the three- and four-year-olds; you can see that they worry about things.” Some of the youngest had barely seen another baby, and found a room full of them overwhelming. And then there was an unexpected side-effect of the extra screen time most children will have experienced. “We had children talking in American accents, because they’d been watching so much YouTube,” Dorling says. A year and half on from reopening, Dorling thinks most of her charges have either caught up or are held back chiefly by shyness. “If they engage in an activity, they’re perfectly able, it’s just their confidence,” she says. “Children have more resilience than we think.” Nonetheless, she is conscious that they aren’t out of the woods yet. When I visit in December 2021, the Omicron variant is only just hitting the headlines in England, but Dorling is braced for what she suspects is coming. Nurseries have been on the frontline of the pandemic, enabling other key worker parents to do their jobs as well as overseeing the early education of children too young to learn by Zoom. But that comes at a price. By the end of November, Covid-19 rates in early-years settings in England had already passed their previous peak. Unlike older children, under-fives are not eligible for vaccination. “There’s been no letup in the early years; it’s constant – the same pressure the whole way through,” Dorling says. “When I look at the team, I can see they’re exhausted. You just think, ‘One more thing is going to break the camel’s back’.” She finds it strange that while the early years are widely deemed critical to life chances – children learn faster between birth and age five than at any other stage of life – there is little public discussion of how the pandemic is shaping a generation born into it. *** If Covid has had a genuinely lasting impact on children’s development, then the Babylab project based at Oxford Brookes University should be among the first to know. Ordinarily, this collaboration between academics at five English universities recruits families of preschoolers to study aspects of development, from the benefits of napping to growing up bilingual. When the pandemic hit, they were instantly curious about the impact of what would presumably be a relatively brief interlude in toddlers’ lives. More than 18 months on, they are still tracking the effect of social distancing on what was originally a cohort of 600 under-threes, via games that parents are asked to play to assess their children’s skills. Its early work confirmed the first lockdown may well have had an impact on children learning to talk. Toddlers still attending nursery at least two days a week in lockdown – because their parents were key workers, for example – could be expected to learn on average 48 more new words than those stuck at home, with children from the poorest backgrounds hardest hit. Those attending five days a week could increase executive function scores – tests of skills such as concentrating, or controlling their emotions – by nearly twice as much as others. The next wave of research, exploring how the same children have fared since nurseries reopened, is still being conducted and results are not expected until spring. But Babylab’s Dr Alexandra Hendry, a research fellow in psychology at the University of Oxford and a mother of two school-age children herself, is optimistic. “That’s what everyone is interested in – do we see recovery and resilience, which is what I’m hoping for and what I’m expecting, to be honest,” she says over Zoom from her home office. “I’m really on board with the message that the first three years really, really matter. But parents can hear from that, ‘If you don’t get there early, it’s too late’, and that’s not true. There’s not a door that shuts. It’s never too late to expose your child to the kind of enriching experiences they get from early years childcare settings.” That chimes with December 2021’s annual report from Ofsted, noting that while almost half of early years providers in England thought children had fallen behind on skills such as sharing toys or following a routine, they noted improvements by autumn. Some preschoolers even mastered new skills during lockdown, or returned happier for having spent more time with their parents. The good news for parents of shy toddlers, Hendry says, is that the human drive to be social is “one of the most robust and recoverable” instincts small children have. Nor should parents who struggled to work from home in lockdown beat themselves up about the amount of Paw Patrol their toddlers may have watched. “We demonise screen time because that’s a simple story, but it’s more complex than that,” she says, “there are benefits and there are disadvantages. No parent I’ve spoken to, myself included, parented in a way that was their optimal style during lockdown. We’re all having to make compromises.” What about parents worried that younger children missed out on early educational activities, such as baby music classes? While babies should have been able to get the social interaction they needed within the family, she argues, it’s frazzled parents for whom such classes can be a lifeline. “I took my kids to baby pilates because I was bored and tired and lonely. In a way, we need to be directing our attention towards parents, because that’s where the negative effects might get passed on to a child, if the parent is struggling.” Her team found that, where parents were coping well, some families actively thrived on more time together. “We’d hear, ‘My child’s language has flourished’ or ‘It’s been brilliant because her dad’s been home all the time, and I’m on maternity leave and I was lonely before.’” (Two-thirds of fathers in two-parent households in the UK reported better relationships with their children as a result of being home more during lockdown, a recent survey by the campaign group the Fatherhood Institute found.) But the risk, Hendry says, is of existing inequalities deepening as lockdown widens the gap between families where the parents are coping well, and those in far more difficult circumstances. The story of what happened to children in the pandemic is, in some ways, really the story of what happened to their parents. *** For Leah, giving birth in a pandemic was never going to be easy. Registered blind and disabled, Leah (who is non-binary and uses they/them pronouns) had previously struggled with their mental health and was supported by specialist mental heath midwives during their second pregnancy, but found raising a baby in lockdown tough. Their eight-year-old daughter is, Leah says, “incredibly outgoing”, but at 18 months, her little brother is clingy and anxious. “If I leave the room, there’s hysteria. With her, we were out and about every day doing something, even if it was just meeting up with another baby or going for a walk around the supermarket. Family and friends were in and out constantly. Whereas he first met my brother when he was eight months old.” Even when the mother and baby group at their local community centre reopened after the first lockdown, numbers were strictly limited and attendance had to be pre-booked. It was hard to find help when the baby had trouble feeding, too. “Our local breastfeeding group did a lot of Zooms, but when people are saying ‘Watch this video’ – I can’t see that.” Leah’s health visitor has been “amazing”, but they worry about the impact on other families of not seeing professionals face to face. “Phone calls are all well and good, but you miss out on the body language. How many kids will slip through the net? I had to take him to A&amp;E with croup, and there were a number of kids that you could hear there were safeguarding concerns around: parents being interrogated about how their kids got marks on them.” Amid fears of a spike in postnatal depression among lonely new parents, restrictions were eased after the first lockdown, allowing families to form “childcare bubbles” for extra support. Under-fives were also excluded from the “rule of six” limit on socialising last winter. But giving birth in a pandemic has still been an acutely lonely experience for many new parents, deprived of help from grandparents and struggling to make friends while playgroups were closed. Many have also struggled to see GPs or health visitors in person, according to a UK-wide survey of professionals working with children published last autumn by the Parent-Infant Foundation. A third said weekly drop‑in clinics had shut down permanently during lockdown, while more than a quarter said local health visitors were still only available over the phone or online. The report’s co-author, Sally Hogg, says paediatricians she interviewed have expressed concerns not just about potentially serious conditions being missed, but also cases “where there’s absolutely nothing wrong with the baby, and the mum should just have been able to go to a mums’ group and say, ‘Does your child throw up after feeds or never sleep?’ They’ve no sounding board, and eventually they get so worried they end up in A&amp;E.” The recent deaths of 16-month-old Star Hobson in Bradford and six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes in Solihull also tragically illustrate the risks of vulnerable children falling under the radar during lockdown. There has been a 31% rise in so-called serious incident notifications (where abuse or neglect is suspected) for babies in their first year, and while social services tried to prioritise high-risk families during lockdown, Hogg points out that not all risks are known. She says: “If this is your first baby, how does anyone know your kids are OK if they’ve not been seen since they were discharged from hospital?” Meanwhile, take-up of free nursery places for two-year-olds – offered to families in deprived neighbourhoods, to help narrow the gap between rich and poor children’s life chances – has fallen sharply since early 2020, reflecting what Hogg fears may be a broader disengagement with children’s services in some communities. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, promised £300m in last autumn’s budget for early years projects championed by Andrea Leadsom, the former business secretary who chaired a recent review of early years [PDF] for the government; these include so-called family hubs providing one-stop support for vulnerable families in England. The Department for Education has also launched a £153m early years recovery programme, including specialist speech and language therapy for reception pupils, and has prioritised keeping nurseries as well as schools open during subsequent lockdowns. But many in the early years sector argue it isn’t enough to meet the ongoing need. Calls to Parent Talk, the helpline run by the charity Action for Children, have increased fourfold during the pandemic. In a UK-wide survey it ran last autumn, half of parents reported feelings of anxiety, and a third felt isolated or depressed, with parents of preschoolers harder hit than parents of older children. “We’re getting a lot of mental health concerns, physical exhaustion, lack of support, feelings of isolation. It often comes up as ‘I can’t cope’ or ‘I don’t know what else I can do’,” says Jo Thurston, service coordinator for Parent Talk. “The stress of parenting in an uncertain environment is really taking a toll.” She says common problems raised during lockdown include separation anxiety, difficult behaviour at home, and being slow to meet developmental milestones such as learning to talk. A post-lockdown surge of referrals for services such as speech therapy has meant delays as they work through the backlog. And every time the NHS frantically reshuffles its resources to face a fresh wave of Covid, families of sick or disabled children fear disruption to existing treatment. Three-year-old Sam was born with a rare condition known as Pallister-Killian syndrome; he is partially blind, needs hearing aids and suffers from hypotonia, a muscle weakness that means he can’t move himself independently or talk. Before Covid, he was having three physiotherapy sessions a week to keep him mobile. But then his NHS physiotherapist was diverted on to a Covid ward, and a charity-funded scheme that was also helping the family shut down, something they fear may have actively shortened his life. “The thing that eats away at you with kids with special needs is that you might not be able to make it up,” says Sam’s father, Matt, a civil servant. “Mobility translates into lifespan – if you don’t move around, you don’t develop healthy organs. I’m saying this distancing myself from it, so I don’t cry, but we will never know the opportunity lost. Could he have had more time? What opportunities were missed for his development? The less a kid like him moves, the shorter his life will be.” The end of lockdown, meanwhile, brought some difficult choices for the family as they weighed the benefits to their two older daughters of going out and seeing friends against the risk of bringing the virus home to Sam, who is highly clinically vulnerable. “We made a decision that we would take precautions, but we couldn’t isolate, because we just couldn’t survive,” Matt says. Matt stresses that the family don’t blame the NHS. “Sam’s physio was on a Covid ward, massaging people’s lungs to keep them alive – there’s no way we wouldn’t have wanted that to happen.” Thankfully, Sam now attends a special needs school that offers the therapy he needs. But for many parents of disabled children who have got this far running on adrenaline, Matt thinks the strain is beginning to tell. “I’m smoking my head off as we speak,” he says. *** For families who have experienced difficult lockdowns, the constant threat of further restrictions has been particularly frightening. Anna Waterman’s daughter Megan turned five just before the UK’s March 2020 lockdown and was, her mother says, “a very happy, cheeky little girl. She never had any issues with social interaction, no anxiety at all.” The first lockdown passed off uneventfully, says Waterman, who runs a travel business and lives in London. But the second, in England in January 2021, was very different. Full days of Zoom lessons left Megan feeling overwhelmed and panicky. “At that age, you can’t teach phonics online. She was really starting to hate the screen time. Thirty kids on a Zoom – it was noisy, she didn’t want to say anything, she didn’t want the camera on.” The school reopened that spring, but repeated Covid outbreaks meant the children kept being sent home to isolate, and Megan struggled with the uncertainty. “You couldn’t go to the library and choose a book because the library was shut. You couldn’t play with a different child because they were in a different bubble. Every time you wanted to do something, it was ‘no’. One day she came home from school and said, ‘Mummy, thousands of children have died, did you know that?’” In July, she began refusing to eat food that needed chewing. “She was utterly convinced that it would get stuck in her throat and she would choke and die. She ate less and less, until she was just eating nothing. I thought, ‘I need help, I don’t know what to do.’” But the family GP wasn’t seeing patients face to face, and it took days to get a phone appointment. Although Megan was then referred to child and adolescent mental health services, Waterman says she was told in August 2021 that nobody could see her until January. “If she’d fallen out of a tree and broken her arm, she would be in A&amp;E and in plaster within eight hours. But they were saying there was nobody available. All they could say was: ‘Keep weighing her, and when it gets really bad, go to A&amp;E.’” After Megan started saying that she was scared to even drink water, the family turned to a private therapist. But, as her mother points out, for many families that isn’t an option. “I rang every helpline and charity on offer. Even the private services are completely stacked. It shocked me. I’d believed what the leaders of our country say – that these services exist. I felt like saying to them: ‘You try getting help.’” Megan returned to school in autumn 2021, and has been doing well, although she remains anxious about the virus. “She asks me: ‘Has Covid gone away?’ “We try to explain that it hasn’t, but it will become like flu – something that we live with. But it’s hard to understand at that age,” Waterman says. For some young children, the most difficult legacy of Covid may be an emotional one, accepting that life can be unpredictable and that there are questions even grownups can’t answer. *** Stuck to the wall behind Beccy Smith’s head when she joins me on Zoom is a child’s drawing of an orange robot. It’s the work of her six-year-old son Jasper, who is now in his third year of interrupted schooling. His experience growing up in a pandemic inspired his mother – who runs the Brighton-based Touched theatre company – to produce a puppet theatre show aimed at helping other families make sense of it. The Gift, originally planned for Christmas 2020, opened in front of a painstakingly socially distanced audience of two- to four-year-olds at Manchester’s Z-Arts theatre last December. While it doesn’t overtly mention Covid, her show tells the story of a lonely astronaut, isolated in space. He is watched over by a kindly star who appears throughout on a screen, representing loved ones children may have only been able to see via FaceTime. The star sends the astronaut a robot to keep him company. Even children too young to articulate their feelings about Covid should be able to recognise the emotions in the play, Smith says. “A lot of them have fears and worries about the virus, and we didn’t want to make a show about fear and worry. We wanted to make a show that reminded children how much they are loved, even when the people who love them are far away.” Giving children chances to process their feelings through games and songs and stories is, she argues, a way of helping them move on. “Cultural experiences can be very healing, and can be part of the way we find out of this.” They may be just as important for their parents, some of whom will be feeling guilt or grief for the childhoods their children didn’t get to have, or are watching anxiously for signs of long-term damage. While many young children are likely to bounce back unscathed, there is growing evidence that the pandemic has deepened inequalities between vulnerable and more fortunate families, and that recovery from it is likely to strain services from daycare to mental health for years to come. When her daughter was ill, Waterman says, she simply lived from mealtime to mealtime. It was only when Megan began to recover that she and her husband finally began to absorb what had happened, leaving her with a fierce desire to let other families who struggled in lockdown know they’re not alone. “As a parent of young children, you feel like you’re the only one who’s losing it. Now, when I talk to other parents and tell them what we went through, you see that flicker of relief if they had a horrendous experience, too – relief that it’s not something they’ve done as a parent, it’s a result of this situation that no one could have foreseen,” she tells me. “You look back and think, ‘Oh my God, what have we just been through?’” • Some names have been changed.Faced with cuts to her universal credit and crippling bills, in September last year Amy Cook, 27, decided to do something she had never done before to help her family: she set up a crowdfunding campaign to help alleviate their financial situation. Cook, a full-time carer to her partner, Jordan, 37, who has learning difficulties, set a £2,000 goal on the crowdfunding platform GoFundMe. On her profile she explained to potential donors that the family had “hit a brick wall” with a bedbug infestation followed by cuts to their universal credit, adding that it would be “10 times harder to survive let alone live”. Cook, who lives in Deptford, London, explained that the couple had depleted their “rainy day fund” and needed a “helping hand to get back to an acceptable standard of living”. This included carpeting the home as Jordan has grand mal epilepsy, which causes him to have fits, and they were concerned that the seizures could lead to a serious head injury. “We have no funds to live off,” says Cook, who has a daughter aged eight. “We approached the council and housing association but there was no support anywhere … The minute the money is there it’s gone; you’re always a month behind on your bills. You pay one bill then another comes straight in. There’s not enough support for people in poverty.” She turned to GoFundMe as a last resort. “I was nervous as I’m not a person to ask strangers for help but what else can I do? The government isn’t doing anything.” The couple reached their goal, allowing them to resolve the bed bug situation, buy a new chest of drawers, washing machine and other essential items. Research for the Guardian by GoFundMe found a 28% rise in the number of appeals mentioning universal credit appearing on the platform between July 2021 and January 2022 compared with the pre-pandemic period of July 2019 to January 2020. The appeals come against a backdrop of rising prices for essentials such as gas and food, and after cuts in benefits, including last autumn’s removal of the £20 universal credit uplift. John Coventry, the senior international director at GoFundMe, says the trend of people turning to crowdfunding for help with everyday living costs is not surprising as the website “generally holds up a mirror to society – so whatever issues people face we’ll see that reflected in the activity on the platform”. He adds: “It will be a tough winter for many people and as such we would expect more fundraisers for basic household needs. Some of the stories are heartbreaking but the power it gives people when communities rally around to help is truly inspiring. “There are some incredible stories of kindness playing out every single day all over the world and that, in turn, makes people more confident to ask for the help they need.” Jackie*, 27, lives in Yorkshire and launched a successful crowdfunding appeal last autumn to raise £1,000 to help her pay for rent and food. “I turned to GoFundMe because the amount from universal credit is so little,” she says. “The stress and anxiety of not knowing each month what I will be able to cover for bills and so on is just crazy. Having the GoFundMe is embarrassing and I feel ashamed to ask people to share it but I didn’t know what else I could do.” Jackie is far from the only one turning to crowdfunding platforms to survive. Rob Rider Hill, a former chef and musician, 40, set up a campaign to raise £350 to help cover costs to repair his broken iPhone and laptop screens. Rider Hill, who has long Covid, is unable to return to work as a chef and is taking on small ad hoc admin projects for friends. He is reliant on the £644 a month he receives in universal credit, out of which he pays £370 in rent. He describes the process of organising and receiving universal credit as a “nightmare”, adding “it’s been the most stressful part of the last year and a half”. Dependent on friends, food banks and the local community cafe, when his laptop screen broke and he couldn’t afford to fix it he wanted to try a different way to raise funds. “Basically, 90% of my world is my laptop as I’m in my room 90% of the time,” says Rider Hill, who lives in Leyton, London. With the money that was donated he bought a new monitor for £300 as it was too expensive to fix the screen itself and bought a refurbished iPhone. “If the pandemic had happened 10 years earlier it would have been harder but now we have the infrastructure to set things up online.” Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy and social work at the University of York, says people are using crowdfunding to plug gaps in government support. “We have a government that is very much focused on providing support to working families but ignoring help for families that for whatever reason can’t work, or people whose parents are disabled or people caring for children who are disabled or have young children,” Patrick says. “It doesn’t surprise me that people are turning to crowdfunding.” Still, she warns that crowdfunding is not a long-term solution. “There’s a lot of shame and stigma to this,” she says. “It’s much better to have a decent level of income to support you and your family. We need to go back to having a social security system that’s fit for purpose. We need to reverse the £20 cut and increase child benefits.” However, with gas and electricity bills rising, the future looks bleak for many. “Millions will be struggling this winter,” Patrick says. A government spokesperson says: “Universal credit offers a vital safety net to millions of people, enabling them to support themselves and their families while building towards financial independence through work. It ensures fairness for both claimants and the taxpayer, and the changes we have made [in December] will see nearly 2 million working universal credit claimants better off by about £1,000 a year on average.” * Name has been changed.Albania has been on the radar for intrepid backpackers for some time, but this year tour operators are predicting the south-eastern Balkan country will become a mainstream holiday destination for UK travellers after a surge in bookings this January. Interest in the country has been gradually building over the past decade as it has slowly opened up after a 44-year dictatorship that ended in 1985. Tour operators have seen a notable increase in bookings for 2022 as Albania extends its appeal to people seeking beautiful beaches and landscapes as well as interesting culture and history at a lower price than neighbouring destinations. “Albania is one of those small and diverse destinations that can offer a bit of everything to everyone, similar to Montenegro or Slovenia,” said Tine Murn, a co-founder of New Deal Europe, a marketing agency for Balkan tourism. He said Albania appealed because it was a “Mediterranean undiscovered gem” and “still holds a sense of the exotic, even though it is geographically very close”. This was especially appealing at the moment while people were reluctant to travel long haul owing to the pandemic, not least because Albania has had very low Covid infection rates and no restrictions for most of the pandemic, he said. Albania’s national tourism agency sees the UK as “an emerging growing market” and has actively promoted tourism in recent years. The country is also becoming much easier to travel around as the standard of its accommodation has improved and spending on infrastructure has increased, with a new road connecting the eastern mountains with the western coastline due to open this year. The UK’s large Albanian diaspora and vocal celebrity champions such as the Southampton footballer Armando Broja and the pop stars Dua Lipa and Rita Ora have further helped raise the country’s profile. Flights from the UK to the capital, Tirana, are increasingly available and in demand. The bookings website Skyscanner said it had seen a 48% increase in bookings to Albania compared with 2019, reflecting interest in “less popular destinations which are traditionally considered off the beaten track”. Average bookings were for 2.1 people, suggesting mostly couples and friends are booking at present. However, Elton Caushi, who runs the Tirana-based tour operator Albanian Trip, said visitors had “significantly shifted” in recent years from backpackers to families, especially from EU countries, and British families were now increasingly visible. “Croatia came on to the map at the end of the ex-Yugoslavian conflicts, Bulgaria and Romania surprised Europe with their beauty and history when they became part of the EU, and now the continent is eager to discover more. The day has come for one of the very last secrets of Europe,” he said. Zina Bencheikh, the managing director for Europe at Intrepid Travel, said there been an increase in bookings this year partly due to the fact Albania offers adventure without the carbon footprint of a long-haul flight, as people were “more conscious than ever of the environmental impact of their holiday”. Wild Frontiers, one of the first operators to launch tours in Albania, said inquiries for its week-long guided trips – the only ones it offers below £1,000 – were up 30% on last January. Its founder, Jonny Bealby, said the country was “set to boom” in the coming years. He said Albania had come a long way since the Communist era. He recalled that when he first started running trips in the country 12 years ago, tourist infrastructure was completely absent. Instead, he relied on a Channel 4 News fixer who had worked on the Balkan wars to help him organise accommodation and transport. He sees Albania as part of a new wave of destinations, including Georgia, Slovakia and Pakistan, that are growing in popularity as travellers look to escape an excess tourists. “These were countries that were very niche destinations a decade ago and now they’re becoming more mainstream as people look for quirky and different places and to get away from the crowds.” Albania’s historical highlights Delve into Albania’s rich past by visiting hilltop towns and fortresses such as Krüje, the country’s first capital, or Gjirokastër and Berat. There are also Greek and Roman ruins in Apollonia and Butrint. For insight into the country’s more recent history under the Communist dictator Enver Hoxha, explore one of the many bunkers built to protect citizens by the paranoid regime, dotted throughout the landscape. Breathtaking landscapes The Albanian Alps are a spectacular mountain range with excellent hiking trails that will lead you around some of Europe’s cleanest rivers, remote villages and stunning views. Albania also has several large lakes – Ohrid, Prespa and Shkodra – to explore. A new road, Arber, is opening in 2022 that will connect the west and east sides of the country and the traditional heartland in the mountains with its more modern coastline. A vibrant capital city There’s plenty to see and do in Tirana, which is safe, walkable and feels buzzy without being overrun by tourists. There’s a thriving bar and restaurant scene, especially in the Blloku district, and plenty of museums to visit. Tirana is the European Youth Capital for 2022 and will host a programme of arts and culinary events, and concerts by Dua Lipa and Rita Ora. Beautiful coastline Like other Adriatic nations, Albania has a long and beautiful stretch of coastline with turquoise sea and lovely beaches, and with fewer crowds there is more likely to be ample space for your towel, too. Compelling culture Albania has developed a distinctive culture after being isolated from other European countries for so long, partly due to its mountain range, which kept outside influence at bay. Albanian cuisine is a surprising blend of Mediterranean and Middle Eastern flavours based on high-quality produce, often sourced from chaotic local bazaars. The country is also an increasingly popular destination for music festivals, including the Unum electronic music festival. • This article was amended on 29 January 2022. An earlier version said a new road is due to open this year connecting the western mountains with the eastern coastline; that should have said eastern mountains and western coastline.January comfort food can be lots of things. I frequently find metaphorical hugs in rich and savoury, or in cheesy and creamy dishes; things that welcome us with a warm, rounded embrace, countering the sharper side of winter. There’s quite a bit going on in today’s first dish – tart, bitter, chilli and crunch – but ultimately it all sinks into an ambrosial puddle of beans, while the second is gloriously beige. Both are low effort and high reward. Parmesan-creamed beans with sweet-bitter leaves (pictured top) Prep 10 min Cook 15 min Serves 2 100g sourdough or focaccia 4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil, plus extra for drizzling 1 fat garlic clove, peeled and crushed 1 tsp chilli flakes 400g cooked white haricot beans (drained weight) 75ml single cream (or 50ml more water) 2 sprigs sage or rosemary (optional) 1 tsp ground black peppercorns 35g grated parmesan 1 medium radicchio (about 500g), quartered, cored and leaves separated 3 tbsp moscatel, sherry or thin balsamic vinegar Flaky sea salt Pulse the bread in a food processor until relatively fine. Put three tablespoons of the oil in a large frying pan set over a medium-high heat for 45 seconds or so, then add the breadcrumbs, toss to coat and fry for three to four minutes, stirring occasionally, until golden. Turn down the heat to low, stir in the garlic and chilli flakes, and about a minute later transfer to a bowl. Wipe the pan clean with kitchen towel. Drain the beans, reserving any liquid. Top up that liquid with cream (if using) and/or water to total 225ml. Put the beans, the liquid and the sage or rosemary, if using, in a saucepan and bring to an energetic simmer. Add the pepper and parmesan, shake the pan to incorporate the cheese, leave to thicken for a minute, then take off the heat. Return the frying pan to a medium-high heat. Add the remaining tablespoon of oil and the radicchio leaves, then use tongs to turn them over for 60 seconds, so each one touches the hot pan and becomes glossy. Create a gap in the middle, add the vinegar and another tablespoon of water, take off the heat and swiftly move the leaves around the pan so they wilt further in the steam. Add a sprinkling of sea salt. Divide the beans between two shallow bowls or plates with rims. Top with the leaves and any pan juices, scatter masses of crumbs over the top (you’ll add any that you don’t use now halfway through eating) and serve. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado One-pot chicken with celeriac, chickpeas and tahini broth Prep 15 min Cook 35 min Serves 4 1 generous tbsp rapeseed oil 4 chicken legs, or skin-on, bone-in thighs 2 shallots, peeled, halved and finely sliced ½ large celeriac (250-300g), peeled and cut into 1-2cm dice 5 fat garlic cloves, peeled and squashed Flaky sea salt and black pepper 125ml dry white wine 8 sprigs tarragon 1 small preserved lemon, seeds removed, finely diced 1 x 400g can cooked chickpeas, drained 1 tsp moscatel or sherry vinegar 2-3 tbsp runny tahini Kale and crusty bread, to serve Get a large, 30cm-diameter, thick-bottomed saute pan or casserole into which the chicken will fit fairly snugly in one layer. Set this over a medium-high heat, add the oil and warm for a minute. Lay in the chicken pieces skin side down and leave to fry for 13-15 minutes without touching them – this will ensure the skin turns golden and crisp. Transfer the chicken to a plate, then add the shallots, celeriac, garlic and a heavy pinch of salt to the pan and fry, stirring occasionally, for three to four minutes. Create a space, pour in the wine, let that bubble and steam for 30 seconds, then scrape and deglaze the base of the pan. Add 600ml water, half the tarragon and the preserved lemon, return the chicken to the pot skin side up, prodding the pieces down so they’re part-submerged but with the skin clear of the liquid. Part cover with a lid and leave to cook at a gentle simmer for 20 minutes. After that time, lift out the chicken pieces and rest on a clean plate. Pick out and discard the spent tarragon. Pick and finely chop the leaves from the remaining herbs, then stir them through the mix with the chickpeas, vinegar and tahini. Check for seasoning, add salt, vinegar and tahini to taste (you should notice the nutty savouriness of the tahini, but it shouldn’t dominate). Ladle into pasta bowls and serve with loads of buttery, well-seasoned kale and crusty bread. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Ed Smith’s latest book is Crave: Recipes Arranged by Flavour, to Suit Your Mood and Appetite; follow him on Instagram at @rocketandsquashIn a small Welsh town far, far away (perhaps), preparations are in hand to tell the story of how one of the most famous and beloved movie spaceships was secretly built in an old aircraft hangar. A permanent exhibition is to open later this year explaining how the Millennium Falcon that appeared in the Star Wars film The Empire Strikes Back came to be constructed from wood and steel by engineers in Pembroke Dock, in south-west Wales. Local craftspeople working under a veil of secrecy were ordered to refer to the ship as “Magic Roundabout” but, inevitably in a small town, word seeped out. “It was the worst-kept secret in Pembroke Dock – everybody in the town knew they were building a UFO in the hangar,” said Gareth Mills, a trustee of the Pembroke Dock Heritage Trust. “That period of time and that story is an important part of the town’s living memory. The exhibition, once opened, will provide a significant boost for Pembroke Dock, with increased visitor numbers helping with the economic regeneration of our town and will also have major benefits for Pembrokeshire.” Mark Williams, a local Star Wars expert who will oversee the project, said: “George Lucas set a new standard in both storytelling and film-making with Star Wars, and the story of the Millennium Falcon being built in Pembroke Dock was big news at the time. The whole world knew about it, then the story faded into legend. “The idea of a town in west Wales making a significant contribution to this incredible story by being the place where one of the most iconic starships in science-fiction history was built creates a mixture of disbelief, awe and pride.” The National Lottery Heritage Fund is providing £8,000 to help the project, which will tell the story with photographs, film, props and costumes. The spaceship itself will not be there but in the future crowdfunding campaigns may be launched to try to to recreate sets from The Empire Strikes Back. After it was built in Wales, the Falcon was split into pieces and driven to the film set in Hertfordshire. The Millennium Falcon isn’t Pembrokeshire’s only connection to Star Wars. Lynwen Brennan, Lucasfilm’s executive vice-president and general manager, has close family links to Pembroke Dock. “I am so delighted that this wonderful moment and place in Star Wars history will be preserved,” Brennan said. “I love that such an iconic, beloved ship was built in the town where my mum was born and in the county where I grew up, and I’m hopeful this exhibit will become a new destination for fans around the world.”Cyclists and pedestrians are better protected as of Saturday as a revamp of the Highway Code comes into force, despite concerns that millions of drivers are confused by or unaware of the changes. An AA survey of more than 13,700 drivers carried out this month indicated that 33% were unaware of the changes, including 4% who had “no intention” of looking at the details. A communications drive will be launched by the Department for Transport’s road safety offshoot Think! in mid-February, and there will be further campaigns in the summer. As part of the revamp in England, Scotland and Wales, cars are expected to give way when pedestrians are crossing or waiting to cross at junctions, while cyclists are advised to ride in the centre of lanes on quieter roads, in slower-moving traffic, and when approaching junctions, to make themselves as visible as possible. The guidance also introduces a hierarchy of types of road users based on which is likely to cause most harm in the event of a collision, meaning someone driving will be expected to watch out for people cycling, walking, or riding a horse, and cyclists will need to be aware of pedestrians. Nine sections of the Highway Code, which contains advice and rules for people on Britain’s roads, have been updated, with 50 rules added or amended. The changes are advisory, so non-compliance will not directly result in a fine, though courts take compliance with the code into account. The AA’s president, Edmund King, voiced concern at the potential impact of the guidance to give way to pedestrians at junctions, saying it risked collisions, since drivers who stopped to allow someone to cross on dual carriageways or fast-flowing A roads were “likely to get hit by another vehicle from behind”. He said pedestrians could be endangered if one driver gave way but another travelling in the opposite direction failed to stop. “Drivers will have to make their own judgments on what they should do in the scenarios they find themselves in,” King told the PA news agency. “However, if the judgments of the driver and the pedestrian are at odds on a very busy road, this could lead to problems.” The roads minister, Lady Vere, said this week that the updated Highway Code would make Britain’s roads safer and encourage people to “respect and consider the needs of those around them”. The charity Cycling UK said the changes must be “communicated with simple, accurate and memorable messaging”. What are the changes? Hierarchy of road users People in charge of vehicles that can cause the most harm in the event of a collision have the greatest responsibility to look out for other road users. Walking, cycling or riding in shared spaces Cyclists should not overtake people walking or riding a horse in shared spaces closely or at high speed, and pedestrians should not obstruct paths. Positioning of cyclists Cyclists should make themselves as visible as possible by riding in the centre of lanes on quiet roads, in slower-moving traffic and at the approach to junctions. Pedestrians crossing Traffic should give way when people are waiting to cross at junctions, updating the earlier guidance that applied only to those who have already stepped out on to the crossing. Traffic must give way to people on zebra crossings. Overtaking cyclists Drivers travelling at speeds of up to 30mph should leave at least 1.5 metres when overtaking cyclists. They should give more space when overtaking at higher speeds. Opening car doors Car occupants should open doors using their hand on the opposite side to the door, making them turn their head to look over their shoulder. This technique, known as the Dutch reach, reduces the chances of doors being opened into the path of cyclists and motorcyclists. Overtaking cyclists at junctions When cyclists are travelling straight ahead at a junction, they have priority over traffic waiting to turn into or out of a side road, unless road signs or markings indicate otherwise. Cycling in groups The new text makes clear that people cycling can ride two abreast but should be considerate of the needs of other road users when in groups. Roundabouts Drivers should take extra care when entering roundabouts to make sure they do not cut across cyclists. Electric vehicle charging Electric car owners using a public charge point should park near the device and avoid creating a trip hazard from trailing cables. • This article was amended on 31 January 2022 to clarify text related to the potential consequences of breaching the Highway Code.Shortly after Silicon Valley sent him to Washington, Ro Khanna visited “Silicon Holler”, a name coined by a colleague, Hal Rogers, for the fledgling tech sector in eastern Kentucky. The two congressmen’s districts had little in common. Khanna’s was among the wealthiest, most diverse and most Democratic. Rogers’ was among the poorest, whitest and most Republican. But when he visited Rogers’ district, in once-prosperous coal country, the California Democrat did not meet with resentment. Desire to participate in the digital revolution was there. Only opportunity was lacking. “In my district, young people wake up optimistic about the future – there’s $11tn in market value in the district and surrounding areas,” Khanna said. “But for many working-class Americans, across the country, globalization has not worked. It’s meant jobs going offshore. It’s meant the shuttering of communities and it’s meant that their kids have to leave their hometowns. “We need to figure out how to bring economic opportunity for the modern economy to these communities that have been left out.” In his new book, Dignity in a Digital Age, Khanna lays out his vision for democratizing the digital economy. He wants the tech industry to expand to places like Paintsville, Kentucky, and Jefferson, Iowa, where the Guardian watched him make his case. Khanna is an intellectual property lawyer who taught economics at Stanford before serving as the congressman for California’s 17th district, home to companies like Apple and Intel. The top contributors to his most recent campaign were employees of Alphabet, Google’s parent company. And yet Khanna is a member of the Congressional Antitrust Caucus and was a co-chair of Bernie Sanders’ 2020 presidential campaign. He says tech companies must be held accountable for harm, and has backed regulatory and privacy reforms. Two senators, Amy Klobuchar, a Minnesota Democrat, and Chuck Grassley, an Iowa Republican, have introduced legislation to stop tech platforms disadvantaging smaller rivals. Khanna calls it a “promising” start. Despite fierce opposition from large tech companies, the American Innovation and Choice Online Act was voted out of committee this month on a bipartisan vote, 16–6. A House committee passed a version of the bill last year. Khanna, however, was critical of that effort, warning that the language was imprecise and could have unintended consequences. His nuanced views on tech and its impact on the economy and democracy have helped make him a rare figure in Washington and Silicon Valley, taken seriously by politicos and entrepreneurs alike. “You can’t just have the tools of antitrust and think, ‘OK, now we’re going to have jobs in Youngstown or jobs in New Albany,’” Khanna said. “You want to have antitrust so new competitors can emerge but then you also need a strategy for getting jobs into these communities.” Khanna says Silicon Valley has a responsibility to address inequality it helped create. Tech companies would benefit, he argues, from a diversity of talent and lower costs of living. Such a shift, he says, would help revitalize communities devastated by the decline of manufacturing and construction, and by automation and outsourcing, thereby allowing young people to find good jobs without leaving their home towns. For years, Khanna said, the notion met resistance. But millions have transitioned to remote work during the coronavirus pandemic, pushing tech companies to embrace changing practices. He says he has gone from “swimming against the tide” to “skiing down the mountain”, so much so that an industry friend said he had put into practice many of the ideas Khanna outlines in his book. “It’s amazing how people go from, ‘It’s impossible’ to ‘It’s already been done’ as if there are no steps in between,” Khanna said. “The truth is, it’s not impossible, but it hasn’t already been done. My book is sort of an accelerant for what is now taking place.” Early in the pandemic, tech workers fled San Francisco for smaller cities in neighboring states. While the transplants brought new business and wealth, in some places they widened wage gaps and drove up real-estate prices. Growth has to be planned, Khanna says. “It’s important to learn some of the lessons and the mistakes of the Valley. There has to be more housing supply, there has to be proper conditions for workers and fair wages so you don’t have the stark inequality that you see in Silicon Valley, where you have, in certain communities, 50% of people’s income going to rent because rents are so high.” Khanna thinks bridging the digital divide might also begin to alleviate polarization that Donald Trump exploited. “Just having good economic empowerment and prosperity for rural Americans, for Black Americans, for Latino Americans is not a silver bullet for becoming a multiracial, multi-ethnic democracy,” he said. “But it could be a starting point.” He has called for billions in federal investments in research, manufacturing and workforce development; building tech hubs that emphasize regional expertise, such as a hub in eastern Washington state to focus on lumber technology; providing tax incentives for federal contractors who employ workers in rural areas; underwriting training programs at historically black colleges; and expanding Stem (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) in public schools. Such ideas have captured the attention of Joe Biden’s White House, as it looks to expand opportunity at home and counter China abroad. This week, House Democrats turned to a bill that aims to make the US more competitive with China by strengthening technology, manufacturing and research, including incentives for producing computer chips, which are in short supply. The plan incorporates key planks of Khanna’s Endless Frontier Act, including the establishment of a Directorate for Science and Engineering Solutions. A similar measure passed the Senate with unusual bipartisan support last year but House Republicans seem less amenable. “We need to produce things in this country, including technology, and have the supply chains here,” Khanna said. “Everyone now recognizes that it’s a huge challenge for America to have semiconductors produced in Taiwan and South Korea. With the shipping costs and the disruption with Covid, it has created huge challenges in America from manufacturing cars to making electronics.” ‘Can we get more Republicans?’ With much of the Democrats’ agenda stalled, Khanna believes the new bill can provide a second major bipartisan accomplishment for the party to tout in a difficult midterms campaign. “Can we get more Republicans than voted for the infrastructure bill?” Khanna said, recalling 13 who crossed the aisle. “That’s the barometer.” Khanna, who is also a deputy whip for the Congressional Progressive Caucus, said Democrats must be ready to accept a less ambitious version of Biden’s Build Back Better domestic spending plan. That is in limbo after Joe Manchin – a senator from West Virginia, the kind of state to which Khanna wants to bring tech jobs – announced his opposition. “A big pillar of [the spending plan] should be climate,” Khanna said, “and then let’s get a couple more things that can get support from Senator Manchin, like establishing universal pre-K and expanding Medicaid.” When it comes to combatting climate change and easing child and healthcare costs, he said, “something is certainly better than nothing”. Dignity in a Digital Age: Making Tech Work For All Of Us is published in the US by Simon &amp; SchusterThis was meant to be Boris Johnson’s week of reckoning, but after more twists and turns than a Formula One grand prix, he ended the week closeted away in his country retreat of Chequers, his premiership safe – for now. Scores of Tory MPs have been awaiting the verdict of Sue Gray, the senior civil servant investigating alleged lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street, before deciding whether to press for a vote of no confidence in the prime minister. With her report now apparently entangled with a police investigation, Conservative backbenchers have been left to draw their own conclusions, and Johnson’s allies believe many will opt to let him fight on. “I think there’s a 55% chance that he’ll survive,” said one backer, though they called for a clearout of staff in No 10 so Johnson can start afresh. That’s not how it looked on Tuesday morning when the Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, electrified Westminster during an appearance at the London assembly. Having repeatedly declined to get her force involved in this most toxic of political scandals, Dick confirmed her force would now launch an investigation into the Downing Street parties. Johnson had been forewarned, but chose not to mention it to his cabinet at their weekly Tuesday meeting. Trapped in the cabinet room without their phones, ministers were among the last people to hear the news as they emerged. There followed an unedifying and confusing 72 hours, which began with the Met suggesting it had no objections to Gray publishing her report in full, and a frenzy of speculation that the report was to be published imminently, but ended on Friday with no sign of the report, and a formal statement conceding the police had asked her to make “minimal reference” to the eight events they are investigating. And in the vacuum, Johnson and his allies have spent their time fighting back hard. He has been meeting wavering MPs to hear their political demands, and Downing Street’s planning “grid” is being filled up with trips and announcements designed to show him getting on with delivering “the people’s priorities”. At prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, Johnson was boisterous and defiant, insisting he couldn’t pre-empt the Met inquiry and highlighting his achievements in government. Tory MPs roared their approval, several times yelling “More!” at deafening volume. Johnson came up with a new attack line on the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, accusing him of being “a lawyer, not a leader”. A Westminster veteran pointed out afterwards that the Conservative party continued cheering on Margaret Thatcher in the final days of her premiership, almost right up until the moment they chucked her out of office. But some of Johnson’s ragtag band of supporters have been lobbying their colleagues by sharing a grainy Daily Express front page from 1990 lamenting Thatcher’s downfall with the headline “What have they done?” (apparently forgetting that by ditching a deeply unpopular leader, the Tories managed to win a fourth general election in 1992 under John Major.) In a line that appeared to be aimed at his own MPs, Johnson claimed Starmer “wants me out of the way” – a nod to those backbenchers fretting about their prospects for re-election. Labour MPs later hit back on Twitter, calling Johnson, “a liar, not a leader” – language they are prevented by convention from using in the House of Commons. Starmer contrasted Johnson’s statement to MPs that Covid guidance “was followed completely in No 10” – and that he had been “repeatedly assured” there were no parties – with the facts that had since emerged. He once again called on Johnson to resign. At the same time as Johnson’s honesty over partygate was being questioned, fresh evidence emerged about his alleged role in authorising the evacuation of animals from Afghanistan by the Nowzad charity. Emails published by the foreign affairs committee showed Foreign Office officials suggesting the prime minister had approved the controversial airlift, at a time when life-or-death decisions were being made about who British troops should help to leave Kabul. The prime minister has dismissed the claims as “total rhubarb”, but the committee’s chair, Tom Tugendhat – who has been burnishing his credentials as a potential leadership candidate – is unlikely to let the issue drop. As Gray continued to wrangle with lawyers and the Met about what could be published, Johnson donned hi-vis on Thursday for a visit to Wales. The resulting photos were reminiscent of carefully curated shots from the 2019 general election campaign: a bullish prime minister surrounded by smiling workers in hard hats. This will be Johnson’s approach in the coming days: look busy – preferably far away from No 10 – sound serious and switch the focus to pressing political issues, such as the war in Ukraine. The publication of Michael Gove’s levelling up white paper, now expected next week, will allow the government to point to its domestic reform agenda, largely shelved since partygate. The question for Conservative MPs will be whether Johnson should now be allowed time to try to claw back his reputation and rebuild their party’s standing in the polls, or whether he is irrevocably damaged. One MP ridiculed colleagues claiming to be awaiting Gray’s verdict. “What’s she going to say? Three words: ‘It’s a shitshow.’ Why do you need to wait for that?” they said. Johnson’s supporters hope that with every day that goes by, the shocking details of lockdown-busting parties will fade from the public’s minds – helped by the backing of the rightwing papers. Wednesday’s Daily Mail front page, after the news broke of a birthday party for Johnson in 2020, railed against “a nation that’s lost all sense of proportion”. This week’s disclosure that Johnson had a birthday celebration in Downing Street in June 2020, with up to 30 people singing around the cabinet table, didn’t change the dial for his supporters in the media. Nor did the much-mocked attempts by the Northern Ireland minister, Conor Burns, to defend what had happened. “It was not a premeditated, organised party,” said Burns. “He was, in a sense, ambushed with a cake.” But one disillusioned Conservative MP, who once supported the prime minister, suggested no shift of policy or personnel in No 10 was likely to win over the public, however much time was allowed to pass. They pointed to a widely shared, heartbreaking Sky News clip of a man called Richard Macvicar, who lost his parents and his sister to Covid, saying: “I would have loved 10 minutes to say ‘ta ra’ to my family members.” “Some people might be willing to forget,” the MP said. “But those people who have terribly suffered feel very differently.”In the final days of April 2020, bankers and Treasury officials were huddled over laptops in makeshift home offices across the country, negotiating the terms of what is fast becoming the most controversial of the government’s pandemic rescue schemes. The country was in its sixth week of national lockdown after the Covid outbreak, and the Treasury’s head of banking and credit, David Raw, was leading video calls with more than 20 senior staff from across government and the City – including the big banks HSBC, NatWest, Barclays and Lloyds, Santander, Virgin Money and AIB – to try to push through the chancellor Rishi Sunak’s ambitious plan for a more accessible, 100% government-backed small business loan scheme. After ordering the closure of all offices and non-essential shops and services, Sunak had promised financial aid. But the first scheme to launch, which offered loans of up to £5m and was known as the coronavirus business interruption loan scheme (CBILS), had been criticised by business lobby groups and MPs as too costly, too slow and too risky – borrowers were required to give personal guarantees, usually in the form of their own homes. So the Treasury introduced a second scheme, bounce back loans, designed to get cheap money to firms in as little as 24 hours. It was a “frenetic, difficult period of time,” one senior banking executive said. After nearly 11 days of round-the-clock meetings, a final agreement was signed in the early hours of Monday 4 May. But the strategy agreed in those discussions for accelerating payouts was so controversial that it would, two years later, lead to the shock resignation of Lord Agnew, a joint Cabinet Office and Treasury minister whose brief included counter-fraud. He stepped down on Monday, lambasting the government for its “woeful” efforts to control fraud. In the space of 15 months, from March 2020, the three main Covid loan schemes – bounce back, CBILS and a scheme for larger loans, CLBILS – handed out nearly £80bn to businesses. Bounce back was the biggest scheme, distributing £47bn to 1.6 million recipients, who were able to borrow up to £50,000 each. Meanwhile, fraud losses were estimated at £4.9bn at the end of March – although PwC, the accountancy firm hired by the government, has since reduced its estimate to £3.5bn. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, said the raid on taxpayer funds by gangs of criminals should be “a source of enduring shame to the chancellor”. Banks intent on protecting their finances usually apply stringent credit checks to help avoid fraud and ensure customers can repay their loans, but what was eventually agreed for bounce back, amid pressure from the Treasury to speed up loan distribution, was that checks would be dispensed with altogether. “The British Business Bank was very, very clear with the lenders – and it’s very explicit in all the documentation – that the banks weren’t allowed, actually were prohibited, from undertaking credit checks,” one senior banking executive said. “But then the trade-off was against a real need to get that money into the economy really quickly.” There were rules: borrowers had to confirm they were affected by Covid and based in the UK, that they were in business as of 1 March 2020 and not insolvent as of 1 December 2019. But applicants were left to self-certify that they met these criteria. While lenders would have to make reasonable efforts to chase down the debts, a state guarantee put taxpayers on the hook for 100% of losses linked to defaults or fraudulent applications. “From the lenders’ point of view, they’ve done what they were asked to do,” one director from the banking industry said. The government was repeatedly warned that the approach was leaving it open to fraud. The business department, which ran the schemes, has revealed that its top civil servant sought ministerial directions to push through the three loan schemes because they did not meet the usual standards for government spending. Industry insiders said the fraud risks associated with scrapping credit checks and turning bounce back into a one-page form were fully discussed with the Treasury. Indeed, the former head of the British Business Bank – which was in charge of overseeing the scheme – wrote to the then business secretary, Alok Sharma, two days before the bounce back launch to warn that the scheme was “vulnerable to abuse by individuals and by participants in organised crime”. A month later, in June 2020, Sunak received a joint letter from three anti-corruption groups, calling for the names of recipients to be published – a request that has not yet been met and which is being challenged at a tribunal. Ultimately, speed trumped caution, opening the doors to experienced criminals. Insolvency Service records show some took loans to fund gambling or currency trading – money the government is unlikely to ever recover – while others spent it on things such as home improvements, car raffles or luxury personal items. Other cases are more astonishing, and suggest serious problems in the banks’ basic know-your-customer requirements. The National Crime Agency in December reported the case of Artem Terzyan, 38, from Russia, and Deivis Grochiatskij, 44, from Lithuania. They were jailed for 33 years for laundering £70m on behalf of criminal gangs from around the world – including £10m in bounce back loans. Police had arrested the pair back in June 2018 after following an Audi around the UK’s lorry parks and service stations picking up dirty cash. Yet when the pandemic started, while they were on bail, they both started to claim £50,000 loans in huge numbers. One unnamed UK bank leant them £3.2m. Some banks were more cautious than others. While Agnew did not name the lenders, he said 87% of bounce back loans paid to already dissolved companies came from just three lenders, while two banks were responsible for 81% of cases where loans were granted to companies incorporated after the pandemic hit. The British Business Bank did not confirm the figures and said it was too early to draw conclusions on repayment data. Some banks tried to mitigate the risks by prioritising their own customers – whom they already had run checks on – over new clients. “From a fraud detection perspective, we were more confident that our fraud checks would be stronger with an existing customer versus a new customer,” one senior banking boss said. Questions remain as to how determinedly the government will be able to chase all fraudulent claims, but some changes have been made, including taking steps to ensure that all businesses that are dissolved by their owners are systematically checked for outstanding loans. Resources are relatively meagre when it comes to investigating the loan schemes. While the business department asked the Treasury for an extra £32m for counter-fraud operations, the National Audit Office said even that sum was “inadequate”. A Treasury spokesperson said: “Fraud is totally unacceptable, and we’re taking action on multiple fronts to crack down on anyone who has sought to exploit our schemes and bring them to justice.” The government is also relying heavily on banks to try to chase smaller-scale fraudsters. While banks are required to make reasonable efforts to chase down debts before they can claim the government guarantee, anti-corruption campaigners are concerned about the lack of commercial incentive to do so; their loan losses are 100% covered, whereas chasing money adds considerable costs. Susan Hawley, the executive director of Spotlight on Corruption, said the scale of the fraud highlighted longstanding problems in the UK’s approach to white-collar crime, including repeated delays to reforms of Companies House, the UK’s corporate register. “The government is just not putting its money where its mouth is” on fighting fraud, said Hawley. “This is really chickens coming home to roost in the failure to fund it.”Parents of adult children who sit down to do their tax return this weekend should check if they are due a refund. One Guardian reader has just discovered HM Revenue and Customs is taxing him as if his family is still getting child benefit, even though his two children are now 22 and 19, and the family stopped receiving the cash almost 18 months ago. His case is similar to one featured in Guardian Money a year ago, involving a woman with a daughter in her 20s who received a £4,300 tax rebate because HMRC had wrongly carried on making deductions for child benefit for several years. Earlier this week, HMRC said 4 million people had still not filed their 2020-21 self-assessment tax return and paid any tax owed ahead of what is still officially the deadline: Monday 31 January. However, it was announced recently that those who file late will not be hit with a penalty, provided their return is submitted by 28 February. Child benefit is currently paid at £21.15 a week for the eldest or only child, then £14 a week for each additional child, and is worth £1,828 a year for a family with two children. You normally qualify if you are responsible for a child under 16 – or under 20 if they stay in approved full-time education or training, which includes A-levels. Lots of families have been pulled into self-assessment because at least one parent has an income of more than £50,000. Under the government’s high-income child benefit charge, the payout is clawed back on a sliding scale. The high-income tax charge is 1% of the amount of child benefit for each £100 of income on a sliding scale between £50,000 and £60,000. For those earning more than £60,000 the charge is 100% – in effect, they receive no child benefit. The reader did his tax return a few days ago and was amazed to be told he was owed £815 for overpaid tax for 2020-21. He has two children and has been affected by the tax charge for several years. However, his younger child stopped being eligible for the benefit in September 2020, shortly after leaving sixth form. The refund related to deductions that HMRC had continued to make for child benefit, even though he became “free of the tax charge” a few months into the 2020-21 tax year. His tax code notice letters for 2021-22 mentioned child benefit, and when he visited Gov.uk to look at his personal tax account, it stated that his current code includes a deduction of £2,650 for child benefit. This suggests he will be due another refund of at least several hundred pounds for 2021-22. His case shows the importance of checking your tax code to make sure it is correct for your situation and not based on outdated or incorrect information. Many people file their tax code notice letters away without looking at them closely – or at all. HMRC previously told Guardian Money that PAYE collects the correct amount of tax for the vast majority of customers, and that it will change someone’s tax code if it is notified of a change in circumstances.Unless stated, all prices quoted are for a week in June Hen Cottage, Leek, Peak District An idyllic retreat for two, this small cottage is situated on the south-west edge of the Peak District national park, with head-swivelling views across the valley to Tittesworth Reservoir and the dramatic limestone ridge known as The Roaches. Vintage furniture, home-made ceramics and a crackling log burner make this a lovely place to hole up, whatever the weather, with curlews, lapwings and skylarks all whirling in the skies above the house. The market town of Leek is three miles away, renowned locally for its excellent range of independent shops and antique emporiums. From £430 a week, sleeps two, thelittledomain.com 1 &amp; 2 Morville Barn, Shropshire A brand-new conversion of an 18th-century barn split into two comfortable cottages, Morville is ideal for two families who want to spend time together, but still have their own space to return to at the end of each day’s fun. Both the properties sleep five people in three bedrooms, and have spacious lounges and kitchens, with a shared garden outside. The historic town of Bridgnorth is a couple of minutes’ drive away, with picturesque Much Wenlock five minutes further up the road, while the sleepy village of Morville is a good starting point for walks through the tranquil Shropshire countryside. Both properties welcome dogs. From £999 for a week in No 2 in July (June dates no longer available), nationaltrust.org.uk The Old Cowshed, St Ishmael’s, Pembrokeshire Ideal for an outdoorsy family, this cleverly converted former farm building has three cosy bedrooms, all en suite, and a spacious, double-height lounge area, warmed by a log burner. On warmer days the terrace is ideal for barbecue suppers: it’s within a walled garden, so offers complete privacy. Beyond the surrounding farm buildings and a handful of cottages, there is nothing but open, hill countryside, which makes this a great choice for dog owners, as well as for keen walkers. The lovely, sandy beaches of Saint Bride’s Bay are a short drive away, while the Dale peninsula offers spectacular coastal walks, with dramatic views of the Milford Haven waterway. From £1,328 a week, sleeps six, qualitycottages.co.uk Orions Cottage, Chilham, Kent Children will love this cute, Grade II-listed cottage, with slanted walls and wonky stairs, set on the picturesque medieval square of one of Kent’s most beautiful villages. There’s a tea room next door, and Chilham Castle – an elegant Jacobean mansion – and the village’s two excellent pubs are a stone’s throw away. The property is ideal for a car-free break, as there are walks from the village into the surrounding orchards and gentle hills, and the station has good connections into historic Canterbury. The house itself has a cosy sitting room with inglenook fireplace, two bedrooms with beamed ceilings and a spacious kitchen/dining area. From £709 a week, sleeps four, mulberrycottages.com The Albatross, Totnes, Devon A brand-new property from organic food pioneer Geetie Singh-Watson, who also owns the Bull Inn just across the road, this four-bedroom apartment is a real treat and has sustainability stamped right across it. Everything, from the furniture to the old cookery books and maps in the lounge, has been recycled or repurposed, the bedrooms are kitted out with organic mattresses and towels, and the walls are covered with an eclectic collection of artworks. There are walks from the door to nearby beaches and Sharpham vineyard, with Dartmoor’s unspoilt landscapes just 10 minutes’ drive away (or an easy bus journey, if you’re on a car-free break). From £2,800 a week/£1,200 for a three-night break, sleeps eight, sawdays.co.uk 2 The Sands, Praa Sands, Cornwall It’s all about the views at this glass-fronted house, which boasts spectacular views of the mile-long, dune-backed beach at Praa Sands. Sliding glass doors bring fresh sea air into the spacious lounge areas, and the surrounding dunes are the perfect natural adventure playground for a young family. The three bedrooms are cool and chic, with rattan furnishings and clean, cream decor, and the well-equipped kitchen is good for rustling up everything from beach picnics to three-course dinners. The South West Coast Path runs along the beach, which makes this a great choice for keen walkers, and Saint Michael’s Mount and busy Penzance are also just a short drive away. From £1,882 a week, sleeps six, luxurycoastal.co.uk Rubstone Cottage, Shanklin, Isle of Wight It’s all about the location at this cosy stone cottage, tucked away in the heart of Shanklin Old Village, an easy walk from the beach. This is a great place for young families; the shoreline is sandy and shallow – ideal for paddling and sandcastles – while the old village is dotted with picturesque thatched cottages and several tea rooms, all serving up classic cream teas. The house can provide cot, stair gate and high chair on request, and is tucked away down a small, car-free pathway, with a walled and gated courtyard garden. From £730 a week, sleeps four, islandcottageholidays.com The Small House, Bourton-on-the-Water, Cotswolds This charming cottage is located close to Bourton-on-the-Water, but surrounded by open countryside, giving it an away-from-the-crowds feel. Dating back to the 17th century, the three-bedroom house has been stylishly converted into a contemporary bolthole, with exposed brick and beams, and a cosy kitchen warmed by the Aga. Outside, the garden has a spacious terrace with barbecue, and lovely views over the Windrush Valley. Stow-on-the-Wold and Northleach are both just a few minutes’ drive; kids will love Cotswold Farm Park, home of Countryfile’s Adam Henson, with plenty of animals to meet and an excellent adventure playground. From £1,487 a week, sleeps six, sykescottages.co.uk The Foxes Cove, Brixham, Devon New for 2022, this stylish, three-bedroom house is ideal for families who want to get out on the water. Overlooking Brixham’s busy marina, almost every room has gorgeous sea views, with the master bedroom and lounge both having balconies (complete with telescope). Steps down from the kitchen lead to a private decked area, perfect for breakfast while watching the fishing trawlers and yachts glide in and out of the harbour. It’s ideal for a car-free break, with the Golden Hind, a replica of Francis Drake’s Tudor ship, historic Battery Gardens and Brixham’s bustling streets, dotted with pubs and fish restaurants, an easy walk from the door. A week from £1,593, sleeps six, classic.co.uk, short breaks available The Nest, Powys Hidden away on a 300-acre farm in the village of Bleddfa, this remote green-roof retreat is a magical place to get away from it all, surrounded by wildflower gardens and gorgeous countryside. There are two double en suite bedrooms, a spacious lounge and dining area, a handmade kitchen, and special features like two alfresco bathtubs, a hot tub (great for stargazing on clear nights) and a firepit. There are plenty of walking trails on the doorstep and the foodie town of Ludlow is 30 minutes’ drive away – though it’s unlikely you will want to leave. From £1,600 a week in July, sleeps 4, hostunusual.com Caledonia Escapes, Invergarry, Highlands Situated right beside the Great Glen Way, a 79-mile walking and cycling route between Fort William and Inverness, this pristine two-bedroom apartment is a great base for serious hikers and those looking for an outdoorsy week. The open-plan living room and kitchen area is light and airy, and a lovely space to return to after a day’s activities; there are also two comfortable bedrooms, and a travel cot and highchair available on request. Loch Ness and Fort William are both within 45 minutes’ drive – offering a wide range of activities, from kayaking and white-water rafting to abseiling. From £819 for a week, sleeps four, cottages.com Cuckoo Cottage, Blakeney, Norfolk Vast skies, unspoilt beaches and atmospheric marshes make Blakeney a great bet for a back-to-nature family holiday, and this cutesy cottage – originally two fishermen’s houses, built in the 1850s – has a great location, within walking distance of the beach and village. The downstairs is warmed by a double-sided wood burner and the upstairs bathroom has lovely views across the marshes. It’s also ideal for a car-free break, as the Coasthopper bus stops close to the cottage, offering easy access to everywhere from Cromer – famous for its crabbing – to the seaside town of Hunstanton. From £803 a week, sleeps four, norfolkcottages.co.uk Treovis Farm, Cornwall Opened last summer, Treovis Farm is a pretty, spacious three-bedroom Georgian farmhouse with old flagstone floors and beamed ceilings. It’s surrounded by wildflower meadows and an extensive garden. It’s close to the River Tamar in Luckett, on the border between Devon and Cornwall, and there’s lots to do in the area: Greenscombe Wood nature reserve (for butterfly spotting) is on the doorstep, there are Tudor gardens to explore at Cotehele, and the wilds of Dartmoor, and a wide choice of beaches, from Freathy to Looe, are just a short drive away. The Royal Inn in Horsebridge is an easy walk for real ales and great food. From £1,600 for a week, sleeps five, sawdays.co.uk Ty Crwn, Carmarthen, Wales Brand new for 2022, this charming roundhouse is tucked away on private farmland, making it an idyllic retreat for two. On the ground floor, a well-equipped kitchenette, large log burner and comfy easy chairs make for a cosy, restful space, with the sleeping area tucked away up a hand-made spiral staircase. The sleepy village of Felindre is just over a mile away, while the lovely beaches of Aberporth and Tresaith are both less than 15 miles’ drive. At weekends, there’s a pop-up vegan restaurant on-site (must be reserved in advance). A week from £596, sleeps two, holidaycottages.co.uk 2 Lymbrook Cottages, Lyme Regis, Dorset A charming former mill worker’s cottage, dating back to the 19th century, Lymbrook has a fantastic location in the Jericho area of Lyme – just five minutes’ walk from the beach. The cottage opens out onto a small patio and good-sized shared garden, with the River Lym just beyond, while inside there’s a cosy lounge with log burner, a well-equipped kitchen and two comfortable bedrooms. Lyme makes an ideal base for exploring the dramatic scenery of the Jurassic Coast; fossil-famous Charmouth and the spectacular cliff walk at Golden Cap are 10 minutes’ away. From £815 a week, sleeps four, lymebayholidays.co.uk Ocean Beach, Rye, East Sussex A chic new option that opened its doors in September, Ocean Beach is ideal for a special occasion, located just a short walk away from the glorious stretch of beach at Camber Sands. Well equipped for younger children, the house has a stair gate, high chair and cot, and a games room with pool table, air hockey and table football. The two, white-walled bedrooms are dotted with sea-themed pictures and accessories, while the lounge opens out onto a small, sun-trap garden. Besides Camber, the picturesque town of Rye is a short drive away, along with the atmospheric Romney Marshes. Dogs are welcome too. From £1,657 a week, sleeps four, besidetheseaholidays.com Tintern Abbey Cottage, Tintern, Monmouthshire When dusk falls outside this cosy 18th-century cottage, the real magic begins; the ruins of Tintern Abbey, illuminated in the half-light, lie just across the road. Tintern village boasts its own vineyard, micro-brewery and vintage bookshop, as well as excellent pubs – this is a place to really immerse yourself in the spectacular beauty of the Wye Valley. There are three double bedrooms, a log burner in the cosy lounge and a charming cottage garden, with walking trails from the door. The Wye offers kayaking, stand-up paddleboarding and fishing, and the traditional market towns of Monmouth and Chepstow are a short drive away. Six nights from £1,079, sleeps six, monmouthshirecottages.co.uk The Ambleside Loft, Ambleside, Cumbria Renting a family-sized property in the Lakes can be ruinously expensive in the summer months, which makes this new apartment in the centre of popular Ambleside a real find. The downside is that there’s no garden, but inside, the five bedrooms and double-height open-plan lounge and dining area feel light and spacious. There’s a good-size laundry and utility room, perfect for storing the family’s hiking boots, rucksacks and fleeces, and the busy streets of Ambleside just three minutes’ walk from the door. The northern shores of Windermere are a short drive away. A week from £1,503, sleeps 10, originalcottages.co.uk Kilchattan Church, Isle of Bute, Argyll &amp; Bute From outside, Kilchattan looks like a traditional sandstone church, but inside it has been cleverly converted into a superb holiday home, with four bedrooms and bathrooms, and a spectacular, open-plan kitchen diner, dominated by the original stained-glass windows. The garden fronts straight on to Kilchattan Bay, with glorious views along the Firth of Clyde, and there are several unspoiled sandy beaches within easy walking distance. If the weather is poor, there’s a bar and pool table in the games room, and a steam room and sauna to warm up in after brisk, blustery walks. From £1,917 a week, sleeps eight, cottages-and-castles.co.uk The Bait House, Portpatrick, Dumfries and Galloway Set right on the harbour wall in Portpatrick, this three-bedroom house dates back to 1850, when it was used by local fishermen to repair their nets. Behind the classic stone frontage, a contemporary renovation has given the interiors pristine wooden floors, clean white walls and a well-equipped kitchen-diner. It’s the only house on the western side of the harbour, and there are unbroken sunset views from the balcony at the back, and tranquil river views from the front. Portpatrick itself is a small fishing village with a clutch of good pubs and restaurants; a golf course, tennis courts and children’s play park are all within walking distance of the house. From £1,295 a week, sleeps six, holidaylettings.co.uk • This article was amended on 29 January 2022. Portpatrick is in Dumfries and Galloway, Scotland, not in Northern Ireland as an earlier version said.It’s a series that is at least partly about Tommy Lee’s penis, so let’s talk about length. Pam &amp; Tommy (Star on Disney+, from Wednesday) is an eight-part series that could have been a movie instead. You realise this about seven minutes in: the first episode, which almost exclusively follows Seth Rogen’s pornographer turned builder Rand Gauthier, takes its time with every single scene. We see Rand nail together a bed while Pamela Anderson and Lee have outrageously loud sex upstairs. We watch him drive home, put his feet up on the sofa, light a cigarette then stub it out. We flashback to his childhood to find out why he doesn’t like pissing his pants. We see him try to charm his boss into helping him hijack a safe from Lee’s unfinished Malibu mansion, and we see that boss umm and ahh and eventually say no. All of this takes ages. All of this could have been cut. We could have had a neat two-and-a-half hour feature film, and it would have been fine. Instead, we have eight hours of streaming to do. Normally, I would be against this – I still have four episodes of Succession to catch up on; can people stop making unmissable legacy TV for one minute! – but Pam &amp; Tommy is so good, so fun, that the detail makes the world richer and denser and more of a hoot than popping to the cinema. First, the casting, which I never normally comment on (‘Yeah, this professional actor is good in the role they were professionally cast for’), is perfect. When they were announced, there was bafflement over the choice of Lily James for Anderson and Sebastian Stan for Lee – they both have such thoughtful faces, how could they possibly play two gorgeous 90s dumbasses? – but they are both on top form. They are magnetically attracted to each other, and play lovestruck honeymooners like two feral animals who communicate in grunts. In the episode where they fall in love, they barely even talk. It’s so, so good. Plotting unseen behind them, Rogen plays a character who isn’t a chuckling stoner for once, and he’s all the better for it. Gauthier, working on the remodel of Lee’s house, is hurt by his failure to pay in advance (again, Stan plays this perfectly: every time he prowls on screen he is at once sweetly simple and unknowingly threatening – always two steps away from holding a hunting rifle while wearing a leopard-print kimono and saying: “I’m joking, dude!”) and too straightforward to know what he’s doing is cold, naked revenge. Giving each character all that screen time lets us add layers to who they are and their motivations: did I need to know Gauthier is still pining for an ex and Lee is dreading the rise of Seattle grunge? How much of Anderson’s barely seen frailty after being dismissed on the Baywatch set did I really need to see? But in an era of Marvel megamovies (also starring Stan, also available on Disney+), it’s nice to watch something that doesn’t just assign goodies and baddies. We spend eight hours learning various shades of grey while Rogen wears a sick mullet and gets a succession of big fits off. That’s what TV can do that films can’t. Here’s another thing TV can do that films would struggle with: an extended sequence in which Stan talks to his own CGI penis (the “mouth” of the penis is exactly what you think it is). I suppose this is what Disney started the Star umbrella for: to get away from all-ages kids movies and show people on ecstasy having sex in a bath, which is most of episode two. Again, I back the gratuitousness of it: if you’re going to pivot to adult themes after 70-plus years of Snow White, go hard or go home. You do sort of feel like that high, shrieking sound is Walt Disney’s snap-frozen head revolving at high speed, but that’s not a problem for me to solve. That’s for Disneyland to figure out how to make a rollercoaster out of this series, somehow. Could it have been a film? Quite easily. Could it have been shorter? Oh, significantly. Is there something to be said for letting everyone have the time of their life and letting the fun go on for as long as possible? Pam &amp; Tommy really does argue convincingly so. I didn’t think I’d say this, but: can every story be way too long now? Can we all just switch to baths again instead of showers?The official investigation of Hunter Biden’s dealings in China and elsewhere rests in the hands of David Weiss, a Trump-appointed federal prosecutor in Delaware, and the US justice department under Joe Biden’s attorney general, Merrick Garland. Politically speaking, we now have Red-Handed by Peter Schweizer, who would very much like to help us digest the business past of the 46th president’s troublesome son. Schweizer’s works include Clinton Cash, a compendium of opposition research that helped shape the presidential election in 2016. These days, he is president of the Government Accountability Institute, a think tank funded by the Mercer family, part of the rightwing ecosystem. Rebekah Mercer chairs the GAI board, a position previously held by Steve Bannon, whom Donald Trump pardoned of fraud charges but who is now under indictment for contempt of Congress. Mercer is also a founding investor in Parler, a rightwing alternative to Twitter and communications vehicle for Trump’s faithful in the run-up to the 6 January insurrection. The Mercers are mainstays of Breitbart News and once funded James O’Keefe’s Project Veritas – of which, more later. Via Cambridge Analytica, the Mercers helped hijack Brexit. Not surprisingly, Nigel Farage counts the Mercers as allies. If Republicans recapture the House in November, as expected, most see investigations of Hunter Biden and his father an inevitable sequel. Schweizer has published a roadmap, from sources including Secret Service travel logs, materials from former business associates and that infamous laptop. Schweizer argues that the rich and powerful have grown too cozy with China, at the expense of their own country. His central contention is that the Biden family garnered approximately $31m from individuals with direct ties to Chinese intelligence. Hunter Biden has denied wrongdoing. In 2020, Politifact said Schweizer’s claims about Joe Biden did “not add up to a picture” of his “being corrupt or pursuing policies contrary to the national interest”. Schweizer, however, fires shots across the political spectrum. John Boehner, a Republican speaker of the House, and Henry Kissinger, secretary of state to two Republican presidents, are in his sights. So are the Bushes. Chuck Schumer, Mark Warner, Chris Coons and Joe Manchin, all Democratic senators, are praised. Schweizer lambasts Silicon Valley for enabling China’s rise and turning a blind eye to human rights abuses. Elon Musk and Bill Gates are criticized, Wall Street (prominently Goldman Sachs, Blackstone and Black Rock), the National Basketball Association and academe too. Yale University receives particular attention. Not surprisingly, Schweizer does not consider links to China enjoyed by Trump and his most ardent followers. He ignores, for example, tax records that show Trump International Hotels Management paid more than $188,000 in China while pursuing licensing deals between 2013 and 2015, and maintained a bank account there. Likewise, Schweizer looks away from Ted Cruz. The Texas senator’s wife is a banker at Goldman. The Cruzes hold direct investments of between $15,000 and $50,000 in the Goldman Sachs China Equity Fund Class P, a mutual fund with positions in Alibaba and Tencent – companies firmly in Schweizer’s sights. Then again, the Mercers are Cruz donors. In 2016, Cruz’s presidential campaign was a Cambridge Analytica client. Schweizer calls for a US lobbying ban on companies linked to the Chinese military and Chinese intelligence, and their exclusion from US stock exchanges. He also demands the press pursue big tech involvement with China. As models for how to resist the Chinese, he holds out Peter Thiel and his company Palantir. Thiel, a rightwing megadonor, gained notoriety when he wrote in 2009 that women and minorities had mucked up democratic capitalism. A Palantir employee planted the concept of data harvesting with Cambridge Analytica. As for China’s territorial ambitions? In another book, Trump was quoted by the Washington Post’s Josh Rogin. If the Chinese were to invade Taiwan, he told a senator, “there isn’t a fucking thing we can do”. It seems unlikely the US could be capable of decoupling its economy from China while avoiding clashes. China’s opacity with regard to Covid does not instill confidence. Schweizer’s book does at least deliver food for thought. ‘Free speech for me …’ If Red-Handed is an amalgam of more than 1,100 footnotes, facts, arguments and innuendos, American Muckraker by James O’Keefe, the founder of Project Veritas, is a 288-page exercise in self-reverence. “The American Muckraker understands that the path to truth involves suffering and sacrifice,” O’Keefe writes. OK. Elsewhere, he compares his plight to that of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in Alabama in the late 1950s, as it worked for “equality”. Really. He also repeatedly refers to Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great Russian dissident. What does O’Keefe do for a living? Mostly, he makes sting videos targeting Democrats and progressives. Targets have included Planned Parenthood and a teachers’ union. Practically speaking, American Muckraker is O’Keefe’s attempt to bolster his claim of being a journalist while re-defining what the media actually is in an era of cold civil war. On that note, he recounts a conversation with Brian Karem after the Playboy White House reporter had a dust-up with a Trump loyalist, Sebastian Gorka. “I’m on the same team as you,” said O’Keefe. “I respect you guys.” Really? Project Veritas counts the Donald J Trump Foundation among past donors and Erik Prince, former head of the Blackwater private security company and brother of Trump’s education secretary, Betsy DeVos, was involved in its sting operations against Trump adversaries. O’Keefe makes clear he is not keen on a shedding a light on those who fund his work. He does have a genuine grievance. In early November 2021, the FBI raided his apartment, handcuffed him in his underwear and seized two phones. He was not arrested. Reportedly, the feds swooped in connection with the disappearance and unauthorized publication of a diary kept by Ashley Biden, the president’s daughter. Project Veritas never wrote anything on the topic and handed the document over. The justice department had placed the first amendment and O’Keefe’s civil liberties in its crosshairs, notwithstanding a court-ordered warrant. But that is only part of the story. In 2020, O’Keefe sued the New York Times for libel in connection with its coverage of videos concerning alleged voter fraud in Minnesota. A New York judge refused to dismiss the suit and O’Keefe has obtained an injunction that bars the paper from publishing documents written by a Project Veritas lawyer. O’Keefe’s mantra might be: “Free speech for me – but not for thee.” Despite the efforts of Richard Nixon in the case of the Pentagon Papers, prior restraint remains anathema to a free press – as Donald Trump’s late brother, Robert, learned when he failed to block publication of a niece’s tell-all. Nonetheless, Trump allies are urging the supreme court to reconsider protections afforded to the media under US libel law. Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch have indicated they are willing. The fact that the decision in question was rendered by a unanimous court a half-century ago means little. American Muckraker is a book for such troubled times. Red-Handed: How American Elites Get Rich Helping China Win is published in the US by Harper. American Muckraker: Rethinking Journalism for the 21st Century is published by Post Hill PressAnd that’s where we’ll leave you on this Saturday evening. Here’s what we learned today: Death numbers from Covid remain high across the country, with 97 nationally – just shy of yesterday’s total of 98, a grim record for the pandemic. All the main statistics from each state are in our National Covid summary, which you can find pinned to the top of this blog, and you can read more about what’s happened in Covid news today in our wrap. Wild weather has caused damage and flooding across the country, with parts of Victoria, NSW and Queensland cleaning up today after being hit by torrential rain on Friday afternoon, with homes being left without power, properties flooding and widespread damage. Flooding in South Australia has damaged rail infrastructure and cut food supply lines to the Northern Territory and Western Australia. Shortages of food and essential supplies are now a concern in Darwin, Western Australia and remote towns including Coober Pedy, but the federal government has sought to reassure people they will not go without food. The federal government has announced it will spend an extra $50m over the next four years to pull east coast koalas back from the brink. The money will underpin a national koala recovery plan, promised after the devastating 2020 bushfires. Kanye West will have to be fully vaccinated if he wants to give concerts in Australia, Scott Morrison said on Saturday, after reports the hip-hop artist was planning an Australian tour in March. Thanks so much for sticking with us and enjoy your Saturday evening. See you next time. Listening to the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, speaking on Friday, you’d be forgiven for thinking Victoria was a new member of his cabinet. Perrottet said the NSW government had “worked alongside” Victoria to deliver thousands of rapid antigen tests before schools resume next week. They were “the only states in the country” that could boast as much, he said. On the business support package likely to be announced in the coming days, Perrottet again referenced Victoria – the NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, was working “very closely” with his southern counterparts “because we’re in a very, very similar situation”, he said. The bonhomie is apparently shared. On Thursday the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said the two premiers “work together as close as we can”. For anyone who lived in NSW or Victoria through the first two years of the Covid-19 pandemic, this developing bromance between leaders from opposite ends of the ideological divide is a jarring shift. Benita Kolovos and Michael McGowan have more here: Meanwhile, in Melbourne... Requiring three doses for full Covid vaccination would “send a clear signal that it is essential, rather than simply a matter of choice and personal responsibility”, a member of a World Health Organization advisory group said. Though the national cabinet is still awaiting advice from Australia’s independent expert group on vaccination, Atagi, as to whether people should only be considered fully vaccinated against Covid after three doses, the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, had been pre-empting Atagi’s advice. “International evidence, our own experience, the views of experts and hopefully the confirmation of both Atagi and national cabinet later today will mean that everyone knows and understands that this is a three-dose project,” he said on Thursday. Given Atagi is yet to release its advice, the matter was not settled at a meeting of the national cabinet later that day. But on Friday the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, backed Andrews, saying he thought the proposal “makes sense”, and that even without a decision by the national cabinet three doses should be required to be “up to date” with vaccination. Read the full story from Melissa Davey, Michael McGowan and Benita Kolovos: Hip-hop artist Kanye West will have to be fully vaccinated if he wants to give concerts in Australia, Scott Morrison said on Saturday, after media said the performer planned an Australian tour in March. The warning comes just two weeks after tennis champion Novak Djokovic’s hopes for an Australian Open title were dashed when a court upheld the government’s decision to cancel his visa over Covid-19 rules and his unvaccinated status. “The rules are you have to be fully vaccinated,” Morrison told a news conference on Saturday. “They apply to everybody, as people have seen most recently. It doesn’t matter who you are, they are the rules. Follow the rules – you can come. You don’t follow the rules, you can’t.” Read the full story: From AAP: The federal government has sought to reassure people they will not go without food, after severe flooding cut major transport links in the centre of the country. Inland floods damaged rail infrastructure in South Australia and cut food supply lines to the Northern Territory and Western Australia this week. Shortages of food and essential supplies are now a concern in Darwin, parts of Western Australia, and remote towns, including Coober Pedy. The federal emergency management minister Bridget McKenzie said on Saturday: Our first concern is for the safety and needs of those directly affected and we know that through working together we can keep the wheels turning and restore supply chains across the country. The community has a role in this too, by buying what you need and not hoarding. This unnecessarily spikes demand and then directly impacts supply. The government’s National Coordination Mechanism is working through options with states and territories to keep essential supplies stocked and carry out repairs quickly, McKenzie said. A 14-day major emergency was declared in South Australia on Friday, allowing the state’s police commissioner Grant Stevens to direct the movement of freight and improve SA food security. The Stuart Highway, the main link between Adelaide and Darwin, remains underwater on Saturday and there is no time frame for when it will reopen. The disruption to the supply chain is the biggest upset to food supply in Western Australia in “living memory”, Richard Forbes from the Independent Food Distributors of Australia told the ABC: This is a very serious situation. Thousands of tonnes of food are transported every day from the eastern states to the west. He said the damage to infrastructure meant 6,500 venues serviced by IFDA, including nursing homes, cafes and restaurants, were immediately going without food. Weather! We have been having a lot of it. There will be some more of it, in this case coming to WA and SA. It’s Stephanie Convery back with you now. Thanks again to Ben Doherty for holding the fort! That’s 22 new cases of local transmission and one related to interstate travel. One person is in hospital. WA police assistant commissioner Allan Adams: The investigation is now being led by the major crime division with the support of the homicide squad and district detectives. The exact cause of death and the circumstances will be thoroughly investigated and this will take some time. But I can tell you, at this stage, we are treating this incident as a double murder suicide. Police are still at the scene, trying to scour the home and collect some evidence and look into any sort of clues into what would have happened leading up to the depths yesterday evening. They are appealing for public information for anyone, close family, relatives, neighbours, friends, to report to police about anything they might know about what might have led to the tragic deaths. They want anyone with any sort of information to call Crime Stoppers. Western Australia police have issued a statement regarding the discovery of three bodies at a home in Perth. Officers from the major crime division are investigating the circumstances surrounding the death of an adult male and two children at a home in Huntingdale on Friday 28 January 2022. About 6.35pm, police were called to the home by a family member. Upon attendance a 40-year-old man, a six-year-old boy and a four-year-old girl were located deceased. The 40-year-old man is the father of the two children. Investigations into the circumstances surrounding the deaths are ongoing. A large police presence including detectives and forensic officers will remain at the scene. WA Police will continue to provide support and assistance to the family, friends and first-responders affected by this tragic incident. The Northern Territory has recorded 828 new cases of Covid-19. There are currently 4,650 active cases in the NT, most in the top end of the state. There are 111 people hospitalised in the Northern Territory with Covid, 10 of those are receiving oxygen therapy, and five are in intensive care units. The health minister, Natasha Fyles, said from 6pm this evening, all of the territory will be placed under a seven-day mask mandate out of doors. The mask mandate applies to anyone aged over 12 who cannot physically distance. Those who are exercising or who can maintain physical distance from other people do not need to wear a mask. Alice Springs prison has recorded 154 new cases, bring the cluster inside that prison to 274. Ninety-seven new cases were reported in New Zealand in the past 24 hours. We are waiting for an update from Western Australia police on this tragic situation in Perth. Another 97 Covid-related deaths have been announced so far today, with numbers still to be reported in Western Australia and the Northern Territory. NSW has accounted for 49 of that total, its highest daily toll to date. Victoria has registered 31 deaths, Queensland 12 and South Australia five. More than 3,630 Australian lives have been lost since the pandemic began, over a thousand of them this month. Australia’s chief nursing and midwifery officer, Alison McMillan, has cautioned that death rates will remain high for some time even as infections plateau. The federal government is meanwhile awaiting final approval for children aged 16 and 17 to receive booster shots, following the initial green light from Australia’s medicines regulator. The health minister, Greg Hunt, expects the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation to sign off on the move next week, paving the way for the rollout to start. The wait time for boosters across the country will also drop from four to three months on Monday. McMillan says people who have contracted Covid should get a third dose as soon as they are symptom-free. This is in contrast with NSW advice telling people to wait for between four and six weeks after recovering from the virus. The return of schools next week, accompanied by states’ rapid test surveillance, is expected to drive daily case tallies up again. Queensland earlier delayed its school return by two weeks until 7 February, while South Australia decided on a staged return over the coming fortnight. NSW recorded 13,354 new infections on Saturday and Victoria 12,250. There were 10,391 cases announced in Queensland, 1,740 in South Australia, 683 in Tasmania and 620 in the ACT. Meanwhile the United Workers Union has launched an attack on the federal government over the deaths of more than 200 aged care residents in the past week. The union says the first month of 2022 has been deadlier for aged care residents than all of last year. I lived on Christmas Island for a number of years as a child. The crab migration was always extraordinary, and, to a five-year-old, endlessly fascinating. Students will return to school in several states and territories from next week. The New South Wales and Victorian governments will provide staff and students with rapid antigen tests for twice-weekly surveillance testing for the first four weeks of term. With a total of 24m self-test kits to be delivered across the two states in the coming weeks, experts share tips on how to make at-home nasal swabbing as painless as possible for daunted adults and kids. Ben Doherty, momentarily back with you on the blog. An update from AAP on the situation in Victoria. Victorian health authorities have detected “a handful” of Omicron sub-variant cases, as the state posts 12,250 new Covid-19 infections and 31 deaths. The total number of active cases in the state is 79,836, down from 101,605 reported on Friday. Covid-19 Commander Jeroen Weimar said authorities had detected “literally a handful” of cases with the Omicron sub-variant, which has been dubbed ‘Son of Omicron’. “We’re obviously following the international developments on the BA.2 sub-variant of Omicron closely,” he told reporters in Melbourne. “It’s still very early days in understanding exactly how that’s moving around, I’m aware there’s a very small number of cases that have been detected here in Victoria.” He moved to assure Victorians “son of Omicron” was “not a new variant”. “As more information comes in, we’ll adjust our strategy if we need to,” he said. “We’re all discovering new things every day here in Australia, just as we do elsewhere in the world.” Hospitalisations with Covid-19 have fallen by 35 to 953 patients on Saturday. There are 114 people in intensive care, with 39 of those on a ventilator. Just two days before schools go back, Weimar said 4.5m rapid antigen tests had been sent to schools with another two million to be distributed in coming days. Students and staff are being encouraged to take twice-weekly RATs once school returns. A vaccination blitz targeting children aged five to 11 has begun at 15 Victorian primary schools, with several state-run vaccine hubs offering walk-up jabs for kids. More than 37% of Victorians aged over 18 have received a Covid-19 vaccine booster, with 22,139 doses administered at state hubs on Friday. NSW: 13,354 new cases, 2,693 people hospital (186 in intensive care) 49 deaths VIC 12,250 new cases 953 people in hospital (114 in intensive care) 31 deaths TAS: 683 new cases 17 people in hospital SA: 1,740 new cases 283 people in hospital (29 in intensive care) five deaths ACT: 620 new cases 61 people in hospital (five in intensive care). QLD: 10,391 new cases 833 people in hospital (53 in intensive care) 12 deaths Victoria’s Covid commander, Jeroen Weimar, is speaking in Melbourne. He says two million booster shots have been administered in the state, 37% of all Victorians aged over 18. [It is] particularly encouraging to see over half of over 60s have had their booster dose, 52%, and 62% of those aged over 70. We really encourage people to come forward and get booster done. 76,000 of us have had a booster appointment made in the next seven days, but there are many more appointments available and again, across care, across pharmacies and clinics, it is easy to get your booster dose. More than 1m lightning strikes recorded in the past 24 hours in south-east Australia. More than one million! I know a bunch of you have been dealing with storm damage overnight, solidarity. (Same here: we had water come through our light fixtures and my parents had to sandbag their yard last night.) Anyway, probably best not to shake it off with a swim in the Bay today, Melbourne mates. Probably also worth noting his response to this point about integrity within the public service. Reporter: It has been a horror week for the Queensland government, seeing the reports about integrity within the premier’s cabinet. There has been horrible reports from the people who used to work there. I guess the comments from you are reminder for people to keep their integrity front and centre. Morrison: Well, of course. I am very grateful to the public servants that I work with and have always had a very respectful relationship with them, and we have a bit of a code between us and the public service – expect and respect. I expect strong performance and we respect their professionalism and their integrity to do their job ... Our public servants have done a terrific job for the commonwealth government, and we rely on them heavily. But we also expect those high standards which are imposed on politicians as well. Now he’s answering question about bringing down the national debt. Morrison: The way you reduce your debt is you ensure that you grow your economy. See, the demands on government on essential services don’t go away, whether it’s the National Disability Insurance Scheme, whether it is aged care, whether it is caring for our country, like the announcements that we have here. Do you know what pays for all of that? A strong economy. And that’s why having a strong economy over the next five years, over the next 12 months, over the next three years, is so important. If you want to have the sort of environmental programs that we are investing in, if you want to have an NDIS that is fully funded, if you want to support aged care, if you want to do all of these things, and what you need is a strong economy. Forgive me, but I thought our taxes paid for those things. Morrison is now talking about renewable energy. The crux of it seems to be: climate crisis isn’t our fault. Whether it’s the reef or our environment, I’ll tell you what’s putting the pressure on climate, is rising emissions in other countries. He says Australia is assisting other countries, like Indonesia, to transition to renewable energy. A little bit of reaction to the koala project from the Greens: More from Morrison, who has said one of the things the money will go to is protecting habitat. He also says his government will continue to “throw our arms around” koalas “in the way all Australians would want us to”: We are monitoring their health. We are investing in the world leading science in looking after our koala populations. We are also investing heavily in education... [Koalas] are often the face of the victims of wildlife of our country when [bushfires] hit. As a result, there has been an increased demand for vets who want an understanding of them. A thousand vet nurses will be supported through this program. We love to throw our arms around koalas. And they love to throw their bear arms around us when we get to have a cuddle. And it is about us continuing to throw our arms around the koala population and care for them in the way I know all Australians would want us to. And the broader wildlife population we need to support. Scott Morrison is speaking in Queensland at Australia Zoo now upon the announcement of the koala protection program. These are the practical things that you do when you care for a country, you care for the country itself and you care for its people. He claims they have invested $24m so far in koala preservation; this represents another $50m of funding. Here is a summary of the daily numbers, which will be updated as they are announced. NSW Deaths – 49 Cases – 13,354 Hospitalisations – 2,693 (186 in ICU) Victoria Deaths – 31 Cases – 12,250 Hospitalisations – 953 (114 in ICU) QLD Deaths – 12 Cases – 10,391 Hospitalisations – 833 (53 in ICU) Tasmania Deaths – 0 Cases – 683 Hospitalisations – 17 (1 in ICU) South Australia Deaths – 5 Cases – 1,740 Hospitalisations – 283 (29 in ICU) ACT Deaths – 0 Cases – 620 Hospitalisations – 61 (5 in ICU) WA Deaths – 0 Cases – 23 Hospitalisations – 0 Northern Territory Deaths – 0 Cases – 828 Hospitalisations – 111 (5 in ICU) Sorry for the press conference whiplash but federal opposition leader Anthony Albanese has just been speaking in Victoria with the shadow minister for transport and infrastructure. He’s just responded to the government’s $50m national koala recovery plan, which we mentioned earlier. It’s all very much election campaign mode (there will be no other mode until the thing is done, frankly): There is a pattern of behaviour with this government and it is about making promises and then [taking] over a decade. We saw it again with the Great Barrier Reef yesterday, they made a big splash in the paper and then you actually had the environment minister on radio yesterday morning saying we cannot tell you – even though it was on the front page of the newspapers – what it is because we have not made the announcement. It was all up in the never never. All announcement, no delivery. They have not even delivered on the previous commitments they have made with regards to the Great Barrier Reef. And we see it again today – koalas. Now, we all think koalas are cuddly and we all want to save them but, guess what, you need to take action on climate change if you’re going to save koalas ... If you’re going to protect the Great Barrier Reef and yesterday’s announcement and media release on the Great Barrier Reef, the government did not use the term climate change, not once. It is just extraordinary that this government just does not get it. It is all announcement, no delivery. The Queensland treasurer, Cameron Dick, is speaking out the front of what looks like a Woolies warehouse. He’s giving us a rundown of how Covid has affected grocery shopping. It’s a slightly odd segue from the daily case numbers, but it becomes clear it’s a nod to the strain of supply chain pressure over the last couple of months. An extract: When the pandemic started, not many Queenslanders knew about distribution centres. We went to the shop, but what we needed and then went home. And then came the great toilet paper rush ... I think it gave us a new understanding ... 30% of staff here have not been able to work because they have tested positive or a been a close contact during this Omicron wave. So many other businesses across Queensland, and every worker who comes here, does a rapid test and they do that to keep the workplace safe, to protect their mates and also to make sure Queenslanders continued to be fed and today, that isolation rate for workers has almost halved. In some days it has gone to a quarter of that. And that is a great testament to the workers here who are doing everything they can to keep themselves safe and protect that workplace. We’re hearing from the Queensland authorities now, who are reporting the state’s Covid numbers for the day. Unfortunately 12 people have died; one third of them were unvaccinated. There are 17 people in hospital in total in the state – four in the south, nine in the north and four in the north-west – and one person is in ICU. There are five people in ICU and one person is on a ventilator. It’s very good to see that zero in the “lives lost” box for ACT this morning. Jumping straight back to South Australia for a moment, and the premier, Steven Marshall, has just announced an extended economic stimulus plan for the state, which involves accomodation vouchers and “experiences” vouchers. Marshall: We are now announcing two new rounds of the great state vouchers, these have been hugely popular here in South Australia. They have been copied right around the country. So we will have a new great state voucher focused on accommodation, so the great state accommodation voucher will be $100 for the CBD, $50 outside of the CBD, and we also have a new voucher for experiences. So that is going to be hugely beneficial and I think it will give us this bounce out of the situation that we have had where many businesses have suffered from a lack of demand over the last four or six weeks. It looks a lot like those voucher packages we saw in NSW and Victoria after various lockdowns – though in this press conference Marshall appears to be taking credit for the idea. This may be true but I haven’t had a chance to fact check it yet. Happy Saturday, team! Thank you to the lovely Ben Doherty for kicking us off this morning. I’ll be with you for the rest of the morning and likely most of the afternoon too. The captain is waving from the balcony. My innings has been declared closed. Carriage of this mighty little news blog is being handed over to the indefatigable, incomparable Stephanie Convery. Thanks all for your correspondence, comments, and queries. Be well, all of you. The South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, is speaking to the media and has updated the state’s Covid-19 figures. SA has reported 1,740 cases, “the lowest we’ve had for the entire year”, and the state’s seven-day average is below 2,000 a day. There are now 22,985 cases in South Australia – “every day we see that number falling”, Marshall said. Five people have died with Covid in the last 24-hour reporting period. An Australian publisher is set to release the latest work from one of China’s most popular writers, Murong Xuecun, a book that forced him to flee his homeland. AAP reports that Murong travelled to Wuhan in April 2020 and went undercover to pen a firsthand account of life in the locked-down city as the Covid-19 pandemic unfolded. “Wuhan was like a large ship sinking into the deep sea ... few knew how people in Wuhan lived and died,” Murong has said. The author stayed in the city for almost three months before threatening phone calls prompted him to flee, and finish his manuscript hiding in the remote mountains of Sichuan province. Deadly Quiet City: Stories from Wuhan, Covid Ground Zero is billed by publisher Hardie Grant as a picture of despair and resistance, and of a regime determined to avoid responsibility. Realising he could not remain in China if his Wuhan account was ever published, Murong escaped his homeland for London late last year, carrying only a bag and a laptop. Academic Clive Hamilton, who edited the book and initially contacted Murong about the Wuhan outbreak, said he took some extraordinary risks. “There was a nerve wracking day or so when he flew from Beijing ... hour by hour we were watching his movements and praying that he would not be arrested,” he told AAP. “There is a remarkable cohort of writers in China that have taken the enormous risk of trying to reveal the truth of what happened in Wuhan and more broadly in Chinese society,” he said. “Most of them are now in jail or have disappeared.” Murong has been censured by the Chinese Communist Party in the past – in 2013 for the content of his books, and in 2016 for his writing for the New York Times. According to Hardie Grant managing director Julie Pinkham, Murong wanted his latest book published at all costs. “The author said that if he got detained or stopped from leaving China or disappeared, then he still wanted the book to be published, and that just felt very daunting,” she told AAP. But she felt a truthful account of events in Wuhan had to be told. “In terms of free speech, as a publisher, that’s important,” she said. Murong’s book includes the experiences of a doctor working on the Covid front lines, although he himself was sick. “Medical decisions were being made by Communist Party officials whose concern was protecting the party and their own backsides, and overruling the doctors,” Hamilton said. In 2018, Hardie Grant published Silent Invasion, Hamilton’s account of Chinese influence in Australia, after his long-time publisher Allen and Unwin backed out. Then too, Hardie Grant decided to go ahead despite the risks. Pinkham says publishing on China has generally been a success - and not only that, the books have come off Chinese printing presses. “The books have been commercially successful, there is a broad audience that is looking for information that is researched from a credible source,” she said. Murong’s books include Leave Me Alone: A Novel of Chengdu and Dancing Through Red Dust. Deadly Quiet City will be released on March 11, with a launch slated for Adelaide Writers’ Week. Massive day for women’s sport. The one-off Ashes Test match between Australia and England is exquisitely poised (if fractionally in Australia’s favour – England will have to bat last). Two-time surfing world champion Tyler Wright begins her season at Hawaii’s Pipeline. And, of course, Ash Barty. The world No 1 will attempt to become the first Australian in 44 years to win the Australian Open tennis championship. AAP’s Murray Wenzel in Brisbane reports on Wright’s admiration for Barty: After a childhood spent unaware of many would-be heroes, Tyler Wright is just glad nobody’s missing Ash Barty. The two-time world surf champion will begin her season at Hawaii’s Billabong Pro Pipeline on Sunday, buoyed by compatriot Barty’s surge to Saturday’s Australian Open final. The Banzai Pipeline event will be a win for women in the sport as they share the famous wave with the men from round one the first time. The World Surf League announced equal pay in 2019, another proud moment for trailblazer Wright and her colleagues. This year the Tour will welcome a record five rookies, who Wright hopes “don’t have to have the fights we’ve had to fight”. “Representation matters; the women athletes have always been there, it’s just that they’ve never been seen,” she told AAP. “Even for me, I haven’t heard of so many incredible female athletes, just because they never got the coverage. “That’s a detriment not only to women, but society. You can learn so much off female athletes because we’ve done more with less.” Wright is pleased all the eyes are on Barty now, almost two million viewers tuning into her semi-final victory on Thursday. Her dominance has transcended the sport, PGA Tour star Marc Leishman raving about her form before he teed off in California this week. Samantha Stosur and Alicia Molik can’t believe how easy she’s made it look while Wright’s admiration of the humble world No 1 is beginning to sound familiar. “Oh yeah, she’s a gun; an incredible athlete but more an incredible human,” Wright said. “You can’t get a more top-class athlete in Australia. All the respect in the world for Ash, how she carries herself and she’s exactly who she is. “She said the other day ‘all I can do is be me, that’s the best I can do’. “I think that resonates at the moment; just be who you are. That’s an incredibly important message.” The death of an 85-year-old man who reportedly succumbed to hypothermia after falling and spending nine hours sprawled and ignored on a bitterly cold street in central Paris has prompted grief, anger and incredulity in France and beyond. I watched the movie Back to the Outback with my kids last night, featuring an animated koala named Pretty Boy voiced by the inimitable Tim Minchin. Very sweet film. Terrific Australian cast. Kids loved it. Save Pretty Boy. Save all Koalas. From Tracey Ferrier at AAP: The federal government will spend an extra $50m over the next four years to pull east coast koalas back from the brink. The money will underpin a national koala recovery plan, promised after the devastating 2020 bushfires. In June last year a federal panel of threatened species experts recommended the marsupial’s status be upgraded from vulnerable to endangered in each of the three jurisdictions. WWF Australia, the International Fund for Animal Welfare, and Humane Society International have long been pushing for the change, saying the species is in desperate need of greater protection if it is to survive. Koala populations in NSW have declined by between 33 and 61% since 2001 and at least 6400 were killed in the Black Summer bushfires. In 2020, a NSW parliamentary inquiry found koalas would likely become extinct before 2050 without urgent government intervention to prevent habitat loss. Queensland’s koala population has dropped by at least 50 per cent since 2001 due to deforestation, drought and bushfires. Prime minister Scott Morrison said the $50m in funding will go to initiatives including restoring habitat, monitoring populations and boosting research into koala health. “Koalas are one of Australia’s most-loved and best-recognised icons, both here at home and across the world, and we are committed to protecting them for generations to come,” he told ABC News. Just a note of clarification on the NSW Covid-19 numbers from today. The 49 deaths recorded today is the highest single-day death toll for the state over the course of this pandemic. On Friday, the state notified 70 deaths in its daily figures, but 35 of those deaths were of people who died in aged care homes earlier in January. Deaths and severe illness continues to disproportionately affect the unvaccinated. Just under a fortnight ago, the prime minster said of the refugees detained inside Melbourne’s Park Hotel: “It’s not clear that to my information that someone in that case is actually a refugee.” That is untrue. The majority of those held in the hotel have had the refugee status formally recognised. Australia is legally obliged to protect them. Below is a powerful riposte to the prime minister. From a person who arrived in Australia as a refugee as a child, and remains in detention after nearly nine years. From Mehdi, the voice from those hidden inside the Park Hotel. There have been 49 Covid-related deaths in NSW and 13,354 new cases. It is the highest number of deaths in a single day for the entire pandemic. More than 1,500 Victorians have sought emergency assistance and thousands are without power, as a clean-up begins following days of wild weather across the state. Thunderstorms brought heavy rain, hail and wind, which battered Melbourne on Friday afternoon and into the evening. A severe weather warning, which has since been cancelled, alerted Victorians to damaging winds, heavy rainfall and flash flooding due to a “cluster of strong storms” moving across the state. Victoria’s State Emergency Service has received more than 1,600 calls for help across the state, including increasing reports of cars entering flood water, building damage, flooding and trees down. More than 7,000 Victorians were without power on Saturday morning. Melbourne has received about 38.6mm of rain in the past 24 hours, with more showers forecast for Saturday. Flood warnings have been issued for a number of rivers, including Melbourne’s Yarra River, Dandenong Creek, Bunyip and Werribee rivers. Flash flooding hit Werribee, in Melbourne’s west, Ballarat and the Brisbane Ranges. Federation at work? From our NSW and Victoria state politics bureaux, Michael McGowan and Belinda Kolovos report on the bonhomie between the premiers, not ideologically aligned, of Australia’s two largest states. Listening to the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, speaking on Friday, you’d be forgiven for thinking Victoria was a new member of his cabinet. Perrottet said the NSW government had “worked alongside” Victoria to deliver thousands of rapid antigen tests before schools resume next week. They were “the only states in the country” that could boast as much, he said. On the business support package likely to be announced in the coming days Perrottet again referenced Victoria – the NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, was working “very closely” with his southern counterparts “because we’re in a very, very similar situation,” he said. The bonhomie is apparently shared. On Thursday the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said the two premiers “work together as close as we can”. Temperatures over the Great Barrier Reef in December were the highest on record with “alarming” levels of heat that have put the ocean jewel on the verge of another mass bleaching of corals, according to analysis from US government scientists seen by Guardian Australia. There will be a federal election this year. May is unbackable as the favoured month for it to be held. But make no mistake, the campaign has begun. Political editor Katharine Murphy has been on the road with a man who wants to be prime minister, and asks two questions: Is Anthony Albanese ready to be prime minister? And, if he is, can he win? (It’s first-class reportage and analysis, vintage Murpharoo). Good morning/afternoon/evening, wherever these words might find you. Ben Doherty here, bravely helming Guardian Australia’s liveblog this Saturday morning. We have much to cover: there will be Covid updates from around the country after Australia reported a record number of Covid deaths yesterday, with 98 fatalities nationwide and 39 in Victoria alone. The flood emergency in South Australia could worsen this weekend, after flash flooding also hit parts of Victoria and New South Wales. There is much to contemplate on arenas sporting. The Ashes Test between the England and Australian women’s sides enters its third day, poised in Australia’s favour (but not irreparably so). And at the tennis complex formerly known as Flinders Park (showing my age there), we will have the Australian Open women’s final between Australian Ash Barty and American Danielle Collins. If Barty wins, she will become the first Australian woman to win the Australian Open in 44 years. That will be followed by the men’s doubles final – an all-Australian affair: Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis versus Matt Ebden and Max Purcell.As in the three previous women’s Test matches going back to 2019, rain intervened to derail an emerging contest and to stifle the chances of a result. The second and third sessions of the third day at Manuka Oval were washed away, reprieving Australia from the precarity of two early wickets for 12 runs in the third innings. That was an overall lead of 52, after England captain Heather Knight turned her overnight 127 into an unbeaten masterpiece of 168 to close the first-innings deficit to 40 runs, with her team all out for 297. Resuming at 235 for eight to start the day, Knight’s innings continued to get help from Sophie Ecclestone, and Ecclestone kept getting help from luck. Her first ball of the day was dropped at second slip from Ellyse Perry, and another nick from Tahlia McGrath 10 overs later followed suit. Australian captain Meg Lanning was the one who couldn’t hold on. Ecclestone didn’t score many herself but stayed in while Knight did, their partnership reaching an even 100 runs before McGrath got the No 10 batter leg before wicket. It was England’s highest ninth-wicket stand, and the third best in all women’s Tests. Having moved within 68 of Australia’s score, Knight would have known that getting bowled out would have its advantages. With time in the match ticking down, conceding a lead might make Australia more likely to have time to set a target that England could chase. Alternatively, using good bowling conditions on a dark overcast morning with a new ball might let England rack up wickets and control the fourth-innings target themselves. So Knight and last batter Kate Cross swung hard before Cross on 11 pulled Perry to fine leg, caught after a sensational run and dive by Darcie Brown for the second time in the innings. Cross ran from the field to let Knight enjoy a leisurely walk off alone, raising her bat for those 168 runs, in an innings where Ecclestone made 34 and the next best was 15. Then it was time for the Katherine Brunt show again, as five wickets in the first innings became seven in the match. Brunt had taken Alyssa Healy’s edge for a duck on day one thanks to a loose drive, but completed a pair for Healy third ball of the innings with an impeccable delivery, angling in before swinging away, leaping off a length, and grabbing the crisp edge of a defensive shot. Fifth over of the day, Brunt got one to seam into the left-handed Rachael Haynes, taking the inside edge onto her thigh pad for Tammy Beaumont at short leg to take a smart left-handed catch. Ellyse Perry came to join the injured Beth Mooney with four minutes to go before lunch, the light disappearing, Brunt with two wickets for four runs, and England every chance to further apply the squeeze. But the first few drops of rain spared Perry from facing a ball, lunch was taken early, and the players never got back on. They will do what they can to create a match if the fourth day’s weather allows, but from here it’s most likely that the only useful pressure to apply will be on administrators, to make them belatedly stop this farce of denying women’s matches a fifth day once and for all.One day, Osman Yousefzada’s parents removed him from school for six months and took him back to where they were born, on the banks of the Indus. His father had often returned, but his mother had not, and while Osman gazes at jewellery-laden women, at villages that are a “puzzle of alleyways in permanent shadow”, at rounds of Kalashnikov bullets fired into the air at weddings in these border territories between Pakistan and Afghanistan, she caught up on her dead. Taken to England as a young girl, with only a few hours’ warning, she had not been able to say goodbye. Osman, who in England often wondered at how his vivid mother was intermittently flooded with sadness, watches her at her family’s graves. “My heart was inside hers: finally, I understood the crying.” One of the many arresting things about this arresting memoir is the way in which Yousefzada manages information: like Leo in the LP Hartley novel that lends his book its title, Yousefzada is, for most of it, a child. He sees what a perceptive child sees, which is not the same as understanding it (though of course the reader understands, and that generates tension). And what he sees is Balsall Heath, Birmingham, in the 1980s, when housing was cheap enough for recent immigrants – West Indians, Rastafarians, Ugandans, Bangladeshis, Hindus, Sikhs, Muslims, Pakistanis, Irish. Ali Campbell from UB40 lives at the end of the street; sex workers tout for custom in front of mosques. Yousefzada’s own orthodox Pathan community is “the most covered and the least integrated in south Birmingham”, the men and women within this separation strictly separated again. But childhood gives him (and us) an all-areas pass. He is a skilled guide, building a rich world of hiding places, of smells, feet at prayer – and clothes. Yousefzada’s mother was a gifted seamstress; it was, writes her son, “like watching a magician”. He is now a designer who has dressed A-listers from Beyoncé to Lady Gaga, and an artist who has exhibited at the Whitechapel Gallery and the V&amp;A, but this is where it began – watching his mother cut patterns freehand, embroidering cuffs and necklines, weighing up fabrics and colours. Generations of children have dressed Barbies for role-play; only a handful will have used offcuts of green devoré. As he grew older, he began to see what this gift meant to his mother: self-expression, pride in personal achievement, and community. She could not go out, but all sorts of women came to her. Often they stayed, and talked. Men were drab, distant, frightening, but to Osman, increasingly his mother’s confidante, the world of women was a “full-blown epic, of tragedy, pathos, colour, jewellery and clothes”. He began to be sent on errands. He picked fabrics, chose shoes, gained a reputation for discerning taste. And brought back news of the outside world, which, apart from the corner shop, F Allen’s, was for him largely non-white. Not even at school did this change: the brown and Black kids were streamed into lower sets regardless of ability (and Yousefzada’s was high). But when the other world broke through, it did so with a vengeance: Thatcher’s complaints about being “swamped” by immigration, marauding skinheads, graffiti reading “Pakis go home”. This begins to complicate Yousefzada’s understanding of the masculinity he fears – his father’s violence and inaccessibility, the religiosity of the bearded believers, or “Bushmen” as he called them. These were men brought over to labour, many of whom worked decades without a holiday. Now factories were closing, serving them “with redundancy papers they couldn’t read”, and they retreated into worship and “the consolation of our culture, our dignity”. There is a moving moment when an English-born son asks why they have to fly a recently deceased man to Pakistan when all his family are in Britain. “He needs to be buried … in the earth of his birth,” comes the reply. “In the land where he was respected, not where he was spat upon.” Yousefzada, who mourns his ejection, at 12, from the women’s quarters, “where the joy and colour came from”, is honest about how long it took him, as a male, to notice the effect this religiosity had on his sisters, who were taken out of school at 10 or 11 and confined to the house. He remembers a woman unable to comfort a son dying in the street because she was not allowed to cross her own threshold; the terrible fates of those accused of being barren, or “loose”. He tells these tragedies plainly, letting them speak for themselves in this narrative full of lovely lines, often further lifted by a light irony – a man “visibly inflating with sagacity”, for instance, or another, a religious purist partial to attar of saffron, musk and jasmine, who “always appeared to be there even when he wasn’t”. When the Bushmen run the pimps and prostitutes out of their neighbourhood, Yousefzada registers that he misses one girl in particular, who always said hello. “However, God’s work was done, and the house prices began to rise.” “I have cleansed some of my feelings in this ritual writing,” Yousefzada notes in his acknowledgments, and the effect when writing about himself, about his escape to Soas University of London, then Central Saint Martins and Cambridge, can be an elusiveness, a curiously distant affect, reported rather than felt. What really lingers are the vividnesses of his childhood world, the struggles and griefs of his parents, and especially of his mother, to whose life he bears loving witness. • The Go-Between by Osman Yousefzada is published (Canongate Books Ltd, £14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer order a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The uncertainties of the pandemic might have skewered plans to host a hybrid festival – it was originally hoped to combine an in-person event in Park City, Utah with an online option – but certain Sundance truths remain inviolable. Key among them is the fact that even without the heady effect of all that mountain air, and despite a selection this year that is unlikely to go down as one for the ages, Sundance buzz remains a powerful force with the potential to propel a small film to big results. This year, however, there is little that has combined crowd-pleasing credentials with critical consensus. Perhaps the main contender for crossover success is Cha Cha Real Smooth, the second film from American Gen Z wunderkind Cooper Raiff (Shithouse), who wrote, directed and stars in a sweet, funny and almost painfully earnest drama about a directionless 22-year-old college leaver (an endearingly puppyish Raiff) who falls hard for Dakota Johnson’s thirtysomething divorcee with an autistic daughter. On paper, it’s an archetypal Sundance movie – emotionally engaging, honest, with just a hint of grit – but my gut says that some slightly sniffy reviews have misjudged the broad appeal of this one. It’s a rare film that manages to capture a specific generational angst while also connecting across the board. It helps that the chemistry between Raiff and Johnson is explosive. But then so is the chemistry between Johnson and Sonoya Mizuno, who plays her best friend in Am I OK?, a gentle comedy directed by Tig Notaro and Stephanie Allynne, written by Lauren Pomerantz, about a young woman who belatedly realises that she’s attracted to girls. On recent evidence, it seems likely that Johnson could be cast opposite a loaf of bread and still melt the screen with the force of her languid, smouldering gaze. Cha Cha Real Smooth is one of several films that deal with one of this year’s recurring Sundance themes: age-gap romances. Markedly less benign and cosy is Palm Trees and Power Lines, the accomplished and profoundly uncomfortable feature debut from Brooklyn-based (female) director Jamie Dack. Featuring a revelatory performance from newcomer Lily McInerny, it follows 17-year-old Lea – disconnected, bored and neglected – as she embarks on a romance with Tom (Jonathan Tucker), a man twice her age. At least she thinks it’s a romance. What becomes sickeningly clear as the film progresses is that Tom is grooming her. It’s not an easy watch – one extended shot in a hotel room is almost unbearable – but this is undoubtedly one of the festival’s standouts. Another picture that deals with age gaps, albeit less successfully, is Lena Dunham’s belated follow-up to her 2010 mumblecore breakthrough Tiny Furniture. Sharp Stick follows a naive young woman on a journey of sexual self-discovery, but its queasy tone drew a collective “yikes” from most critics. There has been a strong showing of British productions this year, notably Ed Perkins’s The Princess, an archival documentary telling the story of Diana, Princess of Wales, entirely through news clips, period commentary and amateur footage. It’s a similar approach to that employed by Asif Kapadia in Amy, and it brings freshness and intimacy to a story that’s been told and retold innumerable times. Also impressive is Living, Oliver Hermanus’s classy, 1950s, London-set remake of Akira Kurosawa’s Ikiru, starring Bill Nighy as a buttoned-up civil servant who belatedly finds a purpose and joy in life after having received a terminal cancer diagnosis. With costumes by Sandy Powell, this is one of the most handsome pictures in the Sundance selection and seems like a potential contender for awards next year. The standout for me, though, is a micro-budget comedy drama from Wales, about a lonely inventor who creates a robot from bits of an old washing machine. Brian and Charles is written by and stars David Earl and Chris Hayward, the latter enclosed in an unwieldy box to play the robot. It’s an oddball delight of a film that takes its silliness utterly seriously and is all the funnier for it. In a Sundance programme that has had no shortage of high-quality performances, I was particularly taken by Aubrey Plaza’s career-best turn in John Patton Ford’s propulsive debut, Emily the Criminal. She plays a young woman sinking into debt, but whose criminal record prevents her from working at anything more lucrative than a food delivery service. A combination of desperation and inclination means that when she gets the opportunity to make quick money through credit card fraud, she grabs it. And she’s good at it. A taut, tough little thriller, this is a perfect showcase for Plaza’s hard-as-nails physicality and irresistible bad-girl minxiness. The real discovery of this year’s festival, however, is one of its more ambiguous and unusual films. You Won’t Be Alone, by the Australian writer-director Goran Stolevski, is set in 19th-century Macedonia, in a culture steeped in folklore and superstition. A child whose soul is stolen by a witch rejects the path that has been assigned her, instead taking the form of a series of people and animals (including Noomi Rapace, at one point) in an attempt to relearn what it is to be human. The shape-shifting poetry of the film, its visual lyricism and the use of an enigmatic voiceover have drawn comparisons with the work of Terrence Malick. But in this case, references to other film-makers don’t do the picture justice. You Won’t Be Alone is thrillingly and emphatically its own thing, whatever form it chooses to take.Paula Robinson lives on a neat suburban cul-de-sac of 1930s houses that also contains the remains of a gateway to a mighty Roman fort once occupied by the Asturian cavalry regiment from northern Spain. Around the corner is the Temple of Antenociticus. Last year archaeologists found ancient pottery and deer bones in Robinson’s garden, which is close to one of Newcastle’s busiest roads, West Road. Exciting but not totally surprising as the house is on the site of Condercum, a huge hilltop outpost of Hadrian’s Wall. All of which, campaigners argue, can be easily missed by the estimated 10,000 walkers who annually follow the 84-mile Hadrian’s Wall trail across the north of England. When the trail gets close to the wonders of the surviving wall it veers away from the city’s west end down to the River Tyne before reaching them. “I’m sure the trail doesn’t go down the West Road because they thought the river was prettier,” says Chi Onwurah, the Labour MP for Newcastle upon Tyne Central. “It may well be prettier, but it’s not where the wall was.” Onwurah is due to bring the matter up in a Westminster Hall debate on Tuesday, calling for the trail to be rerouted. She says it is an important issue given the synergies between the area in Roman times and how it is today. In Hadrian’s day the area was urban and multicultural “which is also how the west end is today,” she says. “We need to celebrate Hadrian’s Wall being in the west end of Newcastle and by doing that you’ll understand more about Britain in Roman times and also more about Britain today.” Hadrian’s Wall this year celebrates its 1,900th birthday, marked by a yearlong series of events under the banner of the 1900 festival. The perfect time, Onwurah believes, to right a wrong. Precisely why the trail does not go down West Road is unclear, though it is fair to say a walk along the road – with its constant traffic and litter problems – is not everyone’s idea of a fun day out. Onwurah says parts of the west end had some of the highest levels of multiple deprivation in the UK. “It is a vibrant, multicultural but yes economically deprived area of the city,” she says. “There may well have been an element of snobbishness in the past as there was about many aspects of our cultural history, but I think the 1900 celebrations are a really great opportunity to represent the wall as it was.” Onwurah will on Tuesday submit a series of requests to the government to better promote the wall in Newcastle. “This is about making sure the story of our nation from Roman times represents our present as well as our history.” The MP’s intervention is welcome news to Rob Higgins, a local councillor, who is out walking a friend’s yorkshire terrier, Daisy, on the impressive foundations of Denton Hall turret on the corner of West Road and the A1. He remembers the trail coming to Newcastle two decades ago. “We were never consulted,” he says. “I think it was about trying to have a route which went along the river and the main arteries should be avoided.” He too thinks there might be an element of snobbishness but stresses: “Some of the stories about the west end of Newcastle are grossly exaggerated.” Higgins says Roman forts such as Vindolanda and Housesteads get all the Hadrian’s Wall attention and “to our frustration the sections in Newcastle get forgotten about”. He is keen to ensure the west end is a key player in the 1900 festival. “We’ve already got some really exciting projects involving people from the local community and schools, which will not only commemorate the event but highlight the history of the wall along the West Road.” Overall responsibility for the trail lies with Natural England, sponsored by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. Defra, however, says decisions on the route are a matter for the trail partnership. Northumberland national park authority, which manages the route and is one of the trail partners, has been approached for comment. Robinson, a retired Northumbria police employee, says her estate in Benwell does get tourists, but many more would be welcome. “It would be lovely to have more people who appreciate history. “The wall here is everywhere, the whole area. I don’t know why it’s not called Little Italy.” • This article’s main image caption was amended on 31 January 2022 to correct the spelling of Denton Turret.Period features were conspicuously absent from Becky Nolan and Barny Read’s flat-hunting wishlist. The couple, who run the Peanut Vendor, a 20th-century design store in east London, were living in a Victorian flat but decided a more modern space would better showcase their collections of abstract art and esoteric furniture. “We were ready for a change from bay windows and wonky walls; we wanted to try an art gallery-style white box,” Read says. They found a two-bedroom flat built in the 1990s to rent and were hooked by its two small terraces, front and back. The flat itself was uninspiring. “It was nondescript and a bit tired, with lots of magnolia,” Nolan recalls. But a quick peep under the beige carpets revealed a concrete screed floor: “We thought that had potential,” Read says. With their landlady’s approval, they painted the walls brilliant white, resin-coated the concrete floor and removed and stored the existing fittings, “so we can reinstate them when we leave”. They swapped faux Victorian metal door handles for vintage Bakelite ones, fussy curtains for crisp white linen, and replaced pendant lights with mid-century glass designs. These “sit flush against the ceiling to maximise the sense of height and give continuity to each room,” Read says. The couple’s landlady had been planning to replace the kitchen and bathroom floors, so the couple were able to steer her towards terracotta quarry tiles, which match the tiles on the canal-side terrace. But there have been compromises. “There were limits to what we could do,” Nolan says. “We just have to live with kitchen and bathroom fittinngs that wouldn’t be our choice.” When they moved in, the plan was to create an uncluttered look. “We had big ideas about being minimalist, having a lot of empty white space,” Nolan recalls with a laugh. “But we are natural collectors: we love art and are always finding new pieces.” Much of it is surprisingly large for a small flat, such as a big abstract painting that sits alongside a low-slung 1970s sofa by Vico Magistretti, or an amorphic ceramic sculpture in the small hallway. “Whether it’s sculpture or a painting, we like to have some huge things that mess with the sense of scale,” Nolan says. “It actually makes the room feel bigger.” With its white walls and focus on art and sculpture, the flat does have a contemplative, gallery-like atmosphere, but tactile rugs and warm woods prevent it from feeling sterile. The couple’s choice of pieces to sell at the Peanut Vendor is just as carefully thought out. “When we’re looking for stock, we ask ourselves if we would have this in our home,” Read says. In a crowded market of mid-century design dealers, the couple are constantly striving to find unexpected and challenging pieces, from a post-modern Italian armchair with a red leather sunburst motif to chunky wooden chairs. “These one-off pieces always seem to sell quickly,” Nolan says. They source many of their pieces at trade-only fairs in France, where dealers gather from across Europe. “We go to flea markets too, if there’s time. We used to go for a lot of Scandinavian design; now we’re into Italian modern and post-modern pieces.” Their thoughtful edit has attracted an appreciative following among influential interior designers such as Kelly Wearstler and Faye Toogood, who snap up vintage pieces to bring depth to their projects. The Peanut Vendor name comes from an old Cuban jazz song. “We just liked it and didn’t want anything that tied us down to a particular genre or era,” says Read. Starting the business, in 2008, was a leap of faith for the couple, who were then just a year into their relationship. “We began with a small shop and spent time looking at what other dealers were doing,” Read says. “We saw that many just had a basic holding page website. I think our big strength was to have a proper online shop from the start.” In the early days, they had to bolster their finances by working in pubs. “It took us about four years to really learn the business side,” Nolan says. In 2015 they upgraded to a large showroom. It’s open by appointment, which frees them up for buying trips in France and Italy. “We’ve had no problem selling over the past two years, but it’s been harder to buy stock and, with Brexit, it’s also more of a challenge,” Read says. “Now we need to arrange shipping, permits and paperwork, which many of our dealers just aren’t set up for. It’s will make everything more complicated, and expensive.” On a more positive note, Nolan has used the lockdowns to become an accomplished ceramicist. “A friend bought me a course at Turning Earth studio a few years ago. I loved it, but I didn’t get a chance to touch clay again until the first lockdown. It’s very soothing.” She began at the dining table, taking her pieces to a local potter for firing, but quickly outgrew this way of working, so the couple transformed their guest bedroom into a small studio, complete with an old portable kiln that they wheel outside to use. Inspired by traditional pots from ancient Greece and Africa, as well as the work of artist Cy Twombly and potter Magdalene Odundo, Nolan documents her efforts on Instagram and has started to sell pieces online. Within 12 months her pots had appeared in Elle Decoration. The ceramics sit happily within the mix in the flat: “I love creating new vignettes of pieces: it keeps things fresh and inspiring. I could go for a Victorian flat again, but for now we really like the contemporary feel. It suits the art and furniture we love, and we’re just enjoying this pleasing white cube of a space.”At least 10 times a month, I receive a message on social media from an anxious woman unsure about which products she should ditch while pregnant. This is an inevitable consequence of the boom in active skincare ingredients and its resulting landslide of misinformation, coupled with US pregnancy websites and apps so litigation-averse that they seemingly deem everything but air a hazard to the unborn child. If you’re newly with-child and keen to rejig your routine, there is not very much that becomes off-limits. As with anything in pregnancy (weightlifting and sushi bingeing, for example), the main thing is not to choose now as the time to start something dramatically new. For instance, if you’re already using a vitamin C serum (considered safe in pregnancy), carry on. But it’s not hugely sensible to introduce a strong one from scratch at a time when your skin may be more sensitive (sunscreens are safe, but if you’re sensitive to synthetic SPF, switch to mineral SPF for a bit). Exfoliating acids are another category that sparks fear, but this is unfounded. Alpha hydroxy acids, such as glycolic and lactic, are fine; beta hydroxy acid (salicylic) is not recommended in large quantities, but you won’t find those quantities in any over-the-counter skincare product. So your daily salicylic toner is fine. A chemical peel in a doctor’s office is not the most sensible (or likely) decision. I’d probably skip a BHA body lotion (uncommon anyway), if you slather on daily and abundantly. There is a relatively short list of products that should not be used: retinoids in all forms (retinol, retinyl palmitate, tretinoin, retinaldehyde and so on) are out until breastfeeding is finished. Pigmentation-busters hydroquinone and arbutin are also off the menu. (Azalaic acid and niacinamide, both effective on discolouration issues so common in pregnancy, are green-lit.) Finally, there is absolutely no good reason to switch from synthetic skincare products to natural in pregnancy (essential oils can actually irritate sensitive skin). It’s also worth remembering that the reason many things are not recommended in pregnancy is not because we know them to be dangerous, but because we hardly ever test anything on pregnant people and so have no way of knowing. And that none of the above is to replace your own doctor’s advice. Only they know the particulars of your health and pregnancy.Dave Ryding says he has done his job now. By achieving his country’s first victory in an Alpine World Cup event, he has brought British skiing in from the cold. “I’ve always said to the younger generation that it’s possible, just work hard,” he says, “but I don’t have to say that any more. I don’t have to say it’s doable having never done it. Now I just have to put on the video and say: watch that.” Ryding’s feat in thrashing through the classic slalom at Kitzbühel last weekend, on perhaps the most difficult course in the sport, was the best ever by a Briton. It drew worldwide attention – “Ein Brite? Ein Brite!” was the headline in Germany’s Süddeutsche Zeitung – and came one hundred years and a day after Sir Arnold Lunn invented the sport of slalom racing itself on the slopes of Mürren in Switzerland. There was one more milestone, too, however: at the age of 35, Ryding became the oldest winner of a World Cup slalom in history. “Sitting here right now I have not one part of my body that is aching. I don’t know if that’s a miracle or not,” says Ryding, speaking in the brief window before his next challenge, a flight to Beijing and a fourth Winter Olympics. “Touch wood, I’ve never had a big injury. I feel healthy. I follow, not a strict diet, but a good diet and I don’t know if this helped, but I didn’t ski much when I was growing, so I didn’t smash my body when it was maturing. Maybe when I stop then the niggles will show more, when the muscles aren’t holding everything together.” Ryding lives in the borough where he was born, Chorley in Lancashire, though he also runs a coffee shop, the Boskins Cafe, in Preston. He says his parents – Shirley, a hairdresser, and Carl, a gas engineer – raised a family that had a smile on its face. “They weren’t really bothered about these materialistic things,” Ryding says, “they just wanted their kids to have fun and enjoy their upbringing.” Part of that involved regular trips to the dry ski slope in Pendle 30 miles away, where Dave went from the age of six and soon got hooked. While his rivals in elite competition have been hurtling down mountains since they could stand, it wasn’t until he was a teenager that Ryding could afford a trip to ski on actual snow, the result of parental scrimping. “They sacrificed loads. They buried themselves financially for me,” he recalls. “I remember we had a sofa, they got it for a wedding gift, so it was already 25 years old. Then one day it broke. My dad just put a piece of plywood underneath it and cracked on. That really brought it home to me.” As much as he thrills to memories of watching British skiers such as Alain Baxter or Chemmy Alcott, with Baxter now working on his team, Ryding’s parents are his guiding role models. In fact cracking on, making do and mending, could be the secret of his success. While he received funding support from GB Snowsport, Ryding lived with his parents until he was 30, working out in a shed his dad built for him and doing interval training over clothes props. It saved money but also time and, Ryding insists, allowed him to maintain an element of fun in the otherwise gruelling process of training. “It’s not felt like a chore all the time, which is probably why I’m still happy to do it,” he says. Now he has his own place with his girlfriend, Mandy Dirkzwager, herself a former skier, but he made sure there was a garage he could convert into a gym, does his aerobic work in the local Park Run and can be found practising his turns in the street. “The funniest thing,” he says, “is when I’m doing some training on rollerblades. I’m going around the cones and my neighbours just have to laugh because a 35-year-old on rollerskates, you shouldn’t have to have that on your estate. But fortunately I’m a skier and they know that, and they certainly know now that the rollerblading wasn’t for nothing.” The Winter Olympics starts next Friday, with the men’s slalom scheduled to begin on 16 February. Ryding says he is ready for the “closed loop” quarantine system installed by Beijing, bunking up close to the British bobsleigh team who share a similar sense of humour. He’s ready, too, for the dry fake snow, which is closer to the old slopes of Pendle than the Alps. He’s also hopeful of his chances of improving on his previous ninth-placed finish (the best British performance in 30 years), boosted by his own triumph but also the lack of a stand-out rival. “There have been six different World Cup races this year and six different winners. I don’t think any other sport is quite like it,” he says. “I can do it. I’ve done it once, let’s see if if I can do it again, but don’t forget the process that has got you there.” More late-blooming success and who knows, but at this point in his career retirement is not far from Ryding’s mind. He wants a family – “I don’t think there’s a better feeling than when you see kids running around enjoying themselves, so I would love to one day, but whether they’re skiers, I’d have to seriously consider that” – and there’s also the business of Boskins Cafe to consider. “I know now what life after skiing will be like and that’s one of the reasons why I did it,” he says of his journey as a barista. “I also know how hard it is so I don’t know if I’ll be pouring the coffees every day or doing more of the background work. But I’m an ambitious guy and maybe, I don’t know, this sounds nuts, but I’d like take on these Starbucks. I’d like to make a British one, make something the Brits are proud of.” When you’ve done it once, after all, it must be tempting to try again.Love, power, agony and death – throughout its history opera has been cherished for its displays of unbridled passion. But for those enacting scenes of murder, sex and sometimes even rape, words like consent and agency have rarely come up. Now, in what’s thought to be a British first, the Royal Opera House (ROH) is consulting with Ita O’Brien – an intimacy coordinator who ensures actors feel comfortable during such scenes – for Katie Mitchell’s new production of Theodora, opening on Monday. George Frideric Handel’s oratorio – about a Christian martyr who is forced into prostitution, threatened with rape and executed by Roman authorities – first premiered at the Covent Garden venue 250 years ago. For Julia Bullock, a soprano who plays the titular role, it’s a symbolic and vital moment. “I’ve been in so many rehearsal spaces where usually it’s the performers who are making complaints about scenes, but to have that preemptively addressed was such a relief,” she said. “In opera, there’s so much attention given to the craftsmanship of the music, the set design, the direction of the singing and choreography, in order to allow human moments to become amplified on stage. But that also means we need to take care of the human beings who are embodying those moments.” Bullock said she’s had a number of challenging experiences in the past, when she was put at unnecessary physical and psychological risk during intimate scenes. “One of the first things Ita talked about was how only those directly involved in an intimate scene should be in the room for its staging. But I remember during my first ever intimate performance, my partner and I were being witnessed by 50 people, and the conductor was asking, ‘Shouldn’t Julia be simulating more noises on stage?’” And where traditionally, she’s been left alone with a partner to explore how to stage a scene, now those conversations take place before anyone takes to the stage. “You explore whether a man can touch your breasts, whether it’s comfortable. You go step by step over parts of the body that may be exposed or are going to be subjected to intimate touch, allowing your body to register if there’s anything that is hypersensitive, or if there’s a place where you might potentially be triggered.” Since the revelations against Harvey Weinstein, intimacy coordinators have become more commonplace on sets. But while scenes on TV and film can often be completed in a couple of takes, a live show is repeatedly played out in front of thousands of people each evening. O’Brien, who has worked on hit TV shows including I May Destroy You, Normal People and It’s A Sin, as well as on recent plays such as Spring Awakening at the Almeida and Manor at the National Theatre, said the scale was wholly different. “There’s consent each and every day. You might agree one day that you’re very happy to kiss lip to lip, and then you develop a cold sore, so it’s not suitable any more. So you explore what the moment is about, different ways to tell the same story,” she said. “There’s been concern that if you bring in guidelines, you dumb down creativity, but actually it’s the opposite because you invite that open conversation.” But even for O’Brien, who has trained as a ballet dancer and worked as an actor herself, opera has been a learning curve. “For example, you have to make sure the positions you put performers in doesn’t interrupt their beautiful sound.” “Opera,” she added, was “the most heightened art form, and because it was mostly written from history and mostly by men, power plays are a big part of the narrative. So to help bring female empowerment to Theodora has been really rewarding.” Oliver Mears, Director of Opera at ROH said the company was “committed” to making intimacy direction an integral part of future productions. “When staging new commissions and reimagining repertory operas, it is critical that artists, creatives and ROH staff feel safe and supported,” he said. “Many of the most celebrated operas explore themes of exploitation, sexual violence, and abuse of power, and it is vital to us that we approach these topics sensitively and with care in the rehearsal room, ensuring our artists can perform at their best.”It was September 2009, and I was anxiously waiting to head off to university. My friends had already all left and my small home town in Wales felt even more claustrophobic than before. It was also the month I downloaded a relatively new music streaming service called Spotify. I was immediately in heaven. I’d sneaked in just before they ended a free sign-up offer and so, for precisely zero pounds, I suddenly had access to a musical library that had previously been unthinkable. I made a playlist titled, very imaginatively, “September 09”, and added all the songs I was listening to at the time. The soundtrack to my small-town angst? Frank Turner’s This Town Ain’t Big Enough for the One of Me and Bright Eyes’ First Day of My Life. I soon made it to university and, even now, listening to December 09 (Emmy the Great, LCD Soundsystem, Frightened Rabbit) gives me an almost painful pang of nostalgia for evenings in my grotty but much-loved student bedroom, with the new friends I’d made. If I’d been born a few years earlier, I’m sure I’d have been painstakingly making mixtapes (I still remember my excitement at about the age of 10 when we got a CD burner and I could produce my own compilation discs), but Spotify let me carefully curate playlists quickly and easily. Sure, it wasn’t quite as romantic as a custom-made cassette with a hand-drawn cover, but it had its own charms. Looking back through the playlists, which I’ve kept going to the present day, is like reading a map of my experiences. You can spot heartbreaks, where the playlists are dominated by sad indie music; you can track the recovery, when strong female artists such as Amy Winehouse, Self Esteem and Julia Jacklin start to dominate. The average BPM definitely rises in 2012 when I started running more, and there’s a brief foray into some dodgy 2000s worship music when I became a Christian in 2015 (I later discovered that there was some less cringey contemporary stuff to be found). More recently, you can see a surge in classical music and film soundtracks from “March 20” onwards, as the pandemic turned my kitchen table into an office and I used music to help me focus. I adore this musical autobiography, which has endured far longer than any attempt at keeping a diary. But it does tie me to one particular company – and an increasingly controversial one at that. The streaming giant is currently in the news because of Neil Young’s demand that his music be pulled from the platform in protest against its hosting of Joe Rogan’s podcast, the Joe Rogan Experience, which Young believes spreads vaccine misinformation. (Rogan has a $100m deal with Spotify for exclusive streaming rights to his show, and it’s listed as the most popular podcast on the platform.) This comes after 270 experts in the US signed an open letter to Spotify expressing concern about medical misinformation on Rogan’s podcast. Do I like the idea of the £9.99 a month I now pay funding possible misinformation about vaccines during a pandemic? No. And on top of that, services like Spotify are often criticised by artists who point out they can’t live off the royalties they receive from streaming. None of this is great if you care as much about music as I – and so many of us – do. So what should I do? I’m yet to be convinced that other streaming platforms offer anything that can really compete, and many of the issues with Spotify may still apply to them. There is, of course, the resurgent popularity of vinyl, which is wonderful to see – I myself am the proud owner of a growing collection. But I dread to imagine how much it would cost to replace my playlist collection if I wanted to own physical copies on vinyl (or even CD). Plus, I’m not sure how my gym would feel about me carting them along to accompany me on a workout. Ultimately, however, it’s the collection of playlists I’ve built since I was 18 that keeps me subscribing, and I imagine there are many other members of Generation Spotify who feel the same. That’s why I struggle with the idea of dumping Spotify – in doing so, I’d be burning 13 years of musical diaries, a personal, evocative and immersive account of my whole adult life. Sarah Ann Harris is the Guardian’s deputy audience editorFor those at the sharp end, trying to make county cricket clubs reflect their local communities, these are challenging times. “Some clubs are clearly not going into the BAME communities and nurturing talent from diverse backgrounds,” says Chevy Green, director of the ACE (African Caribbean Engagement) programme. “They stick to what – and who – they know.” Despite promises from the counties and the England and Wales Cricket Board that lessons from the Azeem Rafiq racism scandal have been learned, the new year hasn’t started well. At a hearing of the digital, culture, media and sport select committee this week, the chairman of Middlesex, Mike O’Farrell, attempted to explain why his club brought on just a handful of the black, Asian and minority ethnic players that make up 60% of the county’s 130 feeder clubs. O’Farrell, who later apologised, initially blamed the attraction of football and rugby to young people from Afro-Caribbean communities and the lure of education to those from south Asian backgrounds. “It makes me so angry when I hear that,” says Green. “It’s cliched and it’s insulting to the BAME players and their families who travel all over the country and invest in the game only to be dropped before they can make a living from it.” Green worked for Surrey’s charitable foundation before Ebony Rainford-Brent invited him to join her at ACE. “African-Caribbean participation in this country has fallen by 75% in the last 25 years. Just 1% of professional players are black. That’s a massive decline and it’s not because they don’t want to play. It’s because they have suffered racism and been made to feel unwelcome at mainstream clubs. It’s taken Ebony setting up ACE to start to reverse that. The clubs didn’t seem to even notice.” Green says in some counties 70% of players up to the age of 15 are from south Asian backgrounds, but by the time they get to the academy and first teams, it falls to around 3%. “Why do all those talented players drop out? You can only put it down to racism.” According to calculations by the Guardian, the four county clubs in and around London – Middlesex, Surrey, Kent and Essex – have 12 British BAME players in their first-team squads, and only five of those come from state schools. “That’s shocking,” says Green. “Especially considering they cover the London boroughs. It shows that the counties are not doing nearly enough to tackle discrimination at professional performance level. We are working really hard to get Kent to branch out, for example, from their usual white, middle-class hunting grounds of Canterbury and Tunbridge Wells and venture into the more diverse London boroughs like Lewisham and Greenwich. We faced some initial resistance but they are now more open.” It has been a hard process, Green says. “Kids have told us when they go for trials, they are asked what school they come from. It’s crazy. If you are from an ethnic minority and a state school you’re doubly disadvantaged. Cricket is hardly taught in state schools these days, especially in deprived urban areas where there are higher proportions of ethnic minorities. That ensures that this endemic racism is built into the system and makes it almost impossible to challenge. “While there is a lot of good work going on to take the game to more urban and deprived areas at recreational level, it’s not translating to elite level. There’s a lot of tick-box exercises going on but we need to see evidence of real change.” Others share Green’s concerns. Surge Singh-Birring, the Asian ambassador at Dartford Cricket Club, says the situation had improved since he was the only non-white player in his school and community clubs. However, he says: “The county clubs are old school – they are living in the past and don’t want to change. It’s a very privileged game. We keep seeing really talented Asian kids turned down by selectors and their parents ask us why.” Duncan Stone, author of Different Class: The Untold Story of English Cricket, said cricket’s historic elitism had been reinforced by the selling of 10,000 state school playing fields between 1981 and 1997 and the demise of workplace sports clubs. He points to a wider cultural problem too. “When the England men’s team go out on to the field to Jerusalem, I think: that’s not my England,” he says. “Whose England is it? It’s certainly not an England that an Asian kid in Bradford would recognise. This cultural baggage of it being the English national sport has to go. You see the Barmy Army, England supporters, almost all of them white and affluent enough to afford the Test match tickets. They all look the same. It’s not a reflection of our nation.” Middlesex say they launched a wide-ranging equality, diversity and inclusivity programme in 2020, but plans to go out into communities were postponed due to Covid. Surrey are also thought to have new projects ready to go. Kent did not respond to requests for comment. Arfan Akram, Essex’s cricket operations manager for east London, insists his club have already made changes. He says Essex recognised the enormous barriers to Asian participation and launched a programme in 2014 to open new pathways, partly funded by the ECB and partly by Essex, which was now showing results. “We asked Asian players what the problems were and we listened,” Akram says. “As a result, we’ve addressed it from every angle, going out into east London communities and giving them the resources and clear talent pathways they need to be the best they can, while removing barriers around culture such as introducing halal meat, breaking for Ramadan and helping talented players from more deprived backgrounds with funding. We’ve also set up new indoor facilities.” As a result, they now have several east London players with BAME heritage coming through their academy. “We’ve shown it can be done if the will is there.”The internal email dropped into staff inboxes at a time when public outrage about pollution in English rivers was in full cry, generating parliamentary debates, demonstrations and mass petitions. But within the agency responsible for protecting and enhancing the environment the focus was on gagging staff with the threat of dismissal if they discussed its work both inside and outside the organisation. Chief executive James Bevan, a former Foreign Office mandarin who was appointed in 2015 to run the regulator, issued a draconian warning silencing staff after a wave of criticism about its performance protecting rivers. Staff should not, he said, “openly criticise or discredit the organisation in the media or on social media” or “disclose any confidential information in connection with the Environment Agency to anyone who is not authorised to received it”. All breaches could lead to disciplinary action or, in serious cases, dismissal. Comments made “inside or outside work”, including derogatory statements about the organisation, managers, colleagues, stakeholders, customers or contractors, and anything that brought the agency into disrepute, or reflected on its performance, were all subject to sanction. Although pressures on the agency and its staff have grown each year as its government grant has been incrementally slashed by nearly two-thirds, this threat from Bevan marked a nadir. “It is desperate,” said Nick Measham of Salmon and Trout Conservation. “It shows a lack of confidence and suggests a very unhappy workplace.” Why Bevan felt compelled to issue his message when he did can perhaps be traced back to a few weeks before in November last year, when staff were given formal instructions to shut down and stop investigating low level pollution events, so-called level 3 and 4 incidents. The memo, seen by the Guardian, clearly laid out the dire state of the organisation’s investigative and enforcement capabilities. “We do not have sufficient funding to continue to provide our current level of environment management incident response and have made it clear to government that you get the environment you pay for,” it read. “As a result, we have decided to reduce our response to unfunded low and no impact environmental incidents.” The memo admitted this would not be popular with the public, many of whom work as volunteers to plug gaps in Environment Agency monitoring of rivers to track pollution. “This is not an easy transition and our officers and advisers are facing criticism from our customers for the reduction in our service,” it read. The axing of core pollution detection work was something environmental charities suspected had been in play for a while. Michelle Walker of the Rivers Trust said: “Anecdotally we had heard for some time that they just won’t come out to a pollution incident unless there are dead fish, for example, or unless there are the right number of dead fish. But the fact that they are now formally making that policy is shocking.” For frontline staff, the individuals whose task is to go out and investigate pollution, identify polluters and make them accountable, it was, insiders said, another example that their work was not a priority in the EA. Multiple and repeated complaints to managers had been made internally about the move away from frontline responses for some time, the Guardian has been told. Some staff have carried on doing the work, only to face reprimands from managers. Insiders point out that attending level 3 and 4 pollution incidents can prevent higher risk pollution incidents in future. A staff survey carried out in October and November reflected the dismay, revealing increasing levels of workplace stress and low morale, with staff struggling with their mental health. After 26 years as a statutory regulator the agency has moved in the last two decades away from its frontline enforcement and monitoring role. In 2009 it changed its policy to allow water companies to self monitor their own discharge and report breaches, rather than their own staff visiting and taking their own independent samples. The conviction of Southern Water last year for deliberately discharging billions of litres of raw sewage into the sea, and covering up its actions by very significant under-reporting of the pollution, has not led to a change in this policy. As government funding for its environmental protection work continues to decline; from about £170m in 2009-10 to £94m last year the gaps are increasingly being filled by charges to the industries and businesses the agency regulates, including water companies and waste firms – £330m in 2021/2. Whistleblowers speaking to the Guardian say the money within the agency has shifted as a result from the officers investigating and monitoring pollution to middle managers dealing with the businesses being regulated who increasingly provide the funding for its work. Between 2013 and 2018, monitoring of water quality in freshwater environments was halved from 10,797 sites to 4,656, according to data collated by Salmon and Trout Conservation and a farmer can only expect a visit from an EA officer once every 263 years, by the agency’s own admission. “These management teams now appear to be directly funded by businesses we regulate, at the expense of the teams that are tasked to carry out the investigation and enforcement,” said one insider. “The overall feeling is that this has not happened by accident but that water quality is no longer a priority and the environment in most cases is expendable,” another source told the Guardian. “There appears to be a direction aimed at working alongside water companies, industry and agriculture, rather than regulating them. The EA is as far removed from the polluter pays principle as it has ever been, and what is most concerning is that this appears to be by design.” Prosecutions by the agency in the decade to 2020 have fallen dramatically. Civil sanctions, known as enforcement undertakings, have increasingly been used since 2010; they are a voluntary legally binding agreement that avoids anyone being held criminally responsible and instead requires an offender to pay a financial contribution towards the environment. “We have a situation where court actions for water offences brought by the EA fell from 235 in 2002 to 20 in 2019 to three in 2020,” said Caroline Lucas, the Green MP and member of the parliamentary environmental audit committee. “Something is clearly going wrong and there is a clear conflict of interest when the agency is left so dependent on income from the permits paid for by the very companies that it’s meant to be regulating.” Tom Burke, co-founder of the environmental consultancy E3G, said the shift in policy was the result of a deliberate political plan to weaken environmental regulation by stealth. “The agency is set up in statute so any effort to close it would require primary legislation, which would run into a hurricane of opposition,” he said. “By taking away its budgets and independence you get a nice label for the gutless business service organisation we see today.” Increasingly, however, the response of the public seems to chime with the apparent frustrations and discontent of frontline staff. From residents who live near polluted landfill sites to river users pushing for cleaner waterways to coastal communities setting up their own groups to monitor the regular discharges of raw sewage by water companies, the view is the agency is not doing enough to stop pollution, bring polluters to account and protect the environment. As Amy Slack of Surfers Against Sewage told MPs recently: “We have never seen greater awareness and appetite for change as we are now … people do not want to be swimming and playing in polluted water and are generally shocked when they find out the extent of the problem.” An EA spokesperson said: “The Environment Agency delivers a massive amount for the country – like the rest of the public sector we operate within a tight budget and must prioritise to ensure we are doing the best we can, with the money we have, for the people and places we serve.”Ben Whishaw, quite apart from being one of the best British actors we have, is an expert dunker of his biscuits in tea. I’ve seen it: he’s a McVitie’s ninja, with a method all his own. We meet one afternoon in the offices of a London film company and I get the chance to observe his distinctive work first-hand, as digestive after digestive gets taken up by Whishaw, then dipped (sometimes double-handed) into a cuppa that he props on a table in front of him. Each biscuit gets submerged for so long, you suppose there’s no chance of it ever coming out whole. Each biscuit later re-emerges, sodden, milliseconds from ruin, still intact. “I’m no good at interviews,” Whishaw, 41, apologises, right away. He has played Hamlet, Sebastian Flyte, Ariel, Paddington, James Bond’s gadget man Q; all manner of bold fictional characters behind which to hide an innate, real-world shyness. In February, Whishaw will appear in the BBC’s adaptation of Adam Kay’s bestselling medical tell-all, This Is Going to Hurt – another cocksure character, another place to hide. “I find it hard meeting people for the first time,” Whishaw shrugs. “I find it anxiety inducing. I get a shaky, unsettled feeling in my belly. Just warning you now!” And it’s true that the actor, with his wiry limbs crossed at sharp angles, the focus of his green eyes often darting away to the middle distance, comes across as socially nervous. Even so, he’s compelling company, and before the end of our conversation he’ll have spoken with careful thought and bracing honesty about sexuality; self-knowledge; LGBTQ+ casting in the film industry; his frustration with the Bond franchise, all sorts. Along the way I start to notice that, actually, there are telling parallels between the way Whishaw approaches a one-on-one interaction such as ours and his perilous technique for dunking biscuits. Whenever the conversation takes a turn, he’ll start out strong. Ideas. Confessions. Then he might lose faith and check himself (“God. I’m waffling … I have no idea what I’m saying, Tom”). Then, right when all looks lost, the biscuit doesn’t break apart, he regathers his efforts, he comes at some idea anew, and often winds up making a point that is richer and subtler than the one he started with. I ask whether being good at acting has ever helped him with his social anxiety. Can’t he use his proven performance skills (the playful sprite he played in 2010’s The Tempest, the complicated rogue in 2018’s A Very English Scandal) and fake it? “Yeah, no,” he chuckles, darkly. “I don’t find acting helps. A nightmare situation for me would be to have to make an impromptu speech at someone’s wedding. Whenever I feel like someone I know might be about to ask me to do it, I say: ‘Nope!’” Whishaw does an immaculate impression of a gruff, irritable old man. “‘Nope! Nope! Nope! Go away!’ ... Even the thought of reading a prepared speech terrifies me.” Wouldn’t reading out a prepared speech at a wedding be just like performing from a script, though? “I just don’t ever want to appear in front of other people,” Whishaw says, “and be myself.” He thinks some more. “I dunno, Tom! I’m probably talking rubbish. But sitting here, today, with you, I find the idea of my words being put down in print for ever a frightening thing. Today I could have one set of thoughts. Tomorrow another. The black-and-white of things – it clams me up.” *** The Bedfordshire village of Langford, where Whishaw grew up with his twin brother James and their parents, could be black-and-white in outlook. “There was definitely a keeping-up-appearances thing going on.” He was a timid young man with many unanswered questions about himself, confused about his sexuality as well as the gender norms he seemed to be expected to conform to. Some refuge was found in drama workshops at a nearby youth theatre. From about 14, he started taking regular train trips to London, mostly to watch plays. “Total theatre nut. I was about 16, I think, when I saw Mark Ravenhill’s Shopping and Fucking. I remember how much I loved arriving in London. I could feel there was another life here, another way of living. Answers. Experiences. A different community of people.” His mum Linda, who worked in retail, and his dad Jose, who worked in IT, were not artistically inclined, but they supported their son’s decision when he said he wanted to audition for drama schools in the capital. He left home at 18 when he got into Rada and moved into student digs in the north of the city. Whishaw recalls coming back to Langford for weekend visits, “and I couldn’t wait to leave again. I remember driving back on Sundays with a friend and feeling London encroaching, surrounding me – this incredible feeling of potential and possibility.” As a fresh new drama grad in 2003, he raced out on an implausibly blazing start to his acting career. He was in the original cast of His Dark Materials at the National, then almost right away (ludicrous, best-case-scenario stuff) he got to play Hamlet in a production by Trevor Nunn at the Old Vic. Critics immediately ranked him alongside the greats. Nunn and his team let Whishaw share three of the week’s nine performances with an understudy, to lessen the load on such a newbie: he was just 23. In his personal life, Whishaw remained a confused, scared and overwrought young man. It came naturally to him to portray a confused, scared and overwrought Danish prince on the London stage. “I do remember feeling like I knew what I was doing in that one,” he says. Screen work came plentifully in those early years, too. At the same time as playing Hamlet, he was filming a supporting role for Chris Morris and Charlie Brooker on the comedy series Nathan Barley. (Whishaw played the much-bullied office receptionist, Pingu.) The German director Tom Tykwer came to see him at the Old Vic and cast him as the lead in his 2006 adaptation of Patrick Süskind’s novel Perfume. In 2008 he was the rake, Sebastian, in Julian Jarrold’s big-screen Brideshead Revisited. He toured the world to film and promote these films and whenever he returned to his home in London, he remembers, he felt as excited as he’d done as a Langford teenager, riding in on that southbound train. Even so, despite the stimulation of the city and its massive human and cultural diversity, he had not yet finished reckoning with who he was. “I’m fascinated, now, by the masculine and feminine energies we carry around within ourselves,” he says. “But for years I felt I had to deny something. Because that ‘something’ was perceived as weak by the world I grew up in. Even when that ‘something’ felt quite good to me.” He didn’t feel comfortable coming out as gay to his family and friends until he was about 26 or 27, he says. “I remember sexuality weighing on me [before then]. That was really unresolved for me.” In 2008, while starring as John Keats in Jane Campion’s biopic Bright Star, Whishaw began a relationship with the film’s Australian composer, Mark Bradshaw. They married in a civil ceremony in 2012, though it took another year before Whishaw made any sort of public statement confirming this (and then in a terse few sentences that were issued through a publicist). He has never liked to talk about Bradshaw in interviews. Today, when I ask what he’s learned about himself during a decade of marriage, he stares at the ground for five, six, seven seconds before answering: “Um. Lots of things.” Another five, six, seven seconds. “I suppose I don’t feel like I’ve got to a sort of plateau of serenity, or any sort of marvellous equanimity, about everything. I don’t feel I’ve got there yet.” He ponders some more, then says: “I wonder if having children does something towards that? I think it does. I see it in my brother James. I see that if you have to think about something other than yourself, that’s extremely powerful and it changes a person. I don’t have that experience.” He laughs. “I’m still very self-absorbed. And that’s OK, I suppose.” What social life he has beyond acting, he keeps pretty private, too. No Twitter, no Instagram. Today, over a T-shirt that in its bright blue swirls gestures to one of David Hockney’s swimming pools, Whishaw wears a gold necklace inlaid with dark stones, made by a friend of his, a jewellery designer. When I ask what sort of people he likes to surround himself with, as friends, he says: “Direct people. I dig direct people. It’s really exhilarating to me when people don’t pussyfoot around or hide who they are through timidity or politeness.” I ask Whishaw about his coming out – whether he always knew who he was on the inside and felt too timid or intimidated to present himself in a truthful way to the world, or whether the uncertainty he has described was as much internal as external. “Oh, internal and external, both, yeah,” he says. “I don’t know why it took me so long. But it did.” Whishaw frowns at his cup of tea. In This Is Going to Hurt, he plays a hospital doctor who is gay and whose experience of coming out to others is a protracted thing that creates continuing ripple effects through his adult life. “I think it’s really interesting what happens to you if you grow up thinking there’s something wrong with you because you’re attracted to a certain thing,” he says. “That takes a lot of time and understanding to get over. And understanding doesn’t just arrive because you’ve been explicit and open to other people.” He asks if he’s making any sense (of course he is), then adds: “The equating of homosexuality with weakness – it’s taken a long time for me to understand there’s no reason why it should be anything of the sort. Honestly? I feel like I’m only starting to conquer that now.” While working on This Is Going to Hurt, which is set in London in 2006, Whishaw had to remind himself how much less forgiving people could be of demonstrations of affection between same-sex couples as recently as 15 years ago. Things are far from perfect in 2022, Whishaw carefully qualifies. “But I definitely remember feeling, for me at least, that it was much less easy to be tactile with a gay partner then. It’s still amazing to me that a display of affection between two men could be so distressing that someone would throw things, or tell me to ‘find a fucking room’.” I ask how those experiences made him feel at the time. Scared? Angry? “Sometimes it could be scary. But I don’t think I remember being angry. I guess I have the basic perception that if you have a problem with gay people showing each other affection, it’s because something around that issue is unresolved within yourself.” Typical that Whishaw should find ambiguity of motive even in the dickhead behaviour of some half-forgotten bully throwing rubbish at him 15 years ago. Ambiguity has always stimulated and excited him, he says. “Contradictory things. Things that don’t quite add up. Oddness. Kinks.” Certainly it’s in his most ambiguous roles that he has done his best screen work. Playing Liberal politician Jeremy Thorpe’s lover, Norman Scott, in A Very English Scandal, Whishaw somehow positioned himself as the villain of the piece as well as its desperate victim, drawing out the audience’s sympathy and disdain in alternating measures. The quality of that performance was confirmed by a rare hat-trick of awards – Emmy, Globe, Bafta – in 2019. I would suggest Whishaw even managed to invest his computer-animated Paddington (a contemporary interpretation of Michael Bond’s character that he voiced in two movies in 2014 and 2017) with hints of anarchic knowing. It was as though, in Whishaw’s hands, this clumsy domestic bear was exasperating to his adopted family, the Browns, as much on purpose as by accident – perhaps driven by a sort of manic compulsion to create chaos and mess. “If a character is one thing, as opposed to many things, I’m not interested,” Whishaw explains. This said, it’s a surprise to me that he should ever have signed on to appear as a slightly one-note supporting player in the James Bond series. Whishaw had crossed paths with Daniel Craig in a series of early movies, 1999’s The Trench and 2004’s Enduring Love and Layer Cake. A few films into Craig’s run as Bond, Whishaw joined the extended 007 cast as its youthful and geeky weapons inventor, Q, adopted this time by a family that was much less tolerant of chaos and mess. Craig and Whishaw shared a pleasurable chemistry, as far as their scenes together in 2012’s Skyfall and 2015’s Spectre went. But by the time of last year’s No Time to Die, Whishaw had settled into the background, a space peopled by seriously good British actors (him, Naomie Harris, Ralph Fiennes, Rory Kinnear) who were kept subordinate to the scarred baddies, the expensive watches, the endless car chases and so on. Happily, there have been lots of edgier, more three-dimensional roles that have overlapped with his Bond years. Your skin crawled watching Whishaw as the toadying Uriah Heep in Armando Iannucci’s David Copperfield in 2019. He was hypnotic as a security officer going through a breakdown in the 2020 independent movie Surge. Between lockdowns he filmed This Is Going to Hurt, plainly enjoying himself as an over-confident junior doctor who patrols the obstetrics and gynaecology ward of a London hospital. Or the “brats and twats” ward, as Whishaw’s character calls it in the first 30 seconds of the show. Punchy! He had wanted to spend time on a real ward, to research the specifics of the job – “To feel it – but Covid put a stop to that. “We couldn’t go in.” There were doctors on set to consult, though, and he had Kay’s source book to turn to. In the coming dramatisation, as in the book, the narrator is a medic who always seems to know what he’s doing – but only seems to. “I would have been curious to see that contradiction play out in real life,” Whishaw says. “How doctors are when they’re chatting to colleagues, and how they are when talking to patients. They’re actors in a sense.” He stops what he’s saying to ask: “Did you find the character too unlikable, by the way?” The opening episodes of the show have just been sent to critics and other interested parties. Whishaw has started to get feedback and he says he was surprised to be asked why the audience should care for a character who was so difficult to like. “Which was so interesting to me because … am I crazy? I don’t need characters to be likable. If someone is too likable, I’m slightly repelled by them. I don’t think it’s life, being likable. It serves no one to depict life that’s likable in art.” *** Inside our meeting room, the table is now strewn with biscuit crumbs. Two cups of tea are down to their dregs. Outside, the production office goes about its business. A young staffer has been given one of those unenviable, near-impossible research tasks, telephoning around meteorologists and weather agencies, trying to get an answer as to where in the British Isles it will definitely snow at some distant date in 2023. Nearby, a publicist checks her emails and notices that the Bafta film awards longlist has just been published. There are lots of nominations for the cast and crew of No Time to Die, though, alas, none for Whishaw. When the actor is told this, he doesn’t blink or register any response. He’s fine. When the night of the Bond premiere came around, last September, after multiple launch delays due to Covid, Whishaw didn’t want to go. His brother persuaded him into the taxi. “James said, ‘Don’t be stupid, the whole family’s been looking forward to this, you have to.’” He and his twin have always been different characters, James bold and forthright where Ben is hesitant and shy. So he went to the premiere. He walked the red carpet. He saw to it that his family got to their seats. Then he fled. It meant Whishaw was not around to watch the scene where his character, Q, makes a passing reference to dating a man. In a thin and fleeting way, this was a moment of cinematic history. The first acknowledgment that a main character in James Bond’s universe might be anything other than straight. When I saw the film, I assumed this nudge about Q’s dating preferences must be leading us somewhere in narrative terms. Perhaps the male villain, played by Rami Malek, would turn out to be Q’s date, adding an interesting wrinkle to the story of MI5’s perennial efforts to overcome evil. Or would the producers take this opportunity to chide or tease themselves for never once admitting the existence of an LGBTQ+ community in the 24 Bond films that preceded No Time to Die? In fact, the singular reference to Q’s male date (it amounted to a pronoun) was the start and end of it. I mention to Whishaw my mixed feelings about this and he asks: “What were they? I’m curious to know.” He promises he won’t be offended. He can recall only one positive text message he got about the scene, sent by Russell T Davies, who claimed he thought it was cool that Q had a boyfriend. “Otherwise, no one has given me any feedback. So I’m really interested in these questions. And I’m very happy to admit maybe some things were not great about that [creative] decision.” I lay out my own subjective response as honestly as I can. That, on the one hand, it was a relief to see some diversity of representation in this particular film franchise, which can be so creakily conservative in its mores. On the other hand, in handling the matter so timidly, in such glancing and underdeveloped fashion (Whishaw’s line could be easily scissored out of the movie on its release in less liberal territories), it created the impression of a creative decision taken grudgingly or embarrassedly – a studio with a gun to its head. Whishaw raises his eyebrows. He says: “I suppose I don’t feel it was forced upon the studio. That was not my impression of how this came about. I think it came from a good place.” He shifts in his seat, recrossing the limbs, drumming his fingers on his kneecap. He admits that he had similar concerns when the idea was first explained to him, during a one-on-one meeting with Barbara Broccoli, years ago. Later he was shown a partial script. “And I think I remember feeling something like what you’ve just described. I think I thought, ‘Are we doing this, and then doing nothing with it?’ I remember, perhaps, feeling that was unsatisfying. “For whatever reason, I didn’t pick it apart with anybody on the film,” Whishaw continues. “Maybe on another kind of project I would have done? But it’s a very big machine. I thought a lot about whether I should question it. Finally I didn’t. I accepted this was what was written. And I said the lines. And it is what it is.” *** Before our time together winds down, I ask him about a more interesting, certainly more complicated movie he made a few years ago: Tom Hooper’s The Danish Girl, in which Eddie Redmayne starred as a trans pioneer, Lili Elbe, and Whishaw took a supporting role as one of Lili’s lovers. Redmayne has long wrestled with his decision to take on this part that might have gone to a trans actor. A few weeks before my meeting with Whishaw, Redmayne went on record calling it a categoric mistake – that he would not take the role if offered it today. I ask Whishaw what he makes of the years of contention that have surrounded this movie since its release in 2015. Typically, in his long answer, Whishaw starts off strong; he panics; he ends up somewhere rather modest and lovely and wise. “I think Eddie did a beautiful job,” he says. “And it’s done. Going forward, there will be other films in which the role is given to someone who lived that experience. Why shouldn’t a role like that be given to someone who knows, inside, what the character is? I’m all for that. I feel the same, sometimes, about straight actors playing gay parts. I’m critical if I don’t think the performance is, from my subjective experience, accurate. I might think, ‘I don’t believe you!’ And even a small moment of hesitation or inauthenticity will block my engagement with the whole story. So I understand these questions.” He hesitates. “Am I making sense? This is why I clam up! I just feel that we can end up arguing over these black-and-white things and get extremely polarised over these questions when I don’t think it needs to be that way. Have a discussion! There can be disagreement! There can be different points of view!” Finally, Whishaw gets where he’s going. “As I said before, I love contradictory things. Ambiguity. And if we look, if anyone takes a moment to look inside themselves about how they’re thinking or feeling on a subject, they’ll immediately see all manner of things that are not consistent. So I’m on the side of listening to each other. And I’m on the side of forgiving each other. We have to believe in listening and forgiveness,” he says, “don’t we?” • This article was amended on 29 January 2022. Paddington is adopted by the Brown family, not the Bond family as an earlier version said. • This Is Going to Hurt starts on 8 February at 9pm on BBC One and BBC iPlayer.Households in the UK are facing a cost of living crisis as the price of essential items goes up and a cut in take-home pay looms in the shape of a national insurance increase. Across the board, the latest official figures show inflation on food and drink prices was running at 4.8% in December, although that disguises bigger rises in the cost of some essentials. In the first of a series examining the causes and effects of rising bills, we’ve looked at why some of the basic items in your supermarket basket now cost more than they did a year ago – and why there could be more pain to come. Pasta The cost of pasta has been pushed up by a rise in the price of its key ingredient: durum wheat. About two-thirds of the world’s traded durum wheat comes from Canada, and the extreme heat and drought that hit the country last year took its toll on crops. Other countries also produced lower harvests than expected, resulting in a scramble for supplies that pushed prices to a 13-year high. A 500g bag of supermarket own-brand pasta that cost about 55p in late 2020 is now typically 70p – a rise of more than a quarter. According to the website Italianfood.net, planting in Italy was delayed in the autumn as a result of drought followed by heavy rains, which could affect this year’s harvest and mean prices stay high. Ultra-cheap penne could be a thing of the past. Margarine The latest official inflation figures showed margarine and similar spreads had risen in price by more than 27% in the year to December. On the shelves at Tesco, for example, a 1kg tub of Stork has got up from £2.10 to £2.65 since last January. Meanwhile, the official figures showed cooking oils were up by 13%. It’s the oil in margarine that has pushed up the price: rapeseed and palm oil have hit record high prices in recent months. Bad weather conditions in Canada and Europe are again to blame in part, as is Covid. Rapeseed crops were hit by drought and high temperatures, while Malaysia, a big producer of palm oil, imposed restrictions on foreign workers and on the number of people at work in the industry in an attempt to slow infections. Another factor is the rise in the price of crude oil that has boosted demand for the oil crops for biodiesel. Milk At farm level there has been a 24% increase in the cost of producing milk since January 2020, says John Allen, a managing partner at Kite Consulting. “That’s a massive rise, and the biggest since 2007-2008 when we had a spike in commodities.” Probably the biggest factor is the cost of feeding cattle, he says, which has been driven up in part by the cost of fertiliser which, in turn, has been driven up by gas prices. Farmers have also faced rising labour costs and machinery prices. “The price of producing a litre of milk has gone up from 28p in January 2020 to 35p this spring,” Allen says. Then the processors face higher costs, with energy and labour prices on the up. As a result, he says, consumers are typically paying 7p-10p more for a litre of milk. And it’s not over. Although only about 10% of milk is traded globally, the price influences what we pay for domestically produced pints. Efforts by governments in countries such as New Zealand and the Netherlands to cut dairy farming for environmental reasons means supply is falling. Demand is rising by 2% a year. That puts upwards pressure on prices. “We’ve got rising demand and we’ve got a fixed supply,” says Allen. “We think this spring there will be further increases. It wouldn’t be unrealistic to expect 20% rises – we’re in for significant inflation in dairy.” Sausages An increase in the cost of processing meat and moving it around is leading to higher supermarket shelf costs for sausages, says Sarah Baker, an economic strategist at the Agriculture &amp; Horticulture Development Board. “Pork farmers aren’t getting good prices,” she says. “Processors are paying more for labour, there are absences because of Covid, and then there’s the rising cost of transport, with the shortage of HGV drivers and rising fuel costs.” Baker says abattoirs have struggled to replace skilled EU workers who worked as butchers and packers but have left the UK as a result of Brexit. Beef prices have been pushed up by some of the same issues, and also by demand. Throughout the pandemic, demand for products such as mince has remained high as people have cooked at home instead of eating out. “The key drivers [for inflation] are your input costs – feed and fertiliser – and labour and transport. Then you have the EU aftershock – the loss of very skilled labour. And then there’s Covid.” Coffee That morning caffeine hit will cost you more as long-term issues around climate change combine with short-term problems caused by the pandemic. The wholesale price of Arabica coffee, used in ground coffees, surged 70% last year while Robusta, more commonly used in instant, jumped 60%, according to analysts at Rabobank. This is after one of the biggest producers, Brazil, suffered from a mix of droughts and the worst frost in over two decades. The price of coffee has also been forced up by problems in global shipping. The cost of shipping a container soared 240% last year while concerns about securing deliveries prompted some buyers to stockpile. Brands tried to hold back those costs but they are now filtering through to the shelves. Almost 100 different coffee products rose in price in the supermarkets this month, according to Assosia data for The Grocer trade journal. Its survey registered some packets instant coffee rising by as much as a third in price. Others rose by a more modest 4% or 6%. Crisps It’s a tough time for salty snack lovers as the price of some of the UK’s favourite brands has shot up in the past year. The average price of Pringles, for instance, rose by 10.3%, Sensations were up by 8.8%, and Quavers up 8.5% in September last year, according to The Grocer. More recently, its first weekly grocery basket survey of 2022 showed a six-pack of Walkers crisps had gone up by 6% to £1.53. Prices are being pushed up by a host of factors, ranging from increases in oil prices and energy costs to the ubiquitous HGV driver shortages that have raised the price of distribution. The cost of producing potatoes is also on the rise, with every aspect, from labour, transport and fertiliser costs, up by more than 10%. There have also been specific problems linked to Brexit. There is a still unresolved issue on the trade in seed potatoes, which hits the trade in the export to Europe and the import of European seeds. Toilet roll The rising costs of paper pulp, transport and energy are all being absorbed by buyers of toilet roll and nappies. In recent weeks, manufacturers have spoken about the impact of higher input costs, and talked of plans to pass them on to retailers and consumers. Accrol, which makes toilet roll for shops including Tesco, Aldi and Morrisons, said this month it would have to put up its prices. Last week, delivering its latest set of accounts, its chief executive, Gareth Jenkins, outlined the problems: “Tissue pricing has reached unprecedented levels, driven by escalating energy costs (rising as much as 500% for certain suppliers) and global sea freight charges, combined with increased UK transport costs, resulting from HGV driver shortages.” This week Essity, which makes the Cushelle and Velvet brands, said it would be putting up prices again this year. Wood pulp prices have been driven up by shipping delays as well as changes in consumer behaviour that have boosted sales of paper products at home and demand for cardboard to pack home deliveries.When we meet in the chill of Westminster Hall, Bridget Phillipson is fresh from a morning round of media interviews about Sue Gray’s much anticipated report and “partygate”. A rowdy session of prime minister’s questions has just finished and the latest government scandal involving the emergency evacuation of animals from Afghanistan is starting to take off. She has taken over the role of shadow education secretary at a time of huge political turbulence, but Phillipson’s focus on her brief is laser-sharp and heartfelt, thanks perhaps to her own experiences growing up, raised by a single mother in a council house in Washington, Tyne and Wear. “Education is my real passion,” she says, “because the great education I had at local state schools just completely transformed my life.” She excelled in her exams, went to Oxford University, where she studied modern history, and in 2010 was elected as Labour MP for Houghton and Sunderland South. She wants every child to have the same opportunity to thrive – whatever their background – and believes education is the great enabler. Life was sometimes tough for Phillipson when she was growing up. It has previously been reported how a neighbour, having seen seven-year-old Bridget playing outside in a jumper in mid-winter, pushed an envelope of money through the letterbox marked, “For Bridget’s coat”. Her mother, who helped found a local domestic abuse charity, was a member of the Labour party and her daughter would play under the table when she took her to meetings. “My mam brought me up on her own, so life was often quite hard for her as a single parent. We didn’t always have it easy but I was from a family where I was supported to read, where education was valued and encouraged and I look back now and feel how fortunate I’ve been. But I don’t believe life should come down to luck. And that’s where government should come in. “I saw the constraining impact of poverty and how so many children and families were let down by a government that just wasn’t interested in their lives. Many of the people I grew up with didn’t have the same opportunities that I was able to enjoy. But all too often children are held back by virtue of where they’re born, their circumstances and family background, and my priority as secretary of state would be to see that change.” When Phillipson was in primary school, the Conservatives were in power. “That was the point at which in the 80s and early 90s school resources were under immense pressure, when buildings were in disrepair, and where child poverty and unemployment locally were incredibly high, and life was really tough for a lot of families.” She went on to St Robert of Newminster Catholic school (other former pupils include the England men’s football team’s goalkeeper Jordan Pickford and Hairy Biker Si King). When she was in year 8, Labour took office. A member of the Labour party from the age of 15, Phillipson says she began to see changes take effect as Tony Blair’s mantra of “education, education, education” started to make itself felt in schools across the country. “It was a really wonderful school,” she says. “We were really encouraged to aim high and we were valued as people, and I think that ethos of the school has always stayed with me. “I was one of those young people who received education maintenance allowance (EMA), which just made it so much easier to stay on and study. My mother would have killed me if hadn’t stayed on anyway, but for many young people I was at sixth form with it made all the difference. “It meant they were able to get to school, they could cover travel costs, they could afford equipment and to be able to go on trips. It made a massive difference.” EMA was scrapped by the coalition government in 2010. “But also the investment that started to filter through into our schools,” says Phillipson, “the resources, the support that was given to teachers, the priority that Labour attached in government to making sure that teachers were well supported, with chances to take on new skills and develop throughout their working lives.” Phillipson, who has two children of her own, aged 10 and six, wants education to be at the heart of Labour’s offer once again, and never has it been more urgent after two years of disrupted learning because of Covid, which has put the poorest children at even greater disadvantage. “Like all parents, trying to combine working and home schooling [during lockdown] was a bit of a juggle, but I’m fortunate in that we had access to technology and I was able to help. “But I know from my community that lots of families didn’t have access to devices, didn’t have access to broadband, and the government’s plans around that were far too slow and meant that [children’s] learning, particularly in those early months, wasn’t as it should have been.” The government says it has invested £5bn in education recovery, including the launch of the national tutoring programme. Labour, Phillipson says, has set out a far more ambitious plan for children’s recovery – a £14.7bn catchup strategy, including breakfast clubs for every child, mental health support, and more small-group tutoring for pupils who need it. For the Conservatives, she says, children have been little more than an afterthought during the pandemic. “If I’d been secretary of state on the day that schools closed to most children, I would have been completely focused on making sure we had a plan for what came next. And yet here we are almost two years on and parents tell me they don’t even know that there is any kind of catchup plan for their children and the tutoring programme is reaching a dismal number of children.” It has far-reaching implications, she says. “What is often overlooked in the discussion around children’s catchup is that it matters for individual children and families but it also matters for all of us as a country. The evidence is very clear about the longer-term damage that will be caused to our economy, to wider society, to the earning potential of young people, to their opportunities and life chances, if we don’t invest now and get this right, which is why we’ve said we will make this a priority. “The government, however, have vacated the field. They seem completely lacking in any real interest in putting in place that kind of plan. They point to gimmicks and headlines, but that’s not a proper plan for our children.” Phillipson says her priorities as education secretary would be to address the widening attainment gap between disadvantaged pupils and their wealthier peers, to tackle child poverty and the growing cost of living crisis for families, and ensure that every parent can send their child to a great local school. She is currently travelling around England, visiting schools and colleges to find out what is working and what is not – the day after our interview she is off to Blackburn. She is not keen to talk about selection and grammar schools, or interested in discussing school structures. On academies, she is concerned about accountability and transparency in multi-academy trusts, but is not in the business of causing upheaval where parents are happy with their child’s education, she says. She is committed to Labour’s promise to scrap charitable status for private schools, but unwilling to go beyond that. “All parents want the best for their children so I’m not going to criticise individual parents for the decisions that they make.” On school inspection, she would like it to be more collaborative than punitive. “Ofsted has an important role in driving up standards for all of our children but I think we need to look at getting the balance right.” And she is worried about schools having to step in to provide food parcels and wash children’s clothes as the cost of living crisis continues to bite. “It’s wonderful that they do that, but that is not a core function of our schools and I want teachers and staff to be able to focus on delivering that brilliant education that they came into teaching to deliver. “We’re going to see hundreds of thousands of young people leaving school this year having had next to no additional support provided by the government. Schools have stepped in. They are doing all they can to make up for as much time as possible, but they don’t feel the government’s got their back.” She says Labour would be different. “We recognise the value of education. We know how important it is to the success of our country and we will always make sure that our schools and the wider sector are recognised, valued and supported.”The former university access tsar has said the government’s reported proposals to bar entry to students with lower school grades are “crude” and “regressive”. He believes ministers are poised to go ahead with reducing the number of degree places for young people. Chris Millward finished his four-year term as the first director for fair access and participation at the government’s Office for Students before Christmas and is now a professor at the University of Birmingham. He says limiting the number of university students just as the number of 18-year-olds in the population is rising would be socially divisive. “For 20 years, governments of all parties have broadly supported the growth of higher education [HE] participation, but the rhetoric is now very different. The government is saying that it wants more people to go into FE [further education] and work, rather than HE.” Millward says if the government goes ahead with cutting access to university, it should expect considerable resistance from parents and young people, who see getting a degree as the best way of improving their life chances. Record numbers of students started university during the pandemic, and universities say they have received high numbers of applications again for the coming academic year. “The question is: is any minister really willing to stand up when A-level results come out and say ‘sorry, there isn’t room for you to go to university’?” He argues that the government cannot “crudely cap the HE side of the equation and expect that to change demand” but must improve alternative options for students in further education first, as well as making sure they can move on to university afterwards if they want to. “If you don’t do that, it’s going to be very divisive,” he said. This warning on future plans, coming from someone who has been at the heart of the government machine, has been received with gloom by universities. The government has never publicly said it intends to cut student numbers, despite ministers attacking Tony Blair’s “absurd mantra” that half of all young people should go to university. Millward’s intervention is the strongest hint so far that the proposals are a serious prospect. This month Millward wrote about his lessons from the OfS role in a paper for the Centre for Global Higher Education, based at Oxford University. He said reducing access to degrees would be “a bad outcome for all of us working in higher education”. Insiders say ministers know that announcing a formal cap on student numbers could alienate voters and they are much more likely to squeeze the sector “by the back door”. The government is widely expected to announce plans for a new minimum entry threshold to study at university, using GCSE or A-level grades to restrict access to student loans, with the aim of pushing those who no longer qualify into further education colleges instead. Millward is adamant that this will unfairly shut doors for the poorest young people. “You shouldn’t stop certain students accessing student loans because that penalises the individual in a pretty crude, regressive way,” he said. “We all know there is a strong correlation between your social background and your school grades and that has only become stronger during the pandemic.” University chiefs think it is most likely that in future loans will only be given to students who have at least a level 4 (the equivalent of an old grade C) in maths and English at GCSE. An analysis of Department for Education (DfE) GCSE results data conducted by the Million Plus group of modern universities before Christmas showed that under this plan 48% of all disadvantaged students in England would be ineligible for a student loan. The proposal to limit loans is thought to be driven by the Treasury. Financial pressure has been ratcheted up by the prime minister’s flagship Lifelong Learning Entitlement – a new entitlement to take out loans for four years of flexible higher learning including short courses from 2025 –which is expected to make unpaid student loan debt mushroom even further. University vice-chancellors and social mobility experts are deeply concerned about the prospect. Lee Elliot Major, a professor of social mobility at the University of Exeter, said: “Reducing numbers of degree places tends to hit poorer students disproportionately.” He said that while it was “absolutely right” to improve opportunities for young people who do not go to university, “that should not be at the expense of the hard won successes in enrolling greater numbers of poorer pupils into higher education”. Alistair Jarvis, the chief executive of the vice-chancellors’ group Universities UK, said: “Reducing the number of students going into HE would cause real damage. The future economy is likely to be highly skilled, so cutting numbers when we need more highly skilled people and not fewer doesn’t make sense. People want their children and grandchildren to go to university. I don’t see any signs that they are reconsidering that. It is a life-changing experience.” Prof Dave Phoenix, the vice-chancellor of London South Bank University and a former chair of the Million Plus group of modern universities, said: “If we want a knowledge-based economy, all the evidence suggests we need more people qualified to degree level not fewer.” A senior higher-education figure close to the government, who asked not to be named, said the Treasury believed it would only be feasible to add the prime minister’s new “lifelong” loans on to the existing student loan debt if the DfE offered fewer loans to 18-year-olds “to compensate”. But he added: “None of the options are easy and all of them are extremely contentious.” A cut to tuition fees, mooted last year as one option, is now thought less likely. Ministers are also expected to change the terms of repayments. In a surprise announcement on Friday they scrapped plans to raise the repayment threshold by 4.6%. Universities have been braced for the government’s response to the Augar review of post-18 education – which reported in 2019 – for months. Jarvis said: “After two years of uncertainty with the pandemic, there is a real frustration amongst vice-chancellors that they don’t know what is coming.” A spokesperson for the DfE said no decisions had yet been made about minimum grade requirements. “This is a government that has boosted aspirations and grown opportunities for disadvantaged people across the country, and last year a record proportion of disadvantaged students have started university as a result,” he said. “We are committed to continuing to level up opportunity so every young person can fulfil their potential.”Earlier this month Antonio Brown made what might be the most dramatic exit in sports history, stripping down and stalking off the field in the middle of an NFL game, as his defending champion Tampa Bay Buccaneers were rallying against the lowly New York Jets on the road. Eric Dickerson could never. “Hell no,” says the 61-year-old Hall of Famer. “My mother would’ve killed me. I can’t speak for another man. I can’t speak for what’s on his mind. But I’ll say this: one day, when he gets to be an older man, he’ll look back and say, Maybe I shouldn’t have done that…” Back in the 1980s and 90s Dickerson wasn’t just thought of as the Antonio Brown of that day. He was seen as even more sinister: a supremely arrogant running back who ruined Southern Methodist’s ascendant program, played hardball with the Los Angeles Rams and otherwise sulked his way through 11 NFL seasons – all of them, by his reckoning, underpaid. Ingrate, Dickerson says, was how sportswriters most often described him. And to the ear of this proud native of Sealy, Texas – the tiny mattress-making town where he recalls whites and blacks literally living on opposite sides of the railroad track – that word sounded a bit too much like another that starts with an N. Before a 1990 game during his time with the Colts, Dickerson remembers jogging out for warmups and being greeted by a banner of a Black baby in his No 29 jersey wearing red lipstick, holding a fried chicken leg, with a watermelon on one side and a stack of money on the other. And these were Colts fans. “I was a bad, bad guy back in the 80s,” Dickerson says. “And then people meet me and are like, You ain’t nothin’ like they make you out to be.” After decades of being cast as the ultimate heel Dickerson finally sets the record straight in Watch My Smoke, an autobiography he co-wrote with People magazine’s Greg Hanlon. In the book Dickerson pays homage to his adoptive parents, addresses the infamous Trans Am gift that nearly resulted in the NCAA banning Southern Methodist University from competitive football, and the ebbs and flows of his underheralded NFL career. Threaded throughout are digressions on race and the pill-popping that was in vogue during his NFL time – including his own use of Darvocet, a now-banned opioid painkiller, to calm his nerves before games. Dickerson even details his playboy misadventures off the field, not least the time he prematurely ended a romantic interlude with Pam Grier because he feared breaking his Rams curfew. “Every time I see her in a movie,” he cracks. “I’m like, You had your chance. You had it!” As a talent Dickerson was sui generis, less tailback than tall back whose upright gait was as unorthodox as his habit of pairing racquetball specs with a Jheri curl. And while his 13,259 career yards (the league’s second-highest mark when he retired in 1993) have long since been eclipsed time and again, the five-time All-Pro owns what might be the only two records that really matter in pro football: the rookie single-season rushing standard (1,808) and the overall single-season rushing record (2,105), which Dickerson achieved the very next year. Not only have those numbers become more hallowed as the NFL has evolved into a pass-wacky league, but in the case of the single-season rushing mark, every player who comes close seems to fall apart shortly thereafter. After cracking the 2,000-yard mark in his second season the Titans Chris Johnson never broke 1,400 yards for the rest of his career. Barry Sanders and Terrell Davis were out of the league shortly after summiting 2K. Adrian Peterson hasn’t been the same bruiser since he flirted with Dickerson’s record in 2012. And Derrick Henry missed half of this season after approaching the mark in 2020. If the record weren’t so out of reach, some might be inclined to believe it’s jinxed. “My teammates always say when a guy’s getting close, they pull the voodoo dolls out,” Dickerson jokes. It’s Dickerson’s bad luck that he came along when he did. In his autobiography he reserves some of his harshest words for the NCAA, likening their student-athlete construct to “wage theft”. Despite being one of the most talented backs in college, he split carries in SMU’s Pony Express offense; despite averaging 7.0 yards per carry and finishing fourth in the country in rushing for the undefeated Mustangs as senior in 1982, Dickerson finished in the Heisman vote behind Stanford’s John Elway and Georgia’s Herschel Walker – who is campaigning as a Republican for that state’s open US Senate seat now. “Maybe that’s what he feels is right for him,” Dickerson says diplomatically. “I don’t agree with some of the things he’s said, for sure.” In the pros Dickerson never made it farther than the 1985 conference championship, losing to the Super Bowl Shuffle Bears. As much as he enjoyed playing for coach John Robinson – a running game savant, in Dickerson’s view – he wonders what might’ve been had played up the coast with Joe Montana. “I played with him in the Pro Bowl and, man, his passes were just so easy to catch,” Dickerson says. Dickerson is certainly poorer for having preceded the advent of free agency, when his ambition and self-determinist streak wouldn’t have marked him as an insufferable jerk. If anything comes across in the book and in conversation, it’s that Dickerson is quite pleasant company, a natural storyteller. You could see how he landed a post-retirement gig as a Monday Night Football sideline reporter in the early aughts – even if, by his own reckoning, he “was terrible at it”. But before you go confusing Watch My Smoke for some Pippen-esque attempt to recoup lost wages, be clear: Dickerson isn’t hurting. He’s long been back with the Rams as an ambassador and long since made amends with the Colts and team owner Jim Irsay, whom he once derisively nicknamed “Daffy Duck”. And when Dickerson does make TV appearances, he doesn’t shy from using the platform to take current NFL players to task for not doing enough to look out for and otherwise support their forebears. In Watch My Smoke, Dickerson relates a bit of foreshadowing he received from OJ Simpson. “When you turn 50,” the Juice told him, “those hits are gonna come back to you.” Apart from a back problem that makes for restless nights and a foot issue that dates to a 1984 turf toe injury, he’s held stout against the ravages of time. When news broke last year that the NFL’s testing protocols for head injury claims were biased against Black players, Dickerson could have broken into a touchdown dance. “We said that from the beginning, when the [2013 concussion] lawsuit started,” he says. “And they replied, ‘Well, we won’t do it again.’ They’ll continue to do it. They will never stop. Man, people are greedy. It’s a greed thing.” That Dickerson has gone from the guy being called a money-grubber to the one pointing it out is sweet redemption. Did he see the day coming? Dickerson could never.Headteachers John Barnes and Andrew O’Neill have both a lot and little in common. Both are successful leaders grappling with the impact of the pandemic as well as the usual challenges facing 21st-century schools. But Barnes leads a small trust, the Seaton Valley Federation, in the heart of Blyth Valley, Northumberland, one of the most marginal “red wall” seats in the country, at a time when the government is under huge pressure to explain what its levelling up agenda means for longstanding Labour constituencies that switched to the Conservatives in 2019. O’Neill, meanwhile, is the head of an inner-city London secondary in an area of high deprivation at the heart of one of the wealthiest boroughs in the country. All Saints Catholic college in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea has almost double the national average of pupils eligible for free school meals. It is within walking distance of Grenfell Tower and some of the most expensive homes in Britain. The Kensington parliamentary constituency also could be described as the most marginal “blue wall” seat in England, with a parliamentary majority of just 150, having been held by the Tories for most of the last 50 years. But two years after the election that delivered Boris Johnson an 80-seat majority on the back of a promise to equalise opportunities across the UK, both heads are unclear what levelling up means for their schools. A white paper, now expected in February, has been repeatedly delayed amid rumours that the Treasury will not provide adequate funding to meet the expectations of voters who handed Boris Johnson victory. Meanwhile, school funding has taken a hit over the past decade. According to the Institute for Fiscal Studies, the 9% real-terms cut in spending per pupil puts a “major brake on levelling up”. Reforms to the way money is distributed to schools, intended to make the system fairer, have been exposed for disproportionately benefiting schools with lower disadvantage. Even without the pandemic learning loss, it would take 500 years, at current rates, to close the GCSE attainment gap between children from different backgrounds. Yet there has only been one levelling up policy for schools – a premium for maths and science teachers – and that is yet to be implemented. “Levelling up is a lovely soundbite,” says Barnes. “But where is the detail for education and more generally? I have never met a headteacher who doesn’t want their children to do the very best and I have never had a politician come and sit in my office and ask me what we need. “Our schools are not particularly disadvantaged, and I would agree that free school meals are a good proxy for deprivation, but we have a lot of ‘just about managing’ families. They get excluded from extra funding and there needs to be a better conversation about those people. They need to see jobs and cultural opportunities in their communities, good mental health support and they need to see someone cares about them. “Above all, if we want to level up, we need honesty about one thing. We need to fund state schools at the same level as private schools. I am not against private schools but their termly fees are the equivalent of my annual per pupil funding. This is unfair.” At the other end of the country, O’Neill acknowledges there is resentment about London schools, which receive more per-pupil funding than schools elsewhere in the country and get better results than some areas that have been branded “left behind”. In the past year he has been developing a website, Lighthouse, that crunches government data about schools, their funding, their results and local contexts including income deprivation affecting children index (IDACI) data. “This is a very complex issue,” he says. “It certainly isn’t going to be resolved by a political project that pushes funds into certain areas to try and win votes. A few more vanity capital projects in the north are not going to make significant change. “One of the reasons I set up the website was because the government puts data in lots of different places and I wanted to see it together to be able to find schools like my own so that I could make comparisons, as well as potentially making contact to see how we could improve. “There are areas of deep deprivation within many local authority areas. Parts of Kensington are more deprived than parts of Blyth Valley but is it all about the money? Probably not. We are a school in IDACI decile one, with 50% of pupils eligible for the pupil premium, yet our children see wealth and opportunity on the doorsteps. “We have a music teacher who teaches choral works in Latin. London schools probably have access to a more mobile pool of high-performing, well-educated members of staff. Unless we define what we mean by levelling up, how can we judge success? Is it income, is it opportunities, is it pupil outcomes? “We need a deeper understanding of the issues to make the changes that will benefit all young people. For too long education has been beholden to politicians offering neat soundbites that tinker at the edges but don’t produce the scale of transformation needed to provide high-quality education across the whole of the country.” One aspect of the levelling up agenda that fascinates O’Neill is the plight of the safe Conservative seats in which students appear to do less well than some of the much trailed “red wall” areas. Dan Morrow leads the Dartmoor Multi Academy Trust in Torridge and West Devon, where the former attorney general Sir Geoffrey Cox, whose lucrative overseas legal practice abroad was recently exposed, has a 25,000 majority. Morrow feels strongly that political expediency may obscure the need for more investment in areas such as his. “Trying to level up areas such as the former ‘red wall’ means that traditionally Conservative areas may be overlooked, despite the clear case for increased support,” he says. “I appreciate that there are post-industrial towns and cities that need investment. I’ve worked in schools in deprived areas across the country. But rural poverty remains a major issue and the same underlying problems exist here; huge disparities between rich and poor, lack of affordable housing and job opportunities, outdated transport links, which make opportunities harder for younger people, and the sense of isolation that then comes from rural disadvantage. “Just because this is taking place in a constituency that also has wealthy semi-aristocratic landowners and stunning scenery, doesn’t make it less of a pronounced issue for young people. If the government want to take levelling up seriously – and make it clear it isn’t just being pursued for political gain – then they must bring more of a focus to rural poverty.” Morrow would like to see closer integration of health, social care and education for young people. “Essentially the disparity in thresholds and provision exacerbates inequalities, and circumstances of birth remain too anchored to a sense of inevitable destiny,” he says. Anita Bath, the chief executive of the Bishop Bewick Catholic Education Trust, has oversight of schools in three local authorities across north-east England, including rural, inner-city Labour and now Conservative areas. She is also adamant that political boundaries should be irrelevant. “More money is always very welcome as it brings freedom, but there are structural issues that need to be rethought rather than sticking plasters. Where are the big thinkers in education?” she says. “We know that by the time children get to primary school they can be 18 months behind their peers. We need to rethink the whole primary sector and narrow the gap at that point.” A recent poll suggested that if there were a general election now, the Tories would lose all but three of their “red wall” seats, so the challenge facing ministers is intense. An education white paper, the first since 2016, has also been promised this year, but Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, which has produced its own blueprint for change, believes there is a range of pressing issues. “Children with special educational needs clearly need more support. Post-16 education has been treated by the government as the poor relation with the largest falls in funding of any sector of the education system over the past decade,” he says. “And schools in England require £11.4bn of repairs, according to the Department for Education’s own figures. “You can’t level up without tackling these problems. Then there’s the long-running and intractable issue of a big gap in academic attainment between disadvantaged youngsters and other children, and the fact that, in normal times, about one-third of pupils leave secondary education with less than a grade 4 in GCSE English and maths.” He adds: “If levelling up means anything, we have to do better for these young people. Having sufficient funding is a significant factor, but there are others too. Curriculum and qualifications aren’t working for them. “If the government gets this right, with clarity and ambition, it could be a seminal moment. What it cannot be is more of the same.” • Additional data used for this article can be found here.When Lois van Baarle, a Dutch artist, scoured the biggest NFT marketplace for her name late last year, she found more than 100 pieces of her art for sale. None of them had been put up by her. Van Baarle is a popular digital artist, with millions of followers on social media. She’s one of a growing number of artists who have had online images of their art stolen, minted as unique digital assets on a blockchain, and offered up to trade in cryptocurrency on the NFT platform OpenSea. The rise in such thefts comes as the market for non-fungible tokens, or NFTs, exploded last year, growing to an estimated $22bn, attracting Sotheby’s and Christie’s, and driving multimillion-dollar auctions for these new certificates of ownership of digital assets. OpenSea has grown at a dizzying pace, and is now valued at $13bn. But amid its spectacular rise, the company is doing far too little to prevent the trade in fraudulent NFTs, some artists charge, and is placing much of the burden of policing art fraud on the artists themselves. OpenSea said in a statement: “It is against our policy to sell NFTs using plagiarized content,” adding that it regularly delisted and banned accounts that did so. The company said it was working to build new image recognition and other tools that would quickly recognize stolen content and protect creators, and that it planned to launch some of them in the first half of this year. A boon and nightmare for artists In theory, blockchain technology was supposed to make it easier for digital artists to sell unique tokens of ownership, offering buyers a permanent record of ownership linked to the work. For some artists, the technology opened up a new way to earn money : Kenny Schachter, a New York-based video artist and art writer, embraced NFTs early and said he has made hundreds of thousands of dollars in the past year, after three decades working within an art world in which video art rarely sold. “We’re in an incredible mushrooming of opportunity for digital artists,” said Schachter. “It’s 1,000% better than a year ago, two years ago, when there was no marketplace for any of this art.” But other artists say that the past year’s crypto boom has been a nightmare. Among the problems is that anyone can “mint” a digital file as an NFT, whether or not they have rights to it in the first place, and the process is anonymous by default. “It is much easier to make forgeries in the blockchain space than in the traditional art world. It’s as simple as right-click, save,” said Tina Rivers Ryan, a curator and expert in digital art at the Albright-Knox gallery in Buffalo, New York. “It’s also harder to fight forgers. How do you sue the anonymous holder of a crypto wallet? In which jurisdiction?” DeviantArt, a decades-old online community for digital artists that hosts half a billion pieces of digital art, began monitoring the blockchain for copies of their users’ work last fall after NFTs based on stolen work by Qing Han, a beloved artist who died in 2020 after publicly chronicling her struggle with cancer, were found for sale on OpenSea. DeviantArt has sent 90,000 alerts about possible fraud to thousands of their users since then, company executives said. It’s now scanning for fraud across 4m newly minted NFTs each week. The number of alerts doubled from October to November, and grew by 300% from November to mid-December. In December, bots began attacking the site, Moti Levy, DeviantArt’s chief operations officer said, scraping whole galleries of artists’ works. The pieces would later appear on NFT marketplaces, often with artists’ names and watermarks still attached. The attacks have focused on DeviantArt’s most popular artists, measured by likes and comments, Levy said, rather than any particular aesthetic. “Bots are bots,” he said. ‘How much of their valuation is from stolen art?’ Aja Trier, a Texas-based artist who has found viral fame for painting riffs on Van Gogh’s Starry Night featuring various breeds of dog, said she discovered 87,000 NFTs based on images of her work for sale on OpenSea, many of them priced at $9.88 each. Trier said 500 listings of her stolen work were added in a single night, suggesting the theft was being automated and carried out by bots. The recourse she has as the legitimate creator of the work, she said, is to write individual copyright infringement takedown requests to OpenSea and to manually monitor for new fraudulent listings – all time-consuming work. The most effective way to get the company to take down their stolen work, Trier and several other artists said, has been by tweeting angrily about the problem or talking to media outlets. At least 37 NFTs made based on Trier’s stolen work were bought before OpenSea took down the fraudulent listings, Trier said, and she has not seen any of that money come back to her, even though OpenSea makes a 2.5% commission on each sale. “It seems to me that they’re making some money on illicit behavior,” Trier said. “They have a $13bn valuation and they’re trying to go public. How much of their valuation is from stolen art?” The kind of fraud artists were complaining about made up only a small fraction of its transactions, OpenSea said. It took enforcement action on 3,500 collections of NFTs every week for counterfeit or copyright reasons, it said, which represents 0.175% of the platform’s more than 2m total collections. It said the site now lists more than 80m individual NFTs. But the problem of plagiarism, whatever its scale, was an important one, the company acknowledged: “We are constantly evaluating new ways to do our part.” ‘One huge mess of theft and fraud and inauthenticity’ The current reporting process for artists whose stolen work is turned into NFTs is confusing and laborious, confirmed Ashli Weiss, a Silicon Valley lawyer who specializes in intellectual property and works with blockchain companies, adding that there is currently little incentive for OpenSea and other marketplaces to fix the problem. “OpenSea is getting paid with each transaction.” OpenSea disputed the view that it did not have an incentive to tackle art theft and plagiarism: “For more people to join OpenSea or other Web3 communities, these issues must be addressed head-on,” a spokesperson said. More than half of the company’s current staff works either full-time or extensively on issues of plagiarism and content moderation, OpenSea said, and it is developing “smart moderation” tools to speed up the company’s response to reports of plagiarism. But the company also defended some of the policies that artists would like to change as essential to its mission. While some artists would like to see a crackdown on bots, creating hundreds or thousands of NFTs at one time is normal for the space, OpenSea said, noting that there are 10,000 “Bored Apes” and more than 8,000 “Pudgy Penguins”, two of the most prominent and commercially successful NFT collections. Van Baarle, the Dutch digital artist, said that she has seen OpenSea’s process for reporting art fraud improve somewhat over the past year. In the early months of trying to flag her stolen art on the platform the site had a “report” button that never generated any response to her at all. By late December, she said, it had introduced a reporting form that made it substantially easier to log the fraud, and each attempt at least generated an email response. But the company can still do more to verify an NFT’s legitimacy before the token is offered up for sale, she said, rather than having artists play whack-a-mole with an endless sequence of anonymous grifters. “For a concept that is supposedly about authenticity, to me it looks like the opposite,” Van Baarle said. “From where I’m standing, it looks like one huge mess of theft and fraud and inauthenticity.”Activists handing out “Where is Peng Shuai” T-shirts at the Australian Open say they will take their campaign to other grand slams and not cease until they are satisfied of the Chinese tennis player’s safety. Seven days after a video went viral of two activists being forced to remove their T-Shirts by Melbourne Park security, the group made good on their promise to print 1,000 shirts they hoped spectators would wear inside Rod Laver Arena during the women’s singles final. About 20 people were voluntarily stationed at each entrance, where they also distributed ribbons and stickers saying “Missing!” in Mandarin. A few shirts could be seen dotted throughout the 80% capacity crowd during the match, with many more sporting the yellow ribbons. “I’m just happy that people care about Peng Shuai,” said Brisbane activist Drew Pavlou, who has been driving the movement alongside Max Mok, a pro-democracy campaigner from Hong Kong. “We’ve been posting on Twitter for six months and nothing ever really happens. Suddenly everyone is covering it, so I’m really happy about that.” A few days after the shirts were banned and a banner was confiscated, and following an international backlash, Tennis Australia reversed its decision to prohibit them based on their claim they constituted “commercial or political” material. “Tennis Australia never reached out to me or any of my team members, they just put out statements via the media,” Mok said. “We’ve just been trying to keep them honest. We will take this to the French Open, Wimbledon, the US Open. We will not stop.” Mok said the sentiment at the gates had been one of mostly support. Another activist said Peter Costello, the chairman of Nine Entertainment Corporation which owns the tournament’s host broadcaster the Nine Network, declined to take a T-shirt when he entered but told them he supported their cause. Pavlou, who was this week blocked on Twitter by Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian, said some of the volunteers were strangers who had approached him on social media and asked him how they could help. Overall the group had raised more than $21,000, with which they had 1,000 T-shirts printed and thousands more ribbons made. They had hoped to spend the remaining $5,000 on hiring a plane to fly a “Where is Peng Shuai?” banner over Melbourne Park on Saturday afternoon before the match, however every company they approached declined to be involved. Pavlou said the remaining money will likely be donated to a sexual violence prevention charity. Peng has appeared only rarely on Chinese social media since early November when her post on Weibo, in which she accused the former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of sexual assault, was quickly deleted from China’s heavily censored internet. In late December, Peng retracted her allegations in an interview with Singapore media outlet Lianhe Zaobao, a Chinese-language publication under the state-controlled Singapore Press Holdings Limited.On the morning of 6 October the nine justices of the US supreme court filed into their wood-paneled courtroom in Washington to hear arguments in a dispute between the US government and Abu Zubaydah, a Guantánamo prisoner who has been held incommunicado and without charge for the past 20 years. A government lawyer addressed the panel, arguing on grounds of “state secrets” that Zubaydah should be blocked from calling two CIA contractors to testify about the brutal interrogations they put him through at a hidden black site in Poland. Within minutes of his opening remarks, the lawyer was interrupted by Amy Coney Barrett, one of the rightwing justices appointed to the court by Donald Trump. Barrett wanted to know what the government would do were the contractors to give evidence before a domestic US court about how they had “waterboarded” Zubaydah at least 83 times, beat him against a wall, hung him by his hands from cell bars and entombed him naked in a coffin-sized box for 266 hours. “You know,” she said, “the evidence of how he was treated and his torture.” “Torture.” Barrett said the word almost nonchalantly, but its significance ricocheted around the courtroom and far beyond. By using the word she had effectively acknowledged that what was done by the CIA to Zubaydah, and to at least 39 other “war on terror” detainees in the wake of 9/11, was a crime under US law. After Barrett uttered the word the floodgates were opened. “Torture” echoed around the nation’s highest court 20 times that day, pronounced by Barrett six times and once by another of Trump’s conservative nominees, Neil Gorsuch, with liberal justices Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan also piling in. The flurry of plain speaking by justices on both ideological wings of the court amazed observers of America’s long history of duplicity and evasion on this subject. “The way the supreme court justices used the word ‘torture’ was remarkable,” Andrea Prasow, a lawyer and advocate working to hold the US accountable for its counterterrorism abuses, told the Guardian. “You could feel the possibility that the ground is shifting.” Prasow was astonished a second time three weeks later when Majid Khan, a former al-Qaida courier also held in Guantánamo, became the first person to speak openly in court about the torture he suffered at a CIA black site. Khan’s description of being waterboarded, held in the nude and chained to the ceiling to the point that he began to hallucinate was so overpowering that seven of the eight members of his military jury wrote a letter pleading for clemency for him, saying his treatment was a “stain on the moral fiber of America”. The ground does appear to be shifting, and as it does attention is once again falling on one of the great unfinished businesses of the 21st century: the US torture program. In the panicky aftermath of 9/11, when the world seemed to be imploding, the CIA took the view that the ends – the search for actionable intelligence to thwart further terrorist attacks – justified any means. With the enthusiastic blessing of the justice department and George W Bush’s White House, the CIA abandoned American values and violated international and US laws by adopting callous cruelties that they consciously copied from the enemy. They took one prisoner, Abu Zubaydah, and made him their experimental guinea pig. On Zubaydah’s back they built an entire edifice of torture – “enhanced interrogation techniques” as the bloodless euphemism went – that in turn was founded upon a mountain of lies. When the worst of the torture was completed, to spare themselves from possible prosecution the CIA insisted that Zubaydah remain “in isolation and incommunicado for the remainder of his life”. “The torture program was designed for only one person – they gave him a name and that name was Abu Zubaydah,” Mark Denbeaux, Zubaydah’s lead habeas lawyer, told the Guardian. “After they tortured him, they demanded that he be held incommunicado forever so that his story could never be told. Since that moment the only people he has ever spoken to are his torturers, his jailers, and his lawyers, including me.” Twenty years after Zubaydah was waterboarded, slammed repeatedly against a wall, sleep-deprived, face slapped, chained in painful stress positions, hosed with freezing water, stripped naked, and blasted with deafening noise, his story still has not fully been told. In 2014 the Senate intelligence committee released a heavily redacted, 500-page executive summary of its seven-year investigation into the torture program, generating headlines around the world and leading Barack Obama to conclude that “these harsh methods were not only inconsistent with our values, they did not serve our national security”. Yet at the insistence of the CIA the full report from which the summary was drawn remains under lock and key to this day. All three volumes of it. All more than 6,700 pages. All 38,000 footnotes. All the detail distilled from 6.2m pages of classified CIA documents. The persistent refusal to release the full Senate torture report has left a black hole at the centre of one of the most shameful episodes in US history. Now, with the T-word being heard even in the hallowed halls of the US supreme court, renewed calls are being made for the report to be published so that this sorry chapter can finally be closed. Several of the individuals most closely involved in the battle for the truth over Abu Zubaydah’s treatment have told the Guardian that 20 years is long enough. It is time for the American people to be told the full unadulterated facts about what was done in their name. “More than seven years after the completion of the torture investigation, it remains critically important that the public see the full report,” said Ron Wyden, the Democratic senator from Oregon who was an important advocate for the Senate investigation and who played a critical role in ensuring that at least some of its findings have emerged into daylight. Wyden called for a full accounting of the CIA’s handling of detainees. He said a wealth of information still shrouded in secrecy would confirm that the torture program was ineffective – it simply didn’t work. “The withholding of the full report, and the redactions in the public executive summary, have hidden from the public the story of how the program was developed and operated. Understanding how all of this happened is important because it must never happen again.” Daniel Jones, the chief author of the US Senate report, said that now was the moment for its release. “The country is ready. It’s what you do in a transparent democracy: when you mess up you admit it and you move on as a better country. We’ve reached that point now.” *** Abu Zubaydah, 50, (actual name Zayn al-Abidin Muhammad Husayn) is a Saudi-born Palestinian who was one of the CIA’s “high-value” targets in the wake of 9/11. He was captured in Faisalabad, Pakistan, on 28 March 2002 in a raid in which he was shot several times including in the thigh and groin. He later lost his left eye while in US custody in unexplained circumstances. John Kiriakou, a former CIA counter-terrorism officer, was a leading member of the team that seized Zubaydah, sitting guard at the prisoner’s bedside after the raid. Though Kiriakou did not participate in the prisoner’s subsequent interrogations at secret black sites in Thailand, Poland, Lithuania and other countries, he continued to keep tabs on his captive. In December 2007, having by then left the CIA, Kiriakou gave an interview to NBC News in which he became the first former government official publicly to state that Zubaydah had been waterboarded – the process where a cloth is placed over a detainee’s face and water poured over it as a form of controlled drowning. Kiriakou declared that he had come to view the procedure as torture. Kiriakou’s comments marked the first chink in the wall of official silence surrounding the CIA’s abuses. The move displeased his former employers and he was made the subject of a leak inquiry that ended in a sentence of 23 months in a federal penitentiary – he is convinced as an act of revenge – ostensibly for having revealed the identity of a covert CIA agent to a journalist. Unbeknownst to him at the time, Kiriakou in fact gave erroneous information in his NBC News interview. He said Zubaydah had been waterboarded only once and that the detainee had instantly cracked, divulging good actionable intelligence in less than a minute. In fact, the prisoner was waterboarded not once but at least 83 times over more than a month. After the torture began in earnest at “detention site green” in Thailand in August 2002, the CIA gleaned no valuable information from Zubaydah whatsoever. Kiriakou told the Guardian that his remarks to NBC had been based on what he picked up at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia. “This was all a lie and we didn’t know it was a lie until it was declassified in 2009. So on top of being illegal, unethical and immoral, it was also false.” To Kiriakou, the supreme court’s ease with the word “torture” 14 years after he used it for the first time on network television is “vindication that it was wrong”. He said he was dismayed that the CIA continues to cover up its “barbaric crimes” by resisting release of the full Senate report, likening the study to the defense department’s internal account of the Vietnam war that changed the course of history when it was leaked in 1971. “We knew a lot about what was happening in Vietnam but we didn’t have official government confirmation until Daniel Ellsberg released the Pentagon Papers. It’s the same here. We have had some testimony from torture victims but we don’t have official confirmation of what the CIA did from the CIA itself, and that’s what release of this report would do.” The lies to which Kiriakou fell foul were intrinsic to the torture program from its inception. Zubaydah was used as the prototype for a new type of “enhanced interrogation” that crossed the line into torture. In April 2002 a pair of psychologists, James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen, were brought on board by the CIA on contract to create the program. They based the plan partly on experiments on dogs that found if you hurt and humiliated the animals sufficiently, eventually they would stop resisting – “learned helplessness” as it was known in the trade. (At least in this regard the torture program proved successful – Zubaydah did reach such a place of helplessness. It got to the point that as soon as an interrogator snapped his fingers twice, the detainee would lie flat on the waterboard and wait supinely for the controlled drowning to begin.) The psychologists, whom the CIA paid more than $80m for their efforts, consciously modeled their interrogation methods on the so-called SERE training of American soldiers on how to resist torture were they to fall into enemy hands. The contractors openly adopted the enemy torture techniques, without irony, despite the fact that the methods were designed to extract propaganda statements from US prisoners of war and not accurate intelligence. Senior CIA officials knew that they faced an uphill battle in persuading the Department of Justice that what they planned to do was legal – after all torture was categorically prohibited under the 1949 Geneva Conventions that the US had ratified. So they presented the DoJ with a “psychological assessment” of Zubaydah justifying why he needed to be made to talk using aggressive interrogation methods, warning that “countless more Americans may die unless we can persuade Zubaydah to tell us what he knows”. It was all a smorgasbord of lies. “The reasons they gave for why he had to be tortured were false and known to be false,” Denbeaux said. “The justice department was duped into approving the torture of a man who was never a member of al-Qaida. They said he was number two, three or four of al-Qaida – not true. They said he was part of 9/11 – laughable and not true. They said he was part of all al-Qaida operations around the world – totally untrue.” Denbeaux added that one of the most urgent arguments in favour of releasing the full Senate report was that it would expose the lies at the core of the program. “It would show in detail how the falsity was made up, and who in the CIA put these false facts together.” Zubaydah’s psychological profile was not the only aspect of the untruths that formed the building blocks of the torture program. The CIA was also misleading about the efficacy of “enhanced interrogation techniques”. Ali Soufan has personal knowledge of how distorted the official CIA account was. A former FBI special agent, he was one of the first US officials to interrogate Zubaydah at a black site. He did so using conventional interrogation methods that would be familiar to students of Law &amp; Order. He learned everything he could about his subject, spoke in the prisoner’s own language (Arabic), built up a rapport with Zubaydah, and played mind games on him such as giving him the impression that the FBI knew much more about his activities than in fact they did. All without recourse to force, violence or humiliation. “We did not need torture to get information,” Soufan told the Guardian. Soufan and his FBI partner succeeded in securing Zubaydah’s cooperation and extracting significant intelligence from the prisoner, including the central role played by Khalid Sheikh Mohammed as the architect of 9/11. Even so, they were abruptly pulled off the job and replaced by the CIA contractors armed with a very different approach. Soufan watched aghast as CIA operatives, under the instruction of Mitchell and Jessen, began to torture the prisoner. “At the beginning it was mostly loud music,” Soufan said. “He was held naked in the cell. That shocked me at the time. It was stupid, why are we doing it, the guy is already giving information. And then it evolved, one step after another.” Starting at 11.50am on 4 August 2002, Zubaydah was tortured through a variety of methods, almost 24 hours a day, for 19 days without break. After a waterboarding session he was noted to have “involuntary leg, chest and arm spasms” and to be unable to communicate. On one occasion he became “completely unresponsive, with bubbles rising through his open, full mouth”. Given Zubaydah’s incommunicado status, he has never been allowed to recount his experiences directly to the American people. But over the years his lawyers have managed to put together notes in which the Guantánamo detainee describes his abuse. Excerpts of those notes, together with some of Zubaydah’s drawings that he sketched from memory in Guantánamo that illustrate his treatment at the CIA black sites, are being published by the Guardian. They amount to a harrowing account in Zubaydah’s own words and images of the relentless, round-the-clock, prolonged and illegal abuse he suffered. Soufan, who is now CEO of the Soufan Group, said the release of the full Senate report is essential to counter the CIA narrative, which he fears that too many Americans still believe – that torture works. “Most of the American public believe the Hollywood version: you beat someone up, they give you the information you want, you save lives.” Soufan added: “Release the full Senate report and you will see that the CIA shaped a false narrative. The torture did not work, it did not produce information that saved lives, it did hinder our counterterrorism operations and destroy our image and reputation around the world.” Soufan’s own experiences give some hope that the full Senate report might one day be made public. When his book on the war of terror, The Black Banners, was published in 2011 it was so heavily redacted by the CIA that he even had to black out any reference to himself including the words “I”, “me”, “our” and “we”. It took him a legal battle lasting nine years, but in 2020 he was finally able to bring out a declassified edition. Soufan hopes that the softening attitude of CIA chiefs towards his book bodes well for an eventual release of the Senate report. “The CIA is now a very different organization from what it was in 2002. The people who were directly involved in the torture program, they are all out and there is a new leadership who understand the impact of all this.” Kiriakou is more pessimistic about a CIA change of heart: “For the next 100 years the CIA will do anything it can to stop that report being made public.” The Guardian asked the CIA whether it had plans to revisit the question of whether the report could be published, and invited the agency to comment. It did not immediately respond. *** For all the uncertainty about the CIA’s intentions, calls for release of the full Senate report are growing. Prasow said that the US will find it all but impossible to close Guantánamo without grappling with the torture issue first. “The public has been sold a false story that torture victims were somehow less deserving of human rights protections. For far too long it’s been too easy to see torture victims as ‘other’. It’s time to bring them out into the light.” Denbeaux, Zubaydah’s lawyer, said that releasing the report would help fill in some of the void that was left in 2005 when the CIA destroyed videotapes of the torture of Zubaydah. “In the absence of the destroyed footage, the full Senate report would bring home to the American people the cumulative horror of how the torture worked, day after day, hour after hour, continuously, endlessly. This was a hideous awful thing, and they’d like us to forget about it?” Jones, the report’s chief author, said that were it to emerge in its totality it would “shut the book and remove any lingering doubts” – about the torture, about its ineffectiveness, and about the lies that were told. “There are so many examples in it of the CIA misleading Congress, the White House, the public.” Among the items still waiting to be revealed is a photograph that has never been made public that Jones and his team discovered of a waterboard that was stored at the notorious “Salt Pit”, a black site outside Bagram airbase in Afghanistan. The device appeared extremely well used, and in the photo it is seen surrounded by buckets of water and bottles of a peculiar pink solution. The photograph puzzled Jones and his team of investigators because there were no official records to indicate that waterboarding had ever been practiced at the Salt Pit. When the Senate team asked the CIA to explain the photograph, the agency said it had no answer. In the last analysis, Jones said that it all points to a massive failure of accountability – a failure that until the full report is made public will continue to gnaw away at the nation’s standing and self-respect. “We’ve failed at every level of accountability – criminal, civil and societal,” he said. “If this is never to happen again, there has to be a reckoning.”Perhaps the only thing surprising about “Operation Red Meat”, Boris Johnson’s recent attempt to deflect attention from the ongoing partygate scandal, is that it flopped. The flurry of policy announcements made in mid-January – from putting the military in charge of dealing with Channel crossings by small boats to threatening the BBC’s licence fee – display the rightwing populist instinct that has been central to Johnson’s leadership of the Conservative party. In the past, announcements such as these might have been enough to keep Conservative grassroot campaigners, MPs, voters and sympathetic media outlets onside. This time, it has done nothing to quell the crisis – and Johnson’s approval rating has continued to plunge dramatically. The immediate cause of failure is obvious: the attempt to placate the right by throwing out some “red meat” was cynical and half-hearted. But whether Johnson stays or goes, there are wider political shifts under way that may make populist posturing a less effective tool for the government in the years to come. A new study from the University of Cambridge suggests that worldwide, voters’ enthusiasm for populism has been on the wane since the beginning of the pandemic. The populist leaders who gathered steam in the mid-2010s and came mainly from the right or far-right are experiencing a steady decline in support, according to a survey of polling data in 27 countries. Authoritarian strongmen who tried to downplay the threat of Covid, such as Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro, are in particular trouble due to their mishandling of the pandemic. But the researchers found that attitudes among voters are shifting more broadly, with less support for ideas central to populism, such as a belief in the “will of the people”, or a tendency to see politics as a conflict between the people and a corrupt elite. The researchers attribute this in part to what they call the “rally around the flag” effect of the pandemic: people have been more likely to put their trust in national institutions and technical experts, or place a greater emphasis on social solidarity, in our collective efforts to suppress the virus. This, however, has come at a price. The study also found a “disturbing erosion of support for core democratic beliefs and principles, including less liberal attitudes with respect to basic civil rights and liberties”. There may be less appetite for populist tub-thumping, but if anything, suggests the research, the pandemic has left people more open to having the state order them around. This should be of particular concern in the UK, where a key part of the Johnson government’s programme has been to attack civil liberties. By now, we are familiar with the series of bills making their way through parliament that seek to curtail people’s rights – the right to protest or to seek asylum; the right of Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities to live without harassment from the state; or of people with immigrant backgrounds to live securely in the UK – but it’s worth pausing to consider why these issues have become so politically dominant. As the Cambridge researchers state: “When people feel existentially threatened, they are likely to endorse illiberal attitudes across a broader spectrum of beliefs.” The rightwing populist wave of recent years has relied on linking people’s discontent at the political system to the false claim that majority populations are threatened by immigrants and other outsiders. These populists – or, in the case of the UK government, a centre-right party that has taken on a populist hue – have offered to restore a sense of security through clamping down on perceived threats, and taking power away from the checks and balances of liberal democracy that they portray as tools of the elite. Fading support for populism may eventually lead to a shift in the tone of political debate, but the changes the government’s new laws bring will be profound and long-lasting – and harder to roll back if people’s desire for security outweighs other concerns. As a new report by the Institute of Race Relations thinktank points out, a common thread running through the new laws is that not only do they target our rights, but they seek to make the state and its officials less accountable. The government’s proposed reforms to the Human Rights Act, for instance, which would place new obstacles in the way of human rights claims in the courts, threaten to limit our ability to seek justice from the state. The barrister and author David Renton notes that the Human Rights Act has been of vital importance to many different groups in society, from the Hillsborough families to tenants fighting eviction. At the same time, we have given the state far greater power over our lives in the service of suppressing the pandemic, an issue that becomes more ethically complex as the emergency recedes. Look, for instance, at how swiftly the idea that unvaccinated people should be denied or given less priority for medical treatment has entered political debate in the UK and elsewhere in recent months. If we do not challenge these trends now, then the UK risks becoming a place where ordinary people have less of a voice, and less ability to hold the country’s institutions to account. Making that challenge is no easy prospect. “Civil liberties” can often seem like a dry, abstract concept, and it cuts across conventional political distinctions. The left has a tendency to regard civil liberties as something of a sideshow – a distraction from “real” issues such as economic inequality – while liberals can sometimes treat the issue as apolitical, merely a matter to be settled by the courts. Rightwing “libertarians”, meanwhile, are often highly selective about the liberties they are willing to defend. Ultimately, the response must be to make these issues central to other political debates, so they are not dismissed as more immediate problems such as the cost of living crisis come to dominate our attention. For example, the government also announced this week that sanctions for jobseekers on universal credit will be made much tougher. It is tempting to see this as purely an economic question: should benefits be more generous, or less? But it is also fundamentally about the way the state is allowed to treat individuals, and what tools we have to push back against our treatment. Over the past decade, cuts to legal aid have made it much more difficult for people without private wealth to dispute what they think are unfair decisions in the benefits system. Ensuring the right to challenge the state would also be a way to help people win economic security for themselves. In the short term, however, it’s important to recognise that there are still effective ways to counteract the government, as the partial victories against the policing bill in the House of Lords earlier this month suggest. There, a cross-party alliance of peers voted down some of the more egregious proposals to restrict the right to protest, but the campaign against the bill would not have gained momentum without the efforts of radical and liberal activists outside parliament, who have been raising the alarm on the streets and in their communities for months. This is an uneasy alliance – the interests and priorities of the groups involved will not always align – but finding points in common is an essential first step to wider change. Daniel Trilling is the author of Lights in the Distance: Exile and Refuge at the Borders of Europe, and Bloody Nasty People: the Rise of Britain’s Far RightShooting with an iPhone, says French photographer Frédéric Noy, is like “mild psychotherapy. Sometimes, you get stuck. Taking a few pictures with an iPhone is like a liberation. A reset, a moment of reflection. You see things differently.” Noy arrived in Nur-Sultan, the capital of Kazakhstan, mid-pandemic, after many years in Africa, where he had documented the daily lives of persecuted LGBTQ+ Ugandans; he had won World Press Photo and Visa d’Or awards for his work on the environmental disaster in Lake Victoria. “I wanted to go somewhere as distant and as different as possible,” he says. “Kazakhstan was the last country to leave the USSR, and it’s still constructing its identity. That’s what interested me. All I knew about it was cliche.” He took this photo in early May 2021, when, on the last day of term, pupils, their teachers and some parents placed flowers on the statue of Aliya Moldagulova, a Kazakh-born sniper who died of battle wounds in 1944 and was made a hero of the Soviet Union. “Like Russia, they celebrate Victory Day here on 9 May,” Noy says. “The shot intrigues me because the children’s uniforms look almost like the Red Army. In a country that only became independent in 1991, when the Kazakhs were a minority in their homeland, there’s a clear tension between the national and the Soviet identity.” It’s part of what he calls his project scrapbook. “I rarely take the same pictures with my phone and with my cameras,” he says. “The intention is very different. It’s like a sketch, I suppose. I feel sometimes I’m not the same photographer.” • The headline and text of this article were amended on 31 January 2022. An earlier version said that the children were wearing “school uniforms”; the outfits were special uniforms worn for Victory Day.It’s an annual tradition as ingrained as throwing Gatorade on the winning coach: the moment when the Super Bowl half-time performer takes to the stage and the football field is filled with “fans” cheering them on. The Los Angeles Times reported last week that those audience members are in fact hundreds of unpaid “volunteers” who participate in nearly two weeks of rehearsals ahead of the Super Bowl, many of whom are trained dancers recruited from the same agency that represents the paid dancers on the halftime show stage. The arrangement is now under scrutiny after Taja Riley, a professional dancer, who called out the people behind the nation’s highest-grossing sporting event for not paying the trained dancers used in the show. She accused the NFL and Roc Nation, who are producing the half-time show, for exploiting the labor of mostly Black artists. Riley, who has been paid to perform in two previous half-time shows, said the unpaid dancers are treated as volunteers but are required to attend nine days of nine-hour rehearsals. While she hasn’t been privy to this year’s preparations, Riley said that at the previous Super Bowls she participated in, “the schedules those volunteers were given, and what they were coaxed into … they will be doing more than just acting as ‘concertgoers’”. This year, the call for volunteers went out to dancers represented by Bloc, the same agency that represents Fatima Robinson, who is choreographing the performance. Riley was tipped off about the recruitment of dance artists for unpaid work. She said she was surprised because Robinson is someone she admired and looked up to not just as a dance artist but one of the “African-American leaders for our community”. “She’s done what I hope to do, of having the esteem and deepened relationship with other artistic collaborators,” Riley said. Robinson, who has worked closely with some of the biggest names in hip-hop, including Pharrell Williams and Kendrick Lamar, has defended this year’s half-time show, saying the 115 paid dancers are the highest number of dancers to be paid to perform in a Super Bowl, and that the only thing required of the volunteers is that they be able to “walk and chew gum at the same time”. That dismissive characterization of the expectations of the volunteers is incongruous with what others have said is being demanded of them. If it were the case, then why not simply pick anyone off the street rather than recruit trained dancers? Regardless, even extras on a typical union job are paid for what truly can amount to simply “walking and chewing gum”. “If they are just ‘concertgoers’,” Riley asked, “why would they have an excessive schedule like this? For award shows, they file in the day of and are just fine with one full day of rehearsal before the show. What would be reasonable is two days, not nine. If they are really just there to be concertgoers, they should really only have, maximum, an eight hour work-week.” This year’s show involves pyrotechnics, which Riley and another dancer, Devyck Bull, who was booked as a paid dancer for this year’s performance, said is one justification for the intense rehearsal requirements – and also a reason why people should be both trained and fairly compensated. Bull replied to Riley’s social media post, saying he was hired to perform at a previous half-time show, he’d discovered that a large number of performers weren’t being paid, and were under the impression that no one was. “It just didn’t sit well with me,” Bull said. Bull felt he was “less experienced about speaking up”, but when he saw Riley’s post, he felt he was able to go public. After he shared what he’d heard in comments on Riley’s Instagram, other dancers told him he was making a mistake, and was going to end up “blacklisted”. Bull said they were right: the next day, he was told he’d been cut from the half-time show. Bull received an email from someone at Bloc on 20 January telling him that the agency had “just received an update and unfortunately they will no longer be needing you for the half-time performance”. The agency representative told Bull he’d be notified “if anything changes”. Bloc did not respond to a request for comment. Nor did the NFL or Roc Nation, which produces the half-time show. As freelance contractors, dance artists lack mechanisms like unions that could allow them to organize and operate in solidarity with one another in these situations, Riley said. However, when she gets a job, she tries to find someone else who is hired on it, and get a group chat going to coordinate who has what supplies, what everyone is bringing, and other logistical necessities. That kind of communication could allow everyone to get on the same page. And if the paid dancers were willing to stand together, it could make a difference for the larger number of unpaid dancerssome of whom have 10 years of professional dance experience. Roc Nation and Sag Aftra have suggested since Riley spoke out that some sort of “agreement” was reached between the production company and the union, with Sag Aftra praising the payment of 100 dancers and saying they’re advising their members not to accept the volunteer positions. But it’s not clear that anything has actually changed since Riley first brought attention to the issue: there are still only 100 people getting paid, and 400 expected to pay to give up nearly two weeks of their time. “This is not just for the Super Bowl, this is for every industry gig,” Riley said. “These are really hard questions that there’s maybe no right or wrong answer to, but there may be an ethical and unethical answer.”A couple heading off on holiday to Madeira were refused permission to board their plane on the grounds that the woman’s passport was not valid – even though it had another nine months left on it. Pat Cerely, 79, and her 83-year-old husband, Peter, are the latest holidaymakers to be caught up in confusion over Brexit-related rules that mean many people with up to 12 months left on their passport could be stopped from travelling to a long list of EU countries. Since January 2021 restrictions limiting how long non-EU citizens can spend in mainland Europe have meant that UK holidaymakers can only enter a country if they have at least three months left on their passport. Rules that for non-EU citizens a passport must be within 10 years of its issue date when the holder arrives also apply. In November, the couple were told they could not set off on their trip because Pat’s passport did not meet new rules. The Cerelys arrived at Gatwick airport, checked in their luggage and then went through passport control with no problems. “We duly went to get on the plane, and when the girl looked at my passport, she said I couldn’t board as it wasn’t valid,” Pat says. “There was another couple there experiencing the same problem. Although my passport didn’t expire until August 2022, she said it wasn’t valid.” However, a close read of EU rules suggests the UK government, and some travel companies, are giving out incorrect information, and some people are being wrongly denied permission to travel. The passport matter revolves around the date the document was issued. According to the UK government and her airline, easyJet, Pat was correctly denied boarding but the EU regulations – as communicated to Guardian Money this week – would appear to show she should have been allowed on the flight. The European Commission says there are two rules that have to be complied with at the point of entry. The passport must have been issued within the previous 10 years, and it must be valid for at least three months after the day you plan to leave. However, the 10-year requirement “does not extend for the duration of the intended stay. It is enough if this condition is fulfilled at the moment of entry”. It says this means that a Briton arriving in an EU country on 1 December 2021 for a 20-day holiday with a passport issued on 2 December 2011 and valid until 2 April 2022 would be allowed entry. The validity date is the expiry date, not the 10th anniversary of the passport being issued, and if you are on holiday in Europe when your passport “busts” the 10-year rule, that is fine. The different dates exist because for many years those renewing their passport before the previous one expired were able to add any remaining time left. Until September 2018 you could have up to nine months added to an adult or child’s passport in this way. If you have a trip booked or are thinking about one, dig out everyone’s passport now to check the dates. Check the date of issue and the date of expiry. Pat Cerely’s passport was renewed in December 2011 but has an expiry date of August 2022. The Cerelys had to return home with their bags after being denied boarding for their break. “We had to wait some time for our luggage and then go through the passport control exit. This all took place at 7am,” she says. Peter has dementia and she adds: “It was all very depressing and confusing for him.” When they got home, Pat contacted the travel firm they had used to book the holiday and was told it was very unlikely they would receive a refund. “I also contacted our insurance company, who said that we couldn’t make a claim as I should have read the small print! Since then we have had a refund of £35.47, which is the air tax,” she says. “What I don’t understand is why didn’t easyJet inform me when I booked the flights, and why a friend who visited his sister in December and had the same expiry date on his passport as me was allowed to fly to Portugal with easyJet with no problem.” The EU rules suggest the Cerelys have a case for obtaining a refund and compensation on the grounds of being unfairly denied boarding. The UK’s Foreign, Commonwealth &amp; Development Office says it is “seeking clarification” from the European Commission about the rule. The Gov.uk site tells would-be travellers that “for some Schengen countries, your passport may need to be less than 10 years old during your whole visit, and the three months at the end of your visit may need to be within 10 years of your passport’s issue date”. The rules for travel changed a year ago, yet the commission says it was discussing this issue with member states during 2021, and “this advice will be reflected in an upcoming update of the practical handbook for border guards”. In a statement, easyJet told us that at the time of the flight taken by the Cerelys, the UK Foreign Office requirements stated that the three-month validity on the day of departure from Portugal must be within 10 years of the passport issue date, and added: “Unfortunately, her passport didn’t meet this criteria.” A spokesperson said: “We do specifically inform customers to check passport validity requirements ahead of departure, both at the time of booking and ahead of their flight via email. “We would like to apologise to these passengers for any inconvenience caused; however, we were following the government guidance at the time.” Before you travel The days of travel insurers offering next to no cancellation and other Covid-related cover are mostly over but you should still check potential policies closely before you hand over your credit card details. Cover for those forced to cancel because a member of their party contracts the coronavirus has been restored to most of the better, popular policies. However, you really need to check the small print, particularly if you are unvaccinated. For example, the popular Staysure requires policyholders to be vaccinated to gain its Covid cover. The rival Direct Line does not. There are still a host of get-outs to contend with. Direct Line will not pay out if you have to cancel because you have to self-isolate when you return. Other insurers will have similar caveats that you will want to be aware of. If you rely on an annual policy either bought or one that comes via your paid-for bank account, it is worth looking at the insurer’s latest position, which may have changed since you last (tried to) book a trip. If you do not have an annual policy, buy the policy as soon as you book the trip. That way you will be covered if the airline collapses (assuming you have scheduled airline failure cover) or something happens to one of your party before you travel. Again, check exactly how much your chosen policy will pay out before you buy. For example, Staysure’s basic policy only offers £500 to cover cancellation, meaning you will want to opt for its comprehensive cover (up to £5,000) if you have pushed the boat out and booked an expensive trip. Other insurers have similarly different levels of cover, and the more you pay the greater the cover. Mobile phone charges Vodafone is leading the way with a £2-a-day charge (or a bundled £15 for 15 days) to use its package “as at home” in Europe, and will start applying the fee to bills on 31 January. In the short-term it only applies to customers who upgraded or changed their payment plan on or after 11 August 2021. EE has delayed resuming its £2-a-day roaming charges, which were planned for January, until March. Three is bringing in roaming charges between the UK and Europe in May 2022. O2 and Virgin Mobile have said they will maintain their inclusive roaming in the EU bloc, so their customers can travel and use their data, calls and texts just as they would in the UK. Brexit has allowed the phone companies to reintroduce roaming fees for Britons in Europe. They never went away for those who ventured further afield.Everyone misses something. For some, it’s quite specific: PG Tips, Branston pickle, proper curry. For many, it’s more intangible: the atmosphere of an English pub; that greenness, everywhere; tolerance; and British openness. Then they pause. Actually, many formerly British-resident EU nationals say, what they miss is an idea. Or, to be precise, the idea of Britain they had before 24 June 2016: all of them remember, in painful, pin-sharp detail, how they felt, and what they did, the morning after. While it is clear that EU immigration into the UK has declined sharply since 1 January last year, when Britain finally left the bloc’s orbit and free movement came to an end, it is hard to say exactly how many EU nationals have left since the Brexit referendum. The figures are confusing. The ONS says Brexit and the pandemic prompted more than 200,000 EU nationals to go in 2020, leaving a total of 3.5 million in the UK – but the Home Office says it has received 6m applications for settled status. Jobs data suggests 9% fewer EU nationals were working in Britain last year than in 2019. Immigration experts, however, say the official data is insufficient, and almost certainly underestimates the true number of departures by a significant margin. Elena Remigi is a translator and interpreter who, after the shock of the referendum result, set up In Limbo, a Facebook group for EU citizens in the UK and Britons on the continent. She reckons more than 20% of the 100-plus EU citizens whose testimonies she published in the first of the project’s two books in 2017 have now left Britain. “Some went right after the vote,” says Remigi, who has lived in Britain for 15 years. “Others waited for job offers. More left in 2020, in the transition period, when British partners could still settle easily in the EU. The pandemic convinced another lot to go.” But for all the confusion around the exact numbers, few experts doubt that the bitterness created by Brexit, combined with longer-term concerns about becoming second-class citizens, have prompted many to go. Early reports of unfair “hostile environment” treatment of legally resident EU citizens have spurred the exodus: EU nationals arriving for job interviews have been locked up, and others legally resident in Britain have been detained. When the Independent Monitoring Authority, which was set up under the Brexit deal to protect the rights of EU citizens settled in the UK, surveyed 3,000 EU nationals in the UK last summer, it found one in three lacked trust in the government, and one in 10 were planning to leave. Last month, the same body launched legal action against the Home Office, accusing it of breaching EU nationals’ basic rights. Many, of course, have decided to stay, regardless. For those who decided to go, the decision was rarely easy. Often, they had been living, working and bringing up families in Britain for decades. Some took British partners – often with equally strong feelings about Brexit – with them. Others separated. They are still scarred. We settled, they say, contributed, built lives in Britain, felt it was our home – and then, without us having any say, you suddenly changed the rules. The words they use to describe how they feel are invariably the same: forgotten, lost, abandoned, unprotected, unwelcome, betrayed, belittled, voiceless. Many were asked when they would leave. Most believed that in future some degree of discrimination – over jobs, housing, healthcare, bank accounts – was inevitable. But returning to the EU has not always been easy. So yes, there are things about Britain they miss. Though they have also lost their illusions of what Britain was. The most succinct summary she has heard, says Remigi, goes like this: “Farewell, Britain. You were once good to me. And then you weren’t.” *** ‘I miss multiculturalism. Proper customer service, green trees. Not the weather. Not the food’: Maria Candela, Spain Candela thinks her experience is a common one. “Come to England, find a job, meet someone, get married, have children,” she says. “Then wake up one morning, see the result of the vote, and realise everything has changed. Leave. There are many like me, aren’t there?” She still believes Britain is a tolerant country. “I always thought it,” she says. “Perhaps this is a hiccup of history. Maybe Britain has just stepped back to move forward. What I do know is the day I left was the saddest of my life.” Candela spent 23 years in Britain, coming first to study English, then working for a Japanese trading company. She married a Japanese man in insurance, and raised two children, now aged 15 and 20. “We bought a house in Orpington,” she says. “It was our home. The day we left, 4 August 2017, I cried so many tears. I feel emotional talking about it even now. I have kept a photograph of it, all emptied.” Brexit was “such a shock. British people always seemed so respectful of foreigners. And the vote brought everything out that was hidden. All this pride in being British, this dislike of other cultures, all in the open.” The morning after, taking her daughter to school, she recalls other parents “looking at the floor. People who knew me.” They looked guilty, she remembers. “A remainer friend came round and announced, ‘We love you.’ Very dramatic. Lots of people said, ‘It’s not against you.’ I thought: but it’s against people like me.” What also changed, she says, is that she started “wondering about people. Which way they’d voted. I’d never thought that way before. Comments you wouldn’t have thought about twice, you started noticing.” Just over a year after the vote, her then husband (they separated a few months ago) was offered a job in Spain, and took it. “He was over the moon,” she says. “The sun, the food … He wasn’t very happy in England.” For Candela, there was “a reverse culture shock”. She was “feeling sad that my country isn’t capable of doing that much better. The whole Catalan independence thing kicked off as we arrived – the same issues, a divisive referendum, all over again. It wasn’t easy.” Now she is working in Barcelona, for a startup. Although her children are British nationals, her son just told her: “Mum, wherever I go, I’ll be a foreigner.” Her daughter is studying at Goldsmiths, and happy; she at least feels at home. Candela misses “London’s multiculturalism. Proper customer service. Green trees. Not the weather. Not the food. And I wouldn’t go back.” *** ‘At UK universities there was a rich exchange of ideas, this great multicultural welcoming of foreign minds’: Andrea Mammone, Italy “There are mixed feelings, but no regrets,” says Mammone. Now a senior researcher in contemporary history at the Sapienza University of Rome, for the past 10 years he was at Royal Holloway, University of London. An expert on the far right, nationalism and European politics, Mammone, whose first experience of Britain was an Erasmus year in Bath in 1999, watched the Brexit process unfold with an interest that was as much professional as personal. He got it half wrong, half right. “On the one hand, I thought the leave campaign did not look like it was winning,” he says. “On the other, I was absolutely certain, looking at what the Conservatives were saying, that if it did, it would be a disaster.” There are lots of people like Mammone in UK universities, “people who came for this very open British system, this rich exchange of ideas, this great multicultural welcoming of foreign minds”. Now, he says, “many are leaving. You see a difference of approach. It feels like certain topics or themes are becoming almost out of bounds. A kind of nationalism has come back. Add in the marketisation of higher education in the UK, and the universities are not what they were.” Professionally, Mammone says, he could see this was “demagogy in action. The Brexiters’ analysis was so poor; it was clear they could never deliver all they promised. We used to talk about British pragmatism, but leaving Europe actually brings Britain closer to the populist politics of parts of the continent.” Personally, he feels “a sort of betrayal. Like a rejection of the European identity. It was a shock when it happened, certainly. Politically, culturally, Britain showed a different face. It no longer considered me a citizen. I had no reason to stay – not family, not the weather, not the food. It was not special any more.” Mammone does miss London. “Or at least, a nostalgic, romantic vision of London – dynamism and greenery. But I was back for a month this autumn and it’s changed. In Italy there’s a kind of post-pandemic renaissance under way; London feels the opposite. Every day I am more sure I made the right choice.” *** ‘I miss my friends, my old teaching job. My husband really misses a good curry’: Joke Qureshi, the Netherlands After 19 years in Britain, Joke Qureshi has come to spell her name as it’s pronounced in Dutch: Yoka. It’s also the name of the new band she has formed with her British husband, Ray, a year after returning to the Netherlands. “It hasn’t all been easy,” she says. “I felt like a foreigner in my own country: so much was the same, so much completely different. I didn’t know how things worked. We felt lonely at times, often misunderstood.” She was disappointed, too, to discover escaping Brexit did not mean escaping some of what drove it. “All the ‘our country is full’ rhetoric, the idea that immigrants are taking people’s jobs, that they are the cause of the housing shortage, only after ‘our’ money – that exists here, too,” she says. Qureshi landed in London in 2002, aged 29, from Amsterdam. She found a job in a pub, then as a recruiter, then in a travel agency, and spent her weekends gigging. Ray, who drives trucks for a day job, joined the band as a guitarist in 2011. She studied for a social policy degree from the Open University, volunteered with a youth offenders service, and eventually became a special educational needs teacher, a job she loved. In August 2016, weeks after the referendum, they moved to Kent. “There were still leave posters everywhere,” she says. “In the pub, people would just assume we agreed with them. I felt nervous, unsure what to say. But when we went to see my mum in the Netherlands, everything just felt so easy. I felt like I belonged. Like I didn’t have to pretend. Ray loved it, too.” When they finally decided to move, in June 2020, it was a scramble: Ray needed to be resident in the Netherlands before the end of the transition period or face a series of complications, including a Dutch language test. But everything fell into place. Before they left, Qureshi found a job in youth care; Ray started driving trucks as soon as they arrived. They found a home with a garden and a workshop for Ray’s hobby, guitar-making. The pandemic hasn’t made life easier, but they feel on track, Qureshi says. The band is on; a social life beckons. “I miss my friends, I miss my old teaching job, I miss the British blues scene, which was so warm,” she says. “I miss nice Brits. Ray really misses a good curry. But I’m happy we left.” *** ‘I miss English pubs. I miss PG Tips. I miss speaking English – I love this language’: Laure Ollivier-Minns, France English was Ollivier-Minns’ worst subject at school, which is why she came to Britain in 1986, aged 19, to improve it. “I honestly thought I would spend the rest of my life there,” she says. “I loved that country. I embraced the culture. It really was home.” In more than three decades in the UK, she worked as an au pair, an auxiliary nurse, a French teacher and, finally, as a sculptor, living first in London, then near Great Yarmouth, and – for 24 years – in a “big house with a lovely garden” in Norwich. She married a Briton (“a good man”) and had two children, now 24 and 27. In September 2018 she moved back to a one-bed house near Nantes, where she grew up and has family and friends. “I had to leave,” she says. “The weight of Brexit became so enormous. The division, the apathy, the sense of betrayal. I couldn’t stay. It became almost physical.” Her last two years in Britain were “suffocating, unbearable”. The architects of Brexit “stole my friends”, she says – they felt uneasy about the vote and kept their distance afterwards. Brexit also “robbed me of my beautiful home: it no longer felt like home. They tarnished the British values we shared, and soiled me in the process. They left me feeling unsafe.” Ollivier-Minns didn’t trust the EU settlement scheme. “I could see the discrimination coming, that dangerous ‘us v them’,” she says. “I had to get out.” Brexit also cost her her marriage. “I fell out of love with the country, then I fell out of love with my husband. So after more than 30 years together, we divorced when I returned to France. It was immensely stressful.” Rebuilding a new life in France after so long away, wrestling with the bureaucracy and doing up a new home have proved “a huge challenge, but also a distraction”. She has a lot less money. “I ended November with €35 in the bank,” she says. “I miss my children most. They’re British; they don’t feel in the least French. That’s the biggest sacrifice, a huge sacrifice. I miss English pubs. I miss PG Tips. I miss speaking English – I love this language. I was missing it so much I set up an English conversation group here.” Yet she remains angry. “I still care about Britain, but the deep feeling of betrayal won’t leave,” she says. “I’m disgusted by what happened, by what’s still happening. But I’m happier out of it. I had to look after myself. There’s no price for freedom and security.” *** ‘I miss my job, my lovely colleagues’: Susanne Aichbauer, Austria Aichbauer headed back to her native Austria in October last year, with a British partner and daughter in tow. “It was a relief,” she says. “I could have stayed, made the most of it. But I’m so grateful Craig wanted to leave too.” An inveterate traveller, Aichbauer arrived in the UK in 2001, aged 28, in pursuit of an Irishman she fell for on a motorbike tour of India. She settled in Brighton, working at a museum cafe to fund more road trips. She met Craig in 2009 and travelled around Asia with him for 14 months. Then she became pregnant with Judith, and moved in with Craig’s mother in the Fens. Later they bought a home of their own near Wisbech in Cambridgeshire. “I trained as a baby swimming teacher and pregnancy yoga instructor, and loved it,” she says. “Craig did warehouse shifts, then found work as a plumber. We had a whole life there. A happy life.” The referendum was “devastating”. Craig’s whole family had voted leave. The pub no longer felt so friendly. “I got a few ‘When are you going home?’ comments, and I just thought, I don’t have to do this,” Aichbauer says. “Craig was very honest,” she says. “He just said he didn’t have the guts.” But then Covid shut down her workplace, and in May 2020 Aichbauer took Judith to Austria for six weeks. “We had the best time ever,” she says. “We called Craig every day. But it was an English friend who convinced him. He said it was clear where Britain was heading.” She won’t easily forget the date. “The sixth of July. He called, said he’d spoken to the estate agent, that the house was on the market. From then on, things went really fast.” (They had to move quickly: as with the other British partners of EU nationals, Craig needed to be in Austria before the end of the transition period.) They were lucky: Aichbauer’s big old family home, now owned by her sister, was mostly used for holiday lets, so they were able to stay. In the Alps, where Austria, Italy and Slovenia meet, most jobs are seasonal, but Aichbauer has found permanent work as an assistant to the local vet, and Craig is working as a plumber. Judith is loving school. “I have no regrets,” Aichbauer says. “I miss my job, my lovely colleagues. Craig struggles a bit with the winter, the sheer weight of the snow. But you look where Britain’s heading now and you think, I wouldn’t have been true to myself if I’d stayed.” *** ‘I miss the openness, the tolerance – I miss my idea of Britain as it was, before Brexit’: Eva Pavelková, the Czech Republic Pavelková is back where she began, in Prague, and there’s not a lot she misses about the country that was her home for 15 years. “I’m not a big tea-drinker,” she says. “I do miss the openness, the tolerance – at least, I miss my idea of Britain as it was, before Brexit.” Pavelková left for the UK after graduating from vet school in the Czech Republic in 2006. She found work in Lancashire; it was hard to begin with. But after a spell travelling, she returned in 2010, settling in Cheshire, qualifying as a veterinary cardiologist in 2014, then working in an animal hospital in Manchester. “I think I was a bit naive about Brexit,” she says. “I didn’t think anyone would be so stupid as to vote leave. But I started to worry as the referendum neared, and people around me started saying they would.” The outcome was, Pavelková says, “a life-changing event. It completely threw me. I panicked about the implications – for my job, my work, free movement. It was clear EU citizens would never have the same status, that the country wouldn’t be the same.” She overheard a nurse telling a colleague she had voted out “because I don’t like the immigrants”. A neighbour asked when she was leaving. A client who brought his dog in was proudly sporting an “I voted leave” T-shirt. “The whole atmosphere was different,” Pavelková says. She applied for permanent residency in the UK – before realising she didn’t qualify because she had not had private health insurance while she was studying. Then, in 2018, she met her British husband, Stuart. “I’d calmed down a bit by then,” Pavelková says. “But neither of us felt our future was in the UK. Neither of us liked where the country was going. We decided to leave in January 2020, and we knew we’d have to be gone by the end of the year.” Pavelková applied for British citizenship. She says: “I’m not proud of having dual nationality; it was necessary just to keep the rights I already had.” But last December the couple moved to Prague. She has set up her own veterinary cardiology practice, and Stuart, an environmental officer in the UK, is working from home. Pavelková has returned a few times since then for locum stints, but has mixed feelings. “I do miss my colleagues; we’re a small, close, very friendly community,” she says. “I love seeing my friends and family. But Britain has changed. Life is cheaper here in Prague, and easier. The quality of life’s better. We’re happier.” • This article was amended on 30 January 2022. Due to an editing error, an earlier version said that the UK left the EU’s “orbit” and “free movement came to an end” on “31 January last year”. The UK formally left the EU on 31 January 2020; then, following a period of transition, it left the EU single market and customs union at the end of 31 December 2020, when free movement came to an end.Four-year-old Joanna Gillikin likes to watch Ada Twist, Scientist, a Netflix children’s show about a young girl with a giant interest in science. So when Matthew Gillikin and his wife, Shannon, enrolled Joanna in a trial in Charlottesville, Virginia, for the Pfizer vaccine against Covid-19, they described it to her as a science experiment, like the ones Ada does. “Her mind was able to latch onto the fact that not only is she participating in something that could make her healthier, but also help make other people healthier,” said Matthew, a speech therapist. Many parents across the United States are eagerly waiting to see whether Joanna and other trial participants can help them. They are upset that more than a year after the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) authorized the vaccines for emergency use for adults, they are still not available to children under five. Now, as the number of new Covid cases continues to fall in parts of the country and talk has returned of figuring out how to forge a ‘new normal’ after the pandemic, some parents of the young children – and their pediatricians – feel as though that population has been left behind. They think the FDA has not acted with enough urgency to make the vaccines available, leaving young children vulnerable to the virus and unable to return to ordinary life. “It’s just about time that we really prioritize these young children,” said Dr Alpa Shah, a pediatrician in Milwaukee. “The narrative throughout this pandemic has been, ‘Well, Covid is mild in these young kids, and the vaccine is now available to children,’ and it’s almost as if we are forgetting that there is a population of children that doesn’t have a means of protection.” Pfizer and its German partner BioNTech have encountered setbacks in their trials for that age group. In December, the companies announced that two doses of the vaccine triggered a sufficient immune response in children six months to two-years-old, but not in kids aged two to four. As such, they said they would add a third dose for children under five. The decision “reflects the companies’ commitment to carefully select the right dose to maximize the risk-benefit profile”, they said in a statement. If the study is successful, the companies expect to submit data to request emergency use authorization in the first half of 2022. Dr Anthony Fauci, the White House’s chief medical adviser, said earlier this month that he hopes the FDA authorizes the vaccine for children in that age group in the coming weeks. Moderna, which has not had its vaccine authorized in the United States for anyone under age 18, announced earlier this month that it expects to report data for children ages two to five in March and then potentially seek FDA authorization. Shah, who has a 2-year-old daughter, said she understands that the FDA wants to ensure the vaccine is safe and doesn’t place blame on a particular group. But she thinks the government should adjust its authorization process. Shah was among more than 250 physicians who signed an open letter posted last week urging Dr Janet Woodcock, the FDA acting commissioner, to allow “providers and parents the option of joint decision-making to immunize children with off-label use”, meaning without government approval. The group, Protecting Their Future, also suggested that the FDA diverge from its normal age de-escalation approval process in which a vaccine is tested among the oldest age groups and then gradually tested among younger people. They would like to see the agency authorize the Pfizer vaccine for ages six months to two years because of the apparently successful results for that subgroup. While the general population can choose which safety measures to follow, including getting vaccinated, “our children don’t have a choice”, the letter states. CJ Koeninger, a coordinator of a children’s ministry in Madison, Wisconsin, has been especially concerned about Covid because her two daughters, Piper and Ellie, now seven and four, were both hospitalized shortly before the pandemic due to asthma exacerbation. Children with moderate to severe asthma are at a greater risk of becoming severely ill from Covid, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). While both girls’ asthma is now well controlled, Koeninger said their hospitalization has “made all the messaging about ‘Kids are fine. It’s not a big deal for kids,’ a little bit frustrating because, well, you don’t know my kids”. Of the more than 848,000 people who have died in the United States from Covid, 727 have been under age 18, according to the CDC. Less than 1.5% of child Covid cases have resulted in hospitalization, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). But the number of Covid cases has increased dramatically recently due to the Omicron variant. There were more than 1.1 million child Covid cases reported the week ending 20 January, five times the rate of the peak of the winter surge in 2021, according to the AAP. The number of people under age 18 who were hospitalized with Covid also spiked during the Omicron surge, but fell by 8.9% the week of Jan. 16, according to the CDC. “The AAP shares your concerns about the inaccurate and harmful media narrative that Covid-19 illness is ‘mild’ in children,” Dr Sandy Chung, the AAP president elect, stated in an email to Shah. “We are in close contact with colleagues at CDC and FDA and have been urging them to prioritize the research and approval process for pediatric vaccines for nearly two years.” Koeninger, who tried to enroll Ellie in a trial, doesn’t understand why groups could not have conducted vaccine trials for different age groups simultaneously. “We are all just so tired,” Koeninger, 32, said of parents of young children. “It feels like the world has moved on, everyone thinks the pandemic is over, and we are still quarantining every few weeks.” While Eric Rubin, an immunologist at Harvard University and member of the FDA advisory committee, said he is sympathetic to parents whose children aren’t yet eligible for the vaccine, he does “not want to second guess the process”. For trials, researchers treat older people first because a potential side effect could become “more acute as you get younger and younger, so one way to make sure you put the smallest number of people at risk is to work” your way down, explained Rubin, who like other members of the advisory committee, has not seen data from the trials. As to the request for the FDA to authorize the Pfizer vaccine just for children ages six months to two years, Rubin explained that studies are designed for a certain number of people, and subgroups are often too small to offer proof. Dr Jay Portnoy, an advisory committee member and medical director at Children’s Mercy Hospital in Kansas City, Missouri, saw the number of children with Covid in his hospital increase during the Omicron wave and said he understands parents’ frustration. But he still said he would not endorse off-label usage of the Pfizer vaccine, as Protecting Their Future suggests. “There is a reason why the label is the way it is, and if it becomes the wild west and everyone just starts doing things willy-nilly, there is no way we are going to be able to keep track of adverse events and how effective it is and all kinds of complications could occur that I would be worried about,” said Portnoy. Kelly Edinger, a mother of three in Troy, Missouri, tried unsuccessfully to get her youngest daughter, Kennedi, four, into a vaccine trial and is disappointed that she hasn’t been able to get the shots. But she said she understands the delay. “They want to make sure it’s safe, and I think I like that idea better, as long as I know they are taking the right steps,” said Edinger, who stays home and helps her children with their virtual school. Though Gillikin was able to enroll Joanna in a trial, it hasn’t changed much for his family because they don’t know if she received three doses of the vaccine or a placebo. Gillikin also sees the ongoing harm caused by the virus because he primarily works with adults at UVA Hospital who have swallowing problems. It’s often because they had Covid and were intubated to help them breathe. “We have so many Covid patients right now. It’s the highest it’s been in the whole pandemic,” Gillikin said earlier this week. Even if they learn that Joanna was vaccinated, the family’s activities will still depend in part on the prevalence of the virus, he said. “We haven’t attended indoor church since the pandemic started, and I think that’s something we would be interested in doing again once they are vaccinated,” Gillikin said of the kids. “I would like for [Joanna] to be able to have friends over for playdates.”When Ash Barty took her first steps on to Rod Laver Arena for her first Australian Open final, there was already no doubt about the completeness of her game, the integrity with which she carries herself and the historic career she is building before our eyes. But it still remained to be seen how she would handle and digest a moment like nothing before it. She did so with the composure of a champion who could go on to win so much more. Before a crowd that lived every moment with her, Barty calmly navigated the fire of Danielle Collins, recovering from a 5-1 second-set deficit to win 6-3, 7-6 (2) and clinch the Australian Open for the first time. She is the first Australian to win an Australian Open singles title since Chris O’Neil in 1978. She did not drop a set. With three grand-slam titles to her name, Barty has joined Serena Williams as the only active women’s players to hold grand slam titles on all three surfaces. Having spent much of the tournament, and recent years, speaking proudly of her Indigenous heritage, she continues to follow in the footsteps of four-times champion Evonne Goolagong Cawley, who surprised Barty by appearing on court to hand her the trophy. “To be able to have this feeling and experience this a few times over, I just understand how fortunate I am to be able to experience that, because not many people get to do that,” said Barty. “It’s just been an incredible journey over this past 20 years of hitting a tennis ball but particularly the last five or six years in this second phase of my career.” From the moment fans began to arrive at Melbourne Park in their thousands, wearing T-shirts with Barty’s name and her two flags, the magnitude of this occasion was clear. Australian sporting royalty and celebrities followed; Rod Laver, Cathy Freeman, Russell Crowe and O’Neil were present to watch sporting history unfold. The players were unaffected by the occasion and atmosphere early on but Barty soon took control by serving smoothly, using her forehand to move Collins and taking the solitary break at 3-2 as she moved up a set. Unsurprisingly, Collins was not shaken. She opened the second set by laying waste to the Barty second serve with her backhand, rushing to control the baseline and punctuating her victorious points with typical shouts of joy. She broke serve for 2-0, which soon became a 5-1 lead. As Collins soared, Barty shrank. She missed forehands, fluffed routine volleys and even her trusty backhand slice gave up unforced errors. But she found clarity with a third set looming and reeled off four games in a row to get back on serve. “I just wanted to try and shift and be a little more aggressive, adjust a couple of things tactically just to get momentum if we went to a third,” she said. “Tennis is a funny game with the scoring system and things can change so quickly it feels like at times.” The pair held serve until 6-6, but Barty seized the moment, taking control with her forehand, pushing Collins from the baseline and ultimately playing the tie-break of her life. As Barty’s forehand passing shot sailed past Collins at the close, she reacted by screaming out in joy several times. Barty is reserved on the court and her reactions after her biggest successes have previously been more understated. Her response underlined the importance of this achievement. “I didn’t quite know what to do or what to feel,” she said. “Just being able to let out a little bit of emotion, which is a little bit unusual for me, and being able to celebrate with everyone who was there in the crowd, the energy was incredible tonight.” As Barty took in her achievement, she was surrounded by those who have supported her. She walked over to Casey Dellacqua, her former doubles partner and best friend who was instrumental in her return to the sport after a hiatus, and hugged her while she was doing her broadcasting duties by the court. As the trophy ceremony began, the announcer, Todd Woodbridge, revealed that Goolagong Cawley, Barty’s idol and friend, would hand over the trophy. Barty was visibly shocked. Barty was carrying the Daphne Akhurst Memorial Cup everywhere she went as she conducted her media duties. Asked whether she had felt any extra pressure from attempting to win her home title, Barty rejected the suggestion entirely. “I have been close before, but now that we’ve been able to achieve this, you guys don’t need to talk about it anymore,” she said. “You were the ones who added fuel to the fire, because for us it was just the same processes and the same enjoyment, regardless of where we’re playing in the world, what round it is. “That has no impact on how much I enjoy my tennis and go out there or how much I try and compete.” A curious aspect of Barty’s rise is that she has not beaten a top 10 player in any of her three grand slam title runs and she did not face a top 20 opponent here. If she was any other player it would be a greater point of discussion, but Barty has won 11 of her past 12 matches against the top 10. It is rather an apt reflection of the uncertainty beneath her, and how her consistent excellence continues to separate her from the rest.Here’s Tumaini Carayol’s report from Melbourne. This is the moment the country had been waiting for. “It’s been one of my favourite experiences,” says Ash, thanking all the staff as the ballkids stand on ceremony in the style of a cub scout event. Then Barty is “pretty rapt” her family could be there. “You guys have been nothing short of exceptional. You relaxed me and forced me to play my best tennis.” “This is just a dream come true. I’m so proud to be an Aussie.” And with that, it’s photos and a lap of honour. And after plenty of ado, here’s Ash Barty receiving the trophy from Evonne Goolagong Cawley, and the noise is very loud. Here’s Ash. “First, I have to say congratulations to Danielle and her team I know you will be fighting for many more in the future.” None other than Evonne Goolagong Cawley takes the stage and Ash Barty’s smile couldn’t be wider. Danielle Collins gives a broad smile as she receives her plate from the legendary Evonne. “I really admire you as a player,” Collins tells Barty. “This is most of the players’ favourite grand slam.” She thanks the medical staff, and says she might not have reached the final without them. There are tears as she thanks her coach, Marty, and her boyfriend, and a David Wagner, presumably not the ex-Huddersfield Town manager. Danielle Collins, as well she might, looks a little uncomfortable as Jayne Hrdlicka drones on. It’s all a bit corporate, on a day of real national joy. Here’s our snap report, with far more to follow. Todd Woodbridge, doubles king supreme, leads the ceremonials. So far, no post-match bantz from Jim Courier or the like. In fact, it’s all a bit Royal Ascot rather than the usual tech bro Ted Talk stuff. The celebrations can begin, and so can the relief. There was a moment in that lengthy second set when it appeared Danielle Collins had Ash Barty’s measure, having broken her twice but one of the game’s great fighters found her way back. Collins goes long for 0-1, and Barty has the next two serves. The first point for 2-0 see Collins again go long. Then a winner is crashed home for a 3-0 lead. The crowd sniff glory. An amazing rally sees Barty smash home after a drop shot is well saved by Collins. 4-0, then 4-1 on Collins’ last serve of her two. Then Collins’ backhand fails her on the Barty second serve. Two points from glory. Barty misses her first serve and this time Collins takes the point. 5-2. But on the American’s own serve she is horribly loose on a forehand and hands over four championship points. It’s taken in style, from the back of the court, a delightful passing shot with Collins at the net. 44 years of hurt are over. *Barty 6-3 6-6 Collins Into the tie-breaker we go. Collins opens up a big chance at 15-30 with a big backhand. But Barty levels at 30-30 with her serve. More of the same for 40-30. And again to level. Barty 6-3 5-6 Collins* Big big hold from the American. Collins misses an opening winner when her fine serve had left Barty all at sea. But she does far better with a volley for 15-15 and in seeing out a long rally at which Barty coughs first and nets. A crashing serve sees it out. *Barty 6-3 5-5 Collins You gotta fight for your right, to Barty? The serve looks better, and so does the forehand, and she guides home a winner for 40-15. Collins uses her deadly backhand to take it to 40-30. But Barty serves out to make it all square. Barty 6-3 4-5 Collins* Another break back and all to play for. Collins starts with a skidding serve that Barty can’t return. Then Barty gets excited in a rally and goes long for 30-0. Barty then clatters home a service return for 30-15. Then a forehand winner for 30-30. She’s back in the set, make no mistake. Then a forehand return offers up a break point. That’s taken and we may be not far from Barty going back into the ascendancy. *Barty 6-3 3-5 Collins Another service hold and the pressure is back on Collins. Barty’s power is rearing up again, and she blams a forehand beyond Collins for 30-0 up. Then comes an ace for 40-0. Barty 6-3 2-5 Collins* A break back and Barty has a foothold in the second set. The Collins backhand sets Barty chasing in the depths of the court for 15-15. But Barty crashes a forehand winner down the line for an opening, at 15-30. Then she overhits a forehand for 30-30. Some hoons in the crowd are cheering Collins’ missed first serves. But there’s genuine cheers as Collins offers up a break point that Barty takes her up on. *Barty 6-3 1-5 Collins A double break. Barty dropping a double fault to start with, and then comes a second serve that Collins should have done better with. Barty wins the point to loud cheers. Then misses a drive volley that drifts out. Big miss. Then another double fault. Uh oh. Two more break points. The first is taken and Tom Couch roars once more. Barty 6-3 1-4 Collins* Collins is serving well but gets her angles wrong on a backhand winner to get pegged back to 30-15. Then Collins shrieks in celebration as she clatters an overhead home. A big roar from Tom Couch, her fitness trainer boyfriend who looks a lot like Ruud Van Nistelrooy. The home crowd are quiet. *Barty 6-3 1-3 Collins Huge roars as the Barty serve improves and she holds to love. Now to set about the Collins serve. Seven days after a video went viral of two activists being forced to remove their T-Shirts by Melbourne Park security, the group made good on their promise to print 1,000 shirts they hoped spectators would wear inside Rod Laver Arena during the women’s singles final. About 20 people were voluntarily stationed at each entrance, where they also distributed ribbons and stickers saying “Missing!” in Mandarin. A few shirts could be seen dotted throughout the 80% capacity crowd during the match, with many more sporting the yellow ribbons. Barty 6-3 0-3 Collins* Collins flushed with confidence, and goes to 30-15 with some good serving and that powerful backhand. But Barty is not done and she lands a break point herself. Collins saves that and makes a loud noise to celebrate. But then scoops a drop volley too long to offer up another. Then Barty looks to have control of a rally only for her stop volley to, well, not stop and fly out of play. Back to deuce. Then a huge roar from her fella in the stands as Collins holds. *Barty 6-3 0-2 Collins Big break from the American, A slight wobble on the Barty forehand? It goes to 15-15, and then 15-30 and it’s the home heroine who has started this set slowly. Then she nets to offer up two break points. The first is saved by an ace, the second is taken by a smash. The noise goes up, mostly in support of Barty but some American accents there, too. Barty 6-3 0-1 Collins* Good hold from Collins. Barty begins the second set with a winner that gets a huge cheer. Collins levels up and then works her way to 30-15 with a whipped backhand. Then comes a big serve for 40-15, and a forehand winner. Nice and easy does it. Cheers as 15-0 is reached by a big serve. Barty’s power forces a winner for 30-0 up, she goes down the line to claim it. Another big serve hands over three set points. And an ace gets the job done. The home fans make some real noise. Barty 5-3 Collins* Barty must serve this one out. Collins drops another double to start off, but then looks far more confident in some serve volleying to go to 30-15 up. Then Barty’s speed around the court levels it up at 30-30. Collins’ hard hitting keeps Barty at the back of the court for 40-30, and then comes an ace. *Barty 5-2 Collins Cheers as Barty goes to 30-0 up, driving home her lead in the set. Then comes 40-0 but a first double fault, just the tenth of the entire tourney. Collins attempts to unleash her backhand but gets her angles all wrong. Barty 4-2 Collins* The first break of the match. At 15-30 there is a glimmer for Barty, but Collins comes to the net to force an error and 30-30. Russell Crowe looks on as Barty crashes home to set up a break point. A second serve is offered up, and then a double fault hands Barty the game. *Barty 3-2 Collins A hard-won hold. Big cheers as Barty makes it to 15-15. There seems to be a few home nerves around, and her going 30-15 up receives a real cheer. A smash takes it to 40-15, she’s won every point she’s got a first serve in. The Collins backhand bullies her way back into the game. And then it’s deuce after a fine forehand from Collins. Then Barty offers up a break point by missing a winner after fine defensive play from Collins. That’s rescued with a baseline winner. And the break is averted. Barty 2-2 Collins* Collins continued her trend of not sitting down during the changeovers, and her Ruud Van Nistelrooy-lookalike boyfriend does some fist pumping as her serves take her to 30-15 up. A backhand takes her to 40-15 and a lucky net cord takes the game. That’s acknowledged by Collins. *Barty 2-1 Collins The home heroine starts with two massive serves to race to 40-0. Then misses a winner. No worries, a serve to the left-hand corner takes the game. Barty 1-1 Collins* Barty only just takes a winner for 0-15, smashing it off the net cord. Next comes an ace, then a crashing serve for 30-15. Then Barty makes a mess of a backhand slice and it’s 40-15. Collins serves it out, held her nerves well. *Barty 1-0 Collins Barty won the toss and will throw first. She starts with an unreturnable serve and goes to 30-0 with another, an ace taking her to 40-0. Then a couple of second serves open the way back up, as Collins clubs a backhand return for 40-30. But it’s served out to a wall of noise. Ok, here we go as Collins comes out first and Barty follows her to a very loud noise. The Rod Laver Arena is supposed to 80 percent full due to restrictions but looks far fuller. The Eurosport coverage has descended to a discussion of whether the presenters like Vegemite or not. For the record, Babsi Schett doesn’t and Tim Henman doesn’t seem so keen. The Barty fans on the Melbourne Park equivalent of Henman Hill are wearing t-shirts that use the Vegemite font. For the record, I quite like Vegemite. Strange scenes at the end of the boys’ singles final. It’s hot out there in Melbourne, though the current temperature is 21 degrees with 72 percent humidity. Like a summer’s day in Macclesfield. And Emma Kemp profiled Ash Barty, on whose shoulders such pressure now lies. Being 2022, it is now 44 years since Christine O’Neil did, on grass, at Kooyong. Ash Barty, of course, knows all of this. Her results of the past three years here read: quarter-final, semi-final, quarter-final. She too would have felt the infamous squeeze in her chest of an expectant country behind her. Tim Joyce wrote about the underdog, Danielle Collins, from Florida. And while many of the high-ranked women have ferocious groundstrokes, what makes Collins unique is that she is just as adept in the forecourt, allowing her to finish off points in swift fashion. Yet part of the reason why Collins’ game has taken longer to mature into the top-tier player she has become is that her on-court decision-making was lacking. But she has now married her all-court abandon with a newfound strategic acumen and increased mental focus, rapidly developing into one of the most dangerous players on tour. (On the men’s side Denis Shapovalov is undergoing a similar transformation.) Collins’ full arsenal of shots was on view during her comprehensive beating of the slam champion Swiatek on Thursday. It was perhaps the finest win of her career. This is a big one for Australia, where Ash Barty can become the first Australian winner of their own grand slam since since Christine O’Neil won on grass, at Kooyong, in 1978. Barty’s progress has been pretty serene, and Madison Keys was brushed aside in the semi-final. In Barty’s way is Danielle Collins, at 28 in her first slam final, but whose service game and backhand destroyed Iga Swiatek in the other semi-final. The serve looks to be at the centre of this final, with, as our preview reveals “the Queenslander has won 20 straight sets and 81 of her last 82 service games”. History may hang heavy on Barty as the last Australian to reach the final was Wendy Turnbull in 1980. The last Australian in their home slam final was Lleyton Hewitt in 2005. This is a big one for the host country, after a hard few years in the formerly Lucky Country. No pressure.When Margaret Shiplee retired from her job as a homecare worker for people with special needs 15 years ago, she was at a loss. “I thought, oh God – I have to do something now,” she says. “If I stopped doing anything I’d be bored out of my brain. I’m not very good at relaxing.” Shiplee, who is 75 and lives in Worlingham, east Suffolk, then heard about an initiative called the Befriending Scheme, which connects adults with learning difficulties or mental health needs to people in their community. She signed up and was paired with Julie Martin, 58, from nearby Beccles, who has a learning disability. The two have now been friends for nearly 15 years. The first time Shiplee met Martin was at a bingo night at a drop-in centre in a Quaker hall. Julie seemed a little forlorn. “Her mother had just died,” says Shiplee. “She was all on her own.” Shiplee’s 40 years of working with people with learning disabilities was a boon. “We hit it off,” says Shiplee. The key, she says, is to “treat them as you’d treat anyone else. Don’t talk down to them, or anything like that. Talk to them as you would talk to your friends, because that’s who they are, really.” Every Wednesday, Martin and Shiplee meet up. They go for lunch, or coffee, or bowling, or to the beach. “You get so much more out of it than you give,” Shiplee says of their friendship. “It’s wonderful. Julie is so much fun. She’s full of beans. She has her down days, like we all do. But she’s mainly quite bubbly, and she’s always grateful.” Martin recently learned how to use a mobile phone, and sent Shiplee a nice message afterwards, which Shiplee treasures. The feeling is mutual. “She does care about me,” says Martin. Shiplee is “a special friend. Always friendly and nice. She’s easy to talk to. And she’s kept me away from the doctor, which is brilliant.” By this, Martin means her habit of going to the GP surgery regularly, worried that something is wrong with her. “She used to go and sit at the surgery almost every day,” says Shiplee. “I think it was so she would have a bit of connection with someone. Every time I see her now, she says: ‘I haven’t phoned the doctor!’” They joke about how much money Shiplee has saved the NHS. Shiplee assists Martin with forms and paperwork, helped her get her Covid-19 vaccine, and takes her to hospital appointments. “If she has a problem,” says Shiplee, “she comes to me.” Martin goes to Shiplee’s house for Christmas most years. “She comes around for lunch and I take her home in the afternoon,” she says. “I can’t let her be on her own.” Sometimes people are worried about joining befriending schemes, because they’re scared they won’t have anything to talk about. But silence isn’t the worst thing in the world. “Silence doesn’t bother me at all,” says Shiplee. “If Julie sits in silence, I just say: ‘Are we not speaking now? Have we fallen out?’” According to the Campaign to End Loneliness, an estimated 9 million people are lonely in the UK. Loneliness is associated with negative health outcomes such as high blood pressure, heart disease and strokes. Half a million older people are estimated to go at least six days a week without seeing or speaking to anyone at all. Making new friends can “transform lives” says Christine Roe, who works for the Befriending Scheme, by “making the vital initial links between vulnerable people who might otherwise be feeling sad or lonely”. Both women have gained much from the friendship. “She’s taught me how to take life as it comes,” says Shiplee of Martin. “She’s always so happy. We always have a little laugh.” When I ask her about her Guardian Angel treat, Shiplee balks, as so many altruistic people do. “I’ve never been offered anything like that before,” she says, aghast. The one thing she would like, says Shiplee after thinking for a while, is fresh flowers. Shiplee grew up on a farm and loves to be surrounded by living things. “They’re so beautiful to have around the house, but expensive,” she says. Arena Flowers, a flower subscription service, offers to send Shiplee fresh flowers every fortnight for a year. I catch up with her after her first delivery arrives. “It was such a big bouquet,” says Shiplee. “I wasn’t sure if I had a vase big enough. But I didn’t want to break them up, because they’re done so nicely.” She can’t wait for her next delivery. The flowers will be replaced by a fresh bunch in two weeks. They are a living reminder of a treasured friendship, as well as the mutual benefits that come from connecting with our local community, and getting over your fears to say hello to a stranger. Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comIt is late January and I only have one thing to say – sow your chillies. You could wait until March, but there is little chance of you eating a chilli until September that way. You’ll have plenty, but they will have ripened in the weaker sun of autumn, rather than the hot summer, which will affect their flavour and heat. The reason we sow chillies early is because they are slow to get going, especially the hot ones. The basic rule is the hotter the chilli, the more temperature-dependent it is, and this affects the time it takes to germinate and grow to harvest. Also, what else have you got to do? It’s wet and cold outside; sowing chillies on a dark winter’s night is a welcome sign that the days are lengthening and spring will return. There is little else to sow now (unless you are into growing giant show leeks and onions, in which case you are already three weeks too late). By the time your windowsill is packed with other seedlings, your chillies will be a decent size and able to look after themselves. Chillies germinate between 20-30C, and do it best with a little underfloor heating, AKA a heated propagator, and a propagator lid or a clear plastic bag to keep in humidity. Make sure the seedlings don’t sit in wet, cold soil: keep them on the propagator until they have at least two sets of true leaves; to stop the soil from getting too wet, cut your compost with something to improve drainage, particularly if it is standard multipurpose peat-free compost. The most sustainable option would be homemade, sieved leaf mould. But if you don’t have that, horticultural sand, fine grit or vermiculite are other options. There are many chilli varieties – too many for here – but you can’t go wrong with Nigel’s Outdoor Chilli from Real Seeds, which ripens whatever the weather, with no protection. If you have space somewhere protected and warm, the unusual flavour of Aji Limon or Lemon Drop, originally from Peru, is worth a go. It has a delicious kick of lemon and then a hit of heat, and works wonderfully in sauces. It does need heat to germinate, around 28-30C, and makes a huge bush, so it won’t fit on a windowsill. Of course, not everyone has a propagator. Many excellent nurseries offer not only a plethora of varieties, but also understand this issue and send out truly well-grown plug plants later in spring (from the end of March to the beginning of May), so all you have to do is grow them on. Order now, though, because the best varieties go early. My go-tos for chilli plants include Sea Spring Plants, Simpson Seeds, South Devon Chilli Farm, Victoriana Nurseries and World of Chillies.When I was young, growing up in Dublin, Ulysses was considered the greatest novel in the world and the dirtiest book ever written. I bought a copy as soon as I had money and it was taken away from me when my mother discovered me reading it – though Lolita, for some reason, had passed unnoticed in our house. I was 14. I was outraged, and delighted with myself, and a little confused. Ulysses contained something worse than sex, clearly, and I did not know what that could be. “It is very scatological,” my mother said and then, “Look it up!” which is certainly one way to develop a daughter’s vocabulary, though the definition left me no further on. What could be so terrible – or so interesting – about going to the toilet? After much argument, I put the book up in the attic, to be taken down when I had come of age. Four years later, I retrieved it and read the thing all the way through, though I think I skipped some of the stuff in the brothel, which seemed to contain no actual information about brothels, or far too much information, none of which was real, and which managed all this at great length. Clearly I was missing something. It was sometimes hard to tell if a character was doing a thing or only thinking about doing it and this constant sense of potential gave Joyceans a very peering look. Meanwhile, he was a very great genius, so discussions about what Joyce meant by one or another line were airy, pedantic, and so properly masculine I found it hard to join in. Reading Ulysses made a man very clever, clearly, and a woman not clever, but intriguingly dirty. For some of these intellectual types at least, there was something a little creepy in the way they said: “Fourteen?” The irony is that the freedom Joyce brought to the Irish tradition has been more useful to female writers than to male. His heretical legacy has been welcomed as a gift by writers such as Edna O’Brien, Eimear McBride and Mary Costello, while his innovative genius is more often declared a burden by the men. Here’s a thing: there is no sex in Ulysses – it is all remembered or anticipated sex, all jam tomorrow and jam yesterday and no jam on the single long day of the book itself. A novel that is interested in love and fascinated by the body contains no passionate union, unless you count Molly Bloom’s afternooner with Blazes Boylan, which is intuited by her husband, but which happens off stage. Things do happen in the book, as they do on any ordinary day but, like most of our days, Ulysses contains very little plot. Two men, Leopold Bloom and Stephen Dedalus, wander around Dublin, bump into each other and form a connection. Bloom is mild, ruminative, maybe a little masochistic: he is happily present in his body, comfortable in his own skin. Dedalus is more cerebral, and very unhappy: he is mourning his mother and deeply ashamed of his blaggard of a father (the always amusing Simon Dedalus) who leaves his own family short of money for food. Both men are caught by tragic betrayals and impossibilities that are made less impossible, less burdensome by their meeting each other. This seems very little to happen in such a large book – but it is also an amazing thing to happen and in order to effect it, the book does heroic and remarkable things. They begin the day with breakfast. Bloom’s is now famous, and served up every year in Dublin on Bloomsday, 16 June, the day on which the book is set. After setting a tray for his wife, Molly, he nips out to buy a pork kidney for himself; “a moist tender gland” with its – after decades of Bloomsdays, slightly tiresome – “fine tang of faintly scented urine”. The streets the men walk were obsessively researched by Joyce, who then declined to describe them for the reader in any conventional way. As the hours pass, their minds become more porous to the world. Voices interrupt, thoughts intrude. We don’t know who is telling the story any more, or from what point of view. At dusk, an oddly romantic scene turns out to be about Bloom masturbating on Sandymount Strand, to the apparent delight of a young woman sitting on a rock. This was the episode that got the book definitively banned in the US, perhaps because the style was so clear there was no doubting the content. “But it is all a parody!” the clever reader cries, perhaps a little uneasily. Fireworks explode. The prose becomes fragmented, heaps up, becomes maximal, turns psychotic. In Bella Cohen’s brothel, Bloom is accused, crucified, turned into a woman, violated. Dedalus sees the ghost of his mother, Bloom sees the lovely apparition of his long dead son. Dedalus wrecks the joint, gets into a fight, is briefly knocked unconscious. After which, the two adventurers go back to Bloom’s place for a quiet cup of cocoa and the book falls asleep completed in the mind of Molly Bloom. So, apart from everything that you could possibly imagine, nothing much happens in Ulysses. Joyce wanted the book to be “encyclopedic”. As well as high thoughts and fond emotions, it contains much that is small, or small-minded; from Dedalus’s frayed cuff as he looks out over the vastness of Dublin Bay, to the hairpin Molly runs down the page to find the word “metempsychosis”. He is also fascinated by things we revile or find disgusting. Despite Buck Mulligan’s wonderful evocation of the sea, “Thalatta! Thalatta! She is our great sweet mother”, a hundred years later, it is the “snotgreen” that sticks. Recently, I was taken aback by students who knew all about Joyce’s niche sexual interests, and very little about his work. There is a cartoon meme – one lone person at a ticket booth advertising the novels while hundreds queue up to see something called “Fart Letter”. Joyce wrote to his partner Nora when he was alone in Dublin in 1909, and failing miserably to publish Dubliners. He called her his “dirty little fuckbird” and showed an urgent and unholy interest in the contents of her backside. As peccadilloes go, this one lacks glamour. The students certainly thought so, and used the silliness of it to dismiss the writer entirely. (Oh, my heart!) “If you can think it,” I said. “Joyce would write it.” The discovery of these letters brought Leopold Bloom’s (very fleeting) coprophilia into focus and stoked the discussion as to how “dirty” Joyce himself was. He lost his virginity to a prostitute at the age of 14, he was interested in threesomes, but never seemed to get one. When is a happily married man to be considered disordered? A recent critical spat debated whether he had syphilis, which was widespread at the time, rather than the autoimmune Reiter’s syndrome, which is usually given as the cause for his failing eyesight. There is a sly reference to syphilis on the first page, but Ulysses is very far from being pox-riddled. It is, however, excremental, happy to scratch an itch and also to accommodate voyeurism, fetishism and whatever you call Bloom’s covert actions on Sandymount Strand. Something there for everyone, you might say, though enacted in a public space these interests are usually considered predatory and misogynistic. Women have consistently higher levels of disgust than men. We are, in general, less likely to talk (about) shite. Ulysses is full of men doing just that: bantering with each other in that very masculine, mock-heroic way. All in all, it is a very male book. And then, at the very end, there is Molly Bloom. Is she enough? Her soliloquy was hailed as “liberating” for the way it acknowledged, way back in 1922, the power of female sexual desire. And although her thoughts contain the shadow of Joyce’s own fantasies, Molly is very much her own person, a free spirit and nobody’s fool. “The works of James Joyce are remarkable in their frankness about sexuality and their sensitivity to the value of women’s experience.” In 2018, a letter in the Modernist Review, signed by 100 academics of all genders, described the contradictions in Joyce’s work as they sometimes played out in the real world. These academics called upon the Joycean community “to take meaningful action to reduce the incidents of sexual harassment, inappropriate behaviour, abuse, and even assault at conferences, workshops, summer schools and any other events affiliated with the community”. The writer’s own streak of badness was not unconnected to his grandiosity. More often, we privilege the grandiose; the impossibly high or unattainable. Just last week I got an email asking about “the burden of confronting Joyce for the contemporary Irish novelist”. I replied that I had no interest in confronting anyone (what?!) and that Joyce was not a burden but a great boon. I am also sometimes asked how I can write “in the shadow” of Joyce, as though his work were a kind of darkness, and not a great light to me. These questions are about Joyce as genius and monument, and not about Joyce as transgressor and disruptor – as such, they do his work a disservice. Joyce was much exercised by the problem of fathers, especially bad ones. Male as it may be, Ulysses is a seriously anti-patriarchal book. Molly’s soliloquy was a great historical moment for women, but it doesn’t seem especially liberating, these days, to break the big news that women think about sex (really? I didn’t know we could). Female writers are, however, still required to be female at all times – we are relentlessly embodied – so the fact that Leopold Bloom lives so fully in his body feels egalitarian, to me. What I find liberating about Ulysses is not just the way the language gets under the skin, however, it is the way the language moves. Joyce refused to fix the meaning of the words on the page and left the reader to fend for themselves. So the content may not be actually shocking, but the book feels exciting – as though it might turn shocking any second. Anything might stir in the body or consciousness of a character, in the body or consciousness of the reader. My mother was right to consider it a dangerous text. The thing the censors worried about were the uncensored workings of their own minds. More than any other book, Ulysses is about what happens in the reader’s head. The style obliges us to choose a meaning, it is designed to make us feel uncertain. This makes it a profoundly democratic work. Ulysses is a living, shifting, deeply humane text that is also very funny. It makes the world bigger. About a third of those who attempt the book do not finish it, according to a Bloomsday poll on an Irish news website. I never considered this to be a problem. I am not sure you can ever finish Ulysses. I am certain it can never be fully understood. I think I knew this instinctively at 14; a time when I lived inside and not outside the words on the page, a time when many books were beyond my understanding, and that was just fine. • The anniversary reissue of Ulysses is published by Vintage.Arizona Republicans have introduced a bill that would impose significant new voting restrictions and allow the state legislature to reject election results. The measure would require the state legislature to convene after primary and general elections to review the ballot counting process and “shall accept or reject the election results”. The proposal does not require lawmakers to find evidence of fraud or lay out any factors they would have to consider in order to overturn an election. If the lawmakers were to reject the results, any voter in Arizona would be allowed to petition a local judge to hold a new election. The same measure would also require Arizona voters to give an excuse if they want to vote by mail, even though mail-in voting has long been used by the vast majority of voters in the state. It also would restrict voting to election day and prevent the use of vote centers, essentially mega voting precincts where anyone in a county can vote, regardless of where they live. One of the co-sponsors of the bill is Mark Finchem, a state representative who believes the 2020 election was stolen, has ties to the Oath Keepers, and was at the Capitol on 6 January. Finchem is running to be Arizona’s chief election official and Donald Trump has endorsed him. “We need to get back to 1958-style voting,” John Fillmore, another Republican state representative who introduced the bill said on Wednesday, according to the Arizona Republic. Arizona had a racist literacy test in place in 1958, the Republic noted. The Voting Rights Act, which wiped out many blatant efforts to keep Black people from the polls, passed in 1965. Fillmore did not respond to an interview request from the Guardian. “What’s clear from this bill is that there are some members of the Arizona legislature who are prepared to replace the judgment of Arizona voters with their own,” said David Becker, an election administration expert who leads the Center for Election Innovation and Research. It’s unclear if the measure will ultimately pass. Republicans hold a 16-14 majority in the state senate, which means, if Democrats unanimously oppose it, any Republican could kill the bill by voting against it. A Republican bill last year that would have allowed the legislature to override the results of a presidential election stalled. “I can’t imagine that they will move forward with that idea because I think the outrage from the community would be pretty big,” said Martin Quezada, a Democrat in the state senate. “But the fact that they’re even talking about this issue just shows what kind of a space that we are in right now.” Even if Republicans drop the provision allowing the legislature to overturn elections, Quezada said, the measures that roll back vote-by-mail access in Arizona would still be extreme. “The impact would be tremendous. It would drastically change the way elections work in the state of Arizona. I mean right now the overwhelming majority of voters vote by mail,” he said. “The turnout overall would be suppressed tremendously … The process of actually showing up at the polls to vote would be so frustrating and time-consuming that many people would feel even if they did want to vote, it’s just not worth it to deal with that type of problem.” The proposal comes as there is increased alarm over Republican efforts across the country to make it possible for partisan actors to overturn election results, something scholars have begun calling election subversion. “This bill follows a worrisome anti-democratic trend of legislation introduced in statehouses across the country that would make it possible for legislatures to overturn election results they don’t like,” said Jessica Marsden, a lawyer at the watchdog Protect Democracy who is tracking election subversion bills across the country. “This brazen power grab reveals the cynical strategy behind the deceptive big lie movement: to create a pretext for interfering in election outcomes by undermining confidence in elections.” The bill also underscores how Arizona, where Joe Biden narrowly defeated Donald Trump in 2020, has become a hotbed of conspiracy theories about the election. The state senate authorized an unprecedented months-long post-election review of 2.1m ballots in the state’s most populous county that fanned lies about the 2020 race but ultimately affirmed Biden’s win. Some provisions in the legislation appear to be connected to conspiracy theories that flourished during that review, including the debunked belief that voting equipment was tampered with and ballots had bamboo fibers in them. The bill would require a hand count of ballots within 24 hours of an election and require the use of a hologram or other unique mark to verify the authenticity of ballots. “They keep inventing solutions where there are no problems,” said Tammy Patrick, a senior adviser at the Democracy Fund and a former election official in Arizona. Changing the paper used for ballots would probably make it more costly for counties to run elections and more difficult to reprint ballots if there is an error in the printing process, she said. And requiring election officials to complete a hand count of ballots within 24 hours just isn’t feasible in Arizona, where the ballot can be extremely long, with dozens of races. “It’s not feasible, it’s not accurate, and it’s cost prohibitive … To think that you can do a full ballot hand count within 24 hours is ridiculous,” she said. Humans are also prone to make counting errors. “Everyone who has done a hand count will tell you that machine counts are more accurate,” Patrick said. Jennifer Morrell, a former election official who now works as a consultant and election administration noted that Cyber Ninjas, the firm that conducted the unusual election review in Arizona, took months to count ballots by hand. “The idea of hand counting all ballots within 24 hours of election day is completely unrealistic and shows how little the bill’s sponsors understand about the mechanics of counting ballots,” she said. “Besides the time frame being unrealistic, the process of counting by hand is prone to error. That’s part of why it takes so long. You have to go at it in a way that is slow and methodical to get it right and include enough time to verify the counting was done correctly.” “Hand counting ballots is problematic to begin with. The time frame they’re suggesting is completely unrealistic,” said Jennifer Morrell, a former election official who now works as a consultant on election administration. Earlier this week, Republicans in the state legislature advanced several other bills that would change election processes in the state. One bill would expand the threshold for an automatic recount from 0.1 percentage point to 0.5 (Biden defeated Trump by 0.3 points). Other bills would require the state to make ballot images public after an election while another would end all mail-in elections for school boards and cities.For more than a year, officials in a northern California coastal town have been debating whether they should rename. This week, the commission examining the issue said that, for now, the Fort Bragg name is here to stay. But the effort highlights the challenges that come as cities, schools and parks across the US reconsider controversial placenames with racist histories. After the murder of George Floyd in 2020 prompted a national examination of systemic racism in the US, the small California town of Fort Bragg commissioned a group of citizens to examine the possibility of changing its name. The name had been in place since it was established as a military post in 1857. Braxton Bragg, the slave-owner Confederate army general for whom the city is named, reportedly never stepped foot in the area, but the post established in his name was responsible for controlling rebellious Indigenous tribes, part of a grim history in the area, a local teacher told the Santa Rosa Press Democrat. The commission discussed the issue over the course of a year and more than 60 hours of meetings. An informal survey it conducted found that a majority of residents in the town of 7,000 wanted to keep the name. In previous city council meetings, some residents argued in favor of keeping the name because of what it meant to the area, rather than any connection to the Confederate general. This week, the citizen group declined to issue a decision about the name, advising the city council that it had been unable to reach a consensus though 60% of commissioners supported the change. “As a commission, we came to the conclusion that, at this time, because the citizens are so divided, this commission cannot unanimously recommend a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’,” Cesar Yanez, a commissioner, told the city council on Monday. The group did issue a list of recommendations to correct historical wrongs in the area, including the creation of a city policy to prioritize the return of land to Indigenous coastal tribes and a formal agreement recognizing their sovereignty. “As we studied the name, it became apparent that the many atrocities and the attempted genocide committed against the Indigenous peoples of this land, when the US military’s Fort Bragg was established here, are fully wrapped up in the town name,” the group said in a presentation to the city council. “We came to unanimous agreement on the following recommendations the city council should carry out to make amends for this tragic history.” The commission also recommended the city support the creation of a cultural center to “honor the way of life that existed pre-contact” and to form a committee dedicated to working with tribes and schools to tell a more complete history of the area. Some renaming efforts in California have been successful. A state commission renamed a park that had been named for a white settler accused of murdering Indigenous people, and a county board voted to change a racist street name in north Lake Tahoe in response to concerns from residents. In September 2021, the popular Lake Tahoe ski resort Squaw Valley announced it would change its name to Palisades Tahoe to remove the “derogatory and offensive” slur from its name. But such efforts have not been without opposition – indigenous activists in Fresno county campaigning to change the name of a town called Squaw Valley there faced pushback from local officials. Organizers said the name acts as a grim reminder of the atrocities Indigenous people have suffered while officials argued it was significant to the area’s history.Andrew Neil is in talks to present a weekly politics show on Channel 4, a move that would see him lurch leftwards to join what he once called “the broadcast arm of the Guardian”. Neil, who is the chair of the conservative Spectator magazine and last year put in a brief and calamitous stint with the rightwing channel GB News, had previously dismissed suggestions about a such a move. The former editor of the Sunday Times is in advanced talks with the channel’s director of programmes, Ian Katz, and the director of news and current affairs, Louisa Compton, according to the industry trade newspaper Broadcast, which first reported on the development. The paper understands that a Sunday evening slot is being considered for a politics analysis show. Channel 4 is said to be looking at an evening slot because it is reluctant to coincide with the BBC’s 9am politics programme, which is presented by Sophie Raworth after Andrew Marr’s departure. Sky News also has a Sunday morning programme, Sophy Ridge on Sunday, which at present is fronted by Trevor Phillips. The early evening slot for the politics show means it could follow C4 News’ early evening Sunday bulletin, which airs at around 6.30pm, allowing Neil to offer analysis of the day’s news, interview heavyweight figures and look ahead to the coming week. Channel 4 declined to comment. Neil, 72, has described his decision to help found GB News as “the single biggest mistake” of his career. He said in an interview in November that the channel washeading in a “Fox News direction”, with its backers resembling a “Ukip tribute band”. He said he did not want it to be the “full stop” to his television career. Despite being the face of the channel before it went on air in June, Neil left after presenting just eight programmes in three months. He resigned in September, saying he was unhappy with technical errors, the loss of top staff and the channel’s political direction. Discussing his departure and the stress leading up to it, the former BBC presenter, who walked away from a £4m contract, told the Daily Mail: “It was a big decision but I frankly couldn’t care if it was £40m. This would have killed me if I’d carried on.” News of Neil’s possible move follows the departure of Jon Snow, who left Channel 4 News in December after more than three decades. Snow will continue to work with Channel 4 on long-form projects and devote more time to his charitable work. There are ongoing questions about the state-owned broadcaster’s future. Ministers are working through 600,000 responses to the government’s consultation on privatising the channel. Privatisation could mean up to 60 British production companies going bust, according to a report published last September. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, told a select committee in November that a decision has not been taken and all the evidence would be considered.Here’s a striking and mysterious debut from the Dominican Republic, where film-maker Nino Martínez Sosa recounts a fascinating true-life story of occupation and resistance from the turn of the last century. Olivorio Mateo was a peasant and faith healer who became known to his disciples as Papa Liborio; he built a self-sufficient community in the mountains. But when US forces occupied in the 1910s, Liborio was branded a bandit, and killed. Not that you’d know any of the historical facts from watching this, which is set squarely in the arthouse endurance-test genre: there is little to no scene-setting or explainers, with the kind of pacing often euphemistically described by critics as “deliberate”. It begins after Liborio vanishes from his village during a hurricane, presumed dead. When he is found alive, he claims to have returned from God with healing powers and takes a band of followers up into the mountains. Is he a charlatan? Madman? Or simply an inspirational community leader? Director Sosa’s answer seems to be that the truth is unknowable. So he tells the story through the eyes of six believers, beginning with Liborio’s son. But the most moving is from the perspective of a woman who begs Liborio to bring back her infant child from the dead. A powerfully charismatic leading performance by Vicente Santos is the force of gravity here. He plays Liborio as an ambiguous character: sometimes he seems high on a messiah complex; at others his spirituality feels genuine. In the end he becomes a tragic hero. Santos’s performance is a reminder that awards season only dishes out gongs to a small corner of the film-making world. Liborio is shot very simply, using handheld cinematography that gives it a modern feel, and the soundtrack is alive with the sounds of nature. There’s an especially good moment when an American commander is trying to sleep. This is a man who calls Liborio a “witch doctor” and rides into the community vowing to instil law and order (a quick glance around would tell him this is a model community). A mosquito buzzes around his bed, an intruder and unwanted, much like himself. • Liborio is available on 26 January on Mubi.The Scots pine plantations in Abernethy forest are the crème de la crème in forestry terms: tall, straight and dense. These plantations were created in the 1930s, and the wood had a variety of uses, from ships’ masts to trench timbers. Now, this woodland is being retrofitted for wildlife as part of the UK’s largest land restoration project because, although it is striking to wander in such a regimented landscape, nature prefers things to be less orderly. The gnarled older and bigger trees are better for woodland species, which is why conservationists working on Cairngorms Connect are intentionally making a mess and artificially ageing trees as part of their efforts to restore Scotland’s old Caledonian pine forest to its former, imperfect glory. Over the total area of the Cairngorms Connect project – 600 sq km (230 sq miles) – partners are spending more than £40,000 a year on plantation restructuring, which includes a range of wildlife-enhancing projects, from artificially ageing trees to thinning out commercial plantations. More than 10 sq km of Scots pine has been restructured since 2019. “Here we want twisted, forked trunks, we want the more open-crowned trees,” says Jeremy Roberts, programme manager at Cairngorms Connect, who is showing me around. The woodland is draped in spiderweb lace and the spongy forest floor is spattered in blaeberry, also known as bilberry. Large natural forests are affected by storms or have grazing animals moving through them, knocking down trees and creating “storm tracts”, so conservationists are replicating this process by using a winch and ropes to pull the trees down. They are also doing ring barring, which means scraping off a circle of bark a few metres up the trunk. It looks as if a hungry giant beaver has chomped its way through the forest. A tree surgeon even cut the top off one of the trees and now the deadwood is being used by a woodpecker. These homogenous forests have less than 15% of the deadwood that should be there. It might seem odd for conservationists to intentionally damage trees, but dead and decaying wood is a crucial habitat. These pinewoods are the most important sites in Scotland for deadwood-loving beetles. Conservationists have recorded 144 species of saproxylic beetle, 32 of which are of conservation concern. Getting light into the woodland floor also helps to establish broadleaf trees such as birch, rowan and juniper, which can’t survive in dense forest. “A goldilocks amount of light is always useful in a Scots pine plantation. A bit too much light and you end up with a dominance of heather, a bit too little light, and you end up with a dominance of grass,” says Roberts. Cairngorms Connect land is home to 55% of the UK’s capercaillie population and 90% of them are in Abernethy forest. As ground-nesting birds, the tangle of logs provides shelter and cover for them. The exposed roots provide the dust capercaillie need to keep their feathers in good condition and get rid of parasites. “The single most useful thing is expanding the forest, making more forest habitat for capercaillie, and that can happen surprisingly quickly if you control the deer numbers,” says Roberts. Currently, the project has 130 sq km of forest. The aim is to double that as part of the 200-year vision, mainly through natural regeneration, rather than mass planting. Young woodlands are flowing out into the moorland like a river and there is a single key reason for this: culling deer. In the early 2000s, there were more than 25 deer a square kilometre; now there are just one or two. Numbers have been so successfully reduced because all landowners included in the project agreed to do it over a vast area. The Cairngorms Connect project has £9m of funding, including about £3.7m from the Endangered Landscapes Programme. Landowners involved in the project include RSPB, Forestry and Land Scotland, NatureScot and Wildland, set up by Danish billionaire Anders Holch Povlsen. This landscape has been damaged over centuries and the vision is to “rewiggle” rivers, rewet peatlands and restore forests. Unlike other conservation projects, Cairngorms Connect covers a vast area of continuous land owned by a handful of landowners. Forestry and Land Scotland has owned Glenmore for nearly 100 years, RSPB has worked at Abernethy for 60 years, NatureScot has been at Invereshie for 60 years and Povlsen bought Glenfeshie in 2006. Four senior representatives from each organisation have met with the Cairngorms national park authority almost every month since 2014. If the key person can’t make a meeting they’re not allowed to send a proxy. “It’s a tight group of people with a lot of trust, which makes it a safe space to challenge and that’s where great collaborative ideas come from,” says Roberts. The project had a low-key launch in 2016 because a lot of work was already happening in the respective areas, but things such as deer management work more effectively over a wide area. If you cut deer numbers, creating new forests in places you have existing forests is pretty easy. Seeds from pine forests can be dispersed 150 metres away from the parent plant over moorland and if the density of deer is below four per square kilometre then the pine will regenerate. A report from 2020 estimated that there were up to 1 million wild deer in Scotland, which could be seriously hampering national efforts to increase tree cover. “The priority here is expanding the forests. All the partners are achieving forest expansion by deer control,” says Roberts. We walk into the open area leading to Ryvoan bothy, where saplings are sprouting. On one side of the path a forest of rowan is forming from seeds planted by wintering thrushes, such as fieldfares and redwings, says Roberts. They feed on berries, then go into the heather to roost, dropping seeds as they go, which grow into saplings. Next morning, I wake at 5am to do the wildlife equivalent of financial accounting, to see what impact these investments are having on species diversity. Ellie Dimambro-Denson, a monitoring officer at Cairngorms Connect, is doing a high-altitude moth survey up the hill from Glenmore visitor centre, using a Robinson light trap. We are joined by what feels like a million midges. These traps are set once a month between May and September at a variety of altitudes – the lowest is at 300 metres and the highest at 900 metres. Moths are great indicator species because they are diverse and respond quickly to changes in the landscape. “We can get so much data in one session,” says Dimambro-Denson. “Moths have relatively fast reproductive cycles and so are able to colonise areas quickly and respond to habitat changes, especially sudden change such as tree planting and other direct management work, on short timescales.” She counts 469 moths from 39 species (plus an additional 46 micro-moths) – including a nationally scarce angle-barred sallow – which is a relatively large and diverse haul. It also includes a brimstone moth, whose caterpillars feed on blackthorn, hawthorn and rowan, and a green carpet moth, whose caterpillars feed on oak and rowan. Their presence suggests broadleaf regeneration is working. “You can see a response. That’s very exciting,” says Dimambro-Denson. Regular moth trappings can show which direction the landscape is moving in. What Dimambro-Denson has done this evening is repeated each year so conservationists can understand how the landscape is changing. Similar monitoring surveys are being done with birds and vegetation. “You could come back in five, 10 or 100 years and repeat this,” she says. The landscape is becoming a complex mosaic of habitats, but the basic ingredients are simple: reducing deer and giving the landscape time and space to recover. Although this is not being billed as a rewilding project, nature is at the helm and the land is naturally covering itself in a complex of forests, bogs and wild rivers. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresIt is a chilly Tuesday evening at Fairfax Park, home to Bridgwater United, and in the modest main stand it is out with the old and in with the new. A volunteer, Richard Gudge, is replacing 150 red and black seats as preparations to play host to Manchester United in front of a record crowd continue. The Women’s FA Cup shimmers on a plinth before camera crews and huddling children keen to take a closer look. These are snapshots that epitomise a community bursting with pride. “I’ve taken the week off work to be here to help,” says Gudge, a decorator whose daughter, Freya, plays for the under-21s. On Sunday, when Bridgwater welcome the Women’s Super League side to Somerset in the fourth round, Gudge will be selling hats, scarves and programmes in the club shop. It is impossible to escape the sense that a significant occasion is on the horizon. There is a tangible buzz, nervous energy flowing through everybody from the coaching staff to the squad, who are midway through a double training session, and the caterers, who have ordered a quarter of a tonne of chips to feed a capacity crowd of 2,500. Among the fans will probably be Grace Best, sister of the Manchester United legend George. Grace is related to a player on the fringe of the first team. The club’s previous record attendance was 1,112, for a men’s derby against Taunton Town in 1997. Sunday’s tickets for the main stand sold out in 10 minutes. In contrast to the men’s competition, the home team keeps 100% of gate receipts. Such is the level of interest that the chairman, Bob Buckingham, believes they could have sold another 1,000 tickets, but, unlike when they entertained Milton Keynes Dons this month in front of a crowd of 146, there will be no room for walk-ups. “It is great to hear the community talking about the game and talking about us as a club, which is fantastic because it doesn’t happen too often,” says the captain, Leah Burridge, who joined in 2014. “It is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity and we’re going to make the most of it.” Founded in 1990 as Yetminster Ladies, after undergoing numerous rebrands – Sherborne Ladies, Yeovil Ladies and Yeovil United – last year they merged with Bridgwater Town and morphed into Bridgwater United. They have trained in Bridgwater, a town on the edge of the Somerset Levels, since 2016. Yeovil reached the WSL as a part-time club but after a switch to full-time for the 2018-19 season the club hit financial trouble, were docked 10 points, relegated and forced to start over in the third tier. That summer the club was taken over by the businessman Adam Murry, the former Bournemouth co-owner who, in 2008, gave a 31-year-old Eddie Howe his first job in management. Howe kept the team in the Football League despite a 17-point deduction. The story goes that Murry, who set up a youth academy in Florida, had arranged a friendly against Yeovil but after the game was cancelled he decided to step in and buy the club. “Coming to Bridgwater reminded me a lot about the early days of when I took over at Bournemouth,” he says. “It is a similar situation because we are the underdogs here. I love getting involved in challenges and Bournemouth was a big challenge for us.” Bridgwater are part-time – they train 5-10pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays – and are adding an extra weekly session to the load. They are also looking into the men’s and women’s teams training together, as Oxford United have done this season. The goalkeeper, Bethany-May Howard, works for Royal Mail as a postal worker and the defender Bow Jackson for the Avon fire and rescue service. Others work as teachers, sports coaches and in sales. The former Crystal Palace defender Amy Goddard helps run the commercial department and the run-up to the game has been understandably busy. “I looked in the inbox and saw 100 emails: ‘Oh, great,’” she says. “There have been a few late nights trying to get everything sorted ready for the big game. I look after all the sponsorships and doing that alongside the football makes you feel that little bit more involved.” Murry has big plans, including building what he believes would be the first dedicated women’s football stadium in the world on a nearby 11-acre site. He does not want the women’s team to be “just one page alongside the men’s”. Murry is also the team’s acting manager, taking training alongside the former Southampton academy coach Kevin Braybrook, who worked with Gareth Bale and Adam Lallana at the club. Braybrook leads a technical session – predominantly sharp passing – on a 3G pitch, adjacent to their stadium, that belongs to the local college. “We need to look after the ball because on Sunday they are going to press, press, press,” he says of the opposition. Bridgwater are third in the FA Women’s National League South. “I was lucky enough to be part of the WSL journey and to still be here and make sure the club is back on its feet and continues to move forward is special,” says the chief operating officer, Ewan Greenhill. “To have reached such a big game again, after a lot of transition and uncertainty over the last few years or so, is amazing. It does help put our whole club on the map. There are people who have bought tickets who have never been to the ground but only live a couple of streets away and hopefully this is a platform to build and grow.” By 9.30pm and after a round of interviews – Laura Holden, who scored the winning goal against Palace in the previous round, does some keepie-uppies for the cameras – an analysis session and a return to the 3G pitch, it is time for the post-training meal: chilli and rice is on the menu. Manchester United have won their past six matches without conceding a goal and have struck up a rhythm under the former Birmingham manager Marc Skinner. But nothing will kill the optimism in these parts. “There’s only one United and that’s Bridgwater United,” Gudge says, breaking into a broad grin.The Tory MP Tom Tugendhat has become the first to say he would throw his hat into the ring if there were a Conservative party leadership contest. The MP for Tonbridge and Malling and chair of the Commons foreign affairs committee said it would be a “huge privilege” to serve as prime minister, a job he once described as like winning the lottery. The former soldier, 48, who served in Iraq and Afghanistan, said anyone who would be able to garner support from a group of colleagues should “go for it” and it was “up to all of us to put ourselves forward”. The likelihood of Boris Johnson facing an imminent confidence vote over Downing Street parties that allegedly broke lockdown rules has stirred speculation about possible leadership candidates. Tugendhat, a Tory centrist without ministerial experience, is considered a 16-1 outsider to succeed Johnson, but his name is increasingly coming up as a viable option. One former cabinet minister said: “Tom would be my first choice.” Tugendhat told Times Radio: “I think I’m making it pretty clear that I think that it’s up to all of us to put ourselves forward. And it’s up to the electorate – in the first case parliamentary colleagues, and in the second case the party – to choose.” He said he had not been canvassing support, but “of course you should have a go”. “I think it’s a position of absolute integrity to say that of course you should offer yourself to the electorate if you think you can do it. Of course you should talk to colleagues and see if you can get a group together, and if you can get a group together you should go for it,” he said. Pressed on whether he would still like to be PM after expressing an interest in the past, he said: “It would be a huge privilege. It’s one of those questions that I know many people ask and some people, some of my colleagues, are coy about and I don’t understand why. “I don’t think you should be embarrassed to want to serve your country. I was very proud to serve my country in the armed forces and I got to the highest rank I could so that I could have the best effect that I could. And I was very proud to serve as a diplomat around the world.” Tugendhat has an important ally in Michael Gove, the levelling-up secretary, but he is less popular on the party’s right. The chief whip, Mark Spencer, has reportedly nicknamed him “Tom Tugendtwat”. He supported the remain campaign, but his loyal voting record on Brexit matters under Theresa May and Johnson and his opposition to stricter Covid measures could net him some support from rightwingers. Whether Tugendhat would end up as “the Rory Stewart of the race”, as one MP put it – a reference to the former development secretary’s failed leadership bid in 2019 – his motivation seems to be shatterproof. He told Politics Home: “I will serve at whatever level I’m asked to.”International travel will receive its biggest boost in two years when the government scraps the need to be Covid tested before and after you arrive back home in England or Scotland – provided you are fully vaccinated or under 18. The rule change, which comes just in time for the half-term break, applies to anyone arriving after 4am on Friday 11 February. Wales and Northern Ireland are yet to change their testing rules, although they are expected to follow. Under-18s and those who qualify as fully vaccinated (having had the second jab at least 14 days previously) will no longer need to take a Covid test before they depart for home, nor after they arrive back. On the same day, the unvaccinated will no longer be required to self-isolate on arrival but they will still need to take a pre-departure test, and book and pay for a day-two PCR test. The need for the second, day-eight, test is removed. Everyone arriving in the UK will still be required to fill in a passenger locator form. Those heading abroad face a bewildering set of rules – depending on their destination. Most countries now require a vaccination certificate to enter without quarantine and, or, a negative Covid-19 test result taken up to 48 hours before the traveller departs the UK. Some countries require the under-18s to prove they have been vaccinated or that adults have had a booster. In Austria, 16- and 17-year-olds must be fully vaccinated, take a test and have a booster in order to enter. Malta still requires 12- to 18-year-olds to be fully vaccinated before arrival. For this reason, the UK government has announced that children aged 12-15 are to be given access to digital Covid passes in time for half-term. Families can also request a NHS Covid pass letter, which takes about seven working days to arrive. Plenty of people who have had the coronavirus in the previous three months are returning positive results when they take pre-departure PCR tests. Some countries, for example, Morocco, which reopens to tourists on 1 February, currently require a negative PCR test taken up to 48 hours before departure. It is worth considering whether all your party would pass a test before you book an expensive trip. PCR tests will pick up traces of infection up to three months after it ended. Some countries will accept proof of recovery instead of a negative PCR test but not many. It is expected that more countries will relax rules in the coming weeks and months but you may not want to bank upon it.• The Greek star violinist Leonidas Kavakos made his concert debut aged 17, in 1984. Only now has he made his first recording of Bach’s six solo sonatas and partitas, mighty monuments of the violin repertoire, traditionally grouped as Sei Solo (Sony). Kavakos’s sound is intense, silken, mercurial – a modern, characterful performance aware of history, playful in its ornamentation, but without exaggeration. The recording is spacious and resonant. His formidable technique makes light of the effortful cross-string chordal passages – in the Sarabande of the B minor Partita, or in the tugging, anguished opening of the vast Chaconne of the D minor (which he ends with), bringing out voices, structure, line. There are as many ways to perform this music as there are top violinists: from Rachel Podger, matchless in her understanding of period performance, to those aristocratic players of the past – Arthur Grumiaux, Nathan Milstein. In recent months, James Ehnes, Augustin Hadelich, Tedi Papavrami and Fabio Biondi have issued sets. There’s no best here: many voices, all worth our attention, but Kavakos’s fire and grace take some beating. • The pairing on disc of settings of the Magnificat by JS Bach and his son CPE Bach has precedent but isn’t common, and the comparisons between these two works, both in D major, make fascinating listening. Jonathan Cohen directed his group Arcangelo in these, and a third by another prominent son, JC Bach, in 2018 (Hyperion). Champions of historical performance practice, the excellent Gaechinger Cantorey of Stuttgart and soloists, conducted by Hans-Christoph Rademann (Accentus), do not favour quite the same thrilling propulsion in the JS Bach setting that you might find with either of John Eliot Gardiner’s recordings. The nine-movement CPE Bach Magnificat, however, crackles with punch and purpose, the instrumental writing vigorous, the arias – such as the bass’s Fecit potentiam – virtuosic, the choruses grand, all reminding us of CPE’s genius, which might be more appreciated had he not been the son of that particular father. • Live from Wigmore Hall: Monday’s lunchtime concert features the pianist Kathryn Stott and tenor Stuart Jackson in a multilingual recital of Gurney, Tosti and Rachmaninov. Watch Wigmore Hall’s live stream or listen on BBC Radio 3, 1pm/BBC Sounds.Born in Hitchin in 1990, James Bay is a singer-songwriter whose music spans indie-pop, blues-rock and soul. He scored a triple-platinum hit in 2014 with his stadium anthem Hold Back the River, taken from his debut album, Chaos and the Calm, which won the coveted Brits critics’ choice award. The album went straight to No 1 in the UK charts and was followed by the R&amp;B-inspired Electric Light; a third album is due out later this year. Bay is currently playing small-capacity gigs in support of Independent Venue Week; the tour ends on 4 February. A former face of Burberry, he lives in London with his partner, Lucy Smith, and their daughter. This photo was taken when I was 17 and sitting in Lucy’s halls of residence in Brighton. I was getting into the mood of what the next few years would be: riders full of chips and beer. I’d had long hair since I was 12, so chopping it off was quite an outrageous thing for me to do at the time, especially as it ended up looking a bit like a mullet. It might seem like I was that stereotypical guy at the party with the acoustic guitar, but I wasn’t that naff. I was always playing music, though, or at least always trying. I grew up in a little town called Hitchin in Hertfordshire. Once the proper teenage years kicked in, I started to get bored, so I’d break into supermarket car parks and skateboard all night. In the background was this constant obsession with music. I first picked up a guitar when I was 11; by the time I was 14 I’d discovered Guns N’ Roses and Cream, and was fully fixated. Instead of posters, I’d draw my heroes, like Jimi Hendrix and Slash, and stick them on my bedroom wall. Although I’d get the occasional person shouting “Cut your hair!” at me, I was really tall, which is a bit of a godsend when it comes to avoiding bullying. It was lucky, as I was an introverted teenager. Most of all, I was my brother Alex’s wingman. Along with some other friends, he and I formed a band called Roadrunner and spent our evenings playing pubs or people’s living rooms. The rest of the group looked like Kings of Leon in their bootcuts, old band T-shirts and layered hair. I was more hippy-like: baggy jeans and Converse. I didn’t have the guts to pull off cowboy boots or anything too extravagant. As a result, my brother was the lead singer and I was the one standing behind him. Eventually his confidence rubbed off on me. It was on those trips to see Lucy in Brighton where I discovered the open mic nights in the city. I finally felt as if I could step into the spotlight and do this on my own. At first I felt pressure and anxiety as a solo artist. There was one bleak night in Hitchin where I played to one old man standing 25ft away from me in an empty room. The guy running the venue was not happy: “Where’s the fucking audience, mate? I’m trying to make money on the bar and you’ve not brought anybody except this old bloke who’s here every day.” The tragic experiences made the incredible moments when people did start to turn up even better, though. There was another show in a pub in Hitchin where a crowd of 50 people were losing their minds. The promoter leaned over the speakers and gave me a tenner to do two more songs. So I did. And then he gave me another tenner to do two more songs after that. It was nights like that where I felt like something had shifted. I still knock around with the same gang of friends that I did when I was 15, so they know how to keep me in check. That’s really helpful when your career is first taking off. At the start it was a weird sensation to have people comment on how I looked. I used to wear hats, a style that became my signature look for Chaos and the Calm. The press would focus on my fedora, and so it became central to how I was perceived. So these days I don’t wear one. I’m glad to have kicked the habit. I don’t want to be unoriginal, but I definitely found the threat of the second album overwhelming. I was amazed by the reception of my debut and while it looked like an overnight success, I’d been trying to make it happen since I was 14. It was 10 years of hard work and then it all went very quickly, a really crazy ride. It was that transition from being an innocent creative artist to having this nagging voice in my head – saying, “Can you actually do this again? Your new album better win all the accolades the first one did!” – that made me question what I was doing. The pressure didn’t stop me from having a brilliant time taking it on tour, though. Not that I am very rock’n’roll. I have to take care of myself; my voice won’t work if I’m hungover. Opening for the Rolling Stones at Twickenham Stadium in 2018 was one of the best days of my life. It was also totally illuminating. They’re the most rock’n’roll band in the world, and yet before the show Mick Jagger was backstage doing a full workout with 10 personal trainers. It made me feel all right about all those times I’ve gone back to the hotel alone to get an early night. Looking back at this photo, I see a guy who was passionate and driven, but I had no idea how hungry I’d need to be to stick around. I’ve definitely become more calm and confident, and my hair’s possibly a bit better. Plus there’s no more chips and dips on my rider. Everything is now in recyclable packaging and is as organic and healthy as it can possibly be. No drugs, no Jameson. One nice bottle of wine, at the very wildest. Let’s not overdo it.There is an old story about Fabien Galthié that is worth telling again now, a week out from the start of the Six Nations. It is from 2003, when France’s head coach was captaining the team in the World Cup. It was his fourth, he had been in teams that lost in the quarters in 1991, semis in ’95, and final in ’99. Understandably, he was hell-bent on finishing his career by winning the thing. But France were beaten in the semi-finals again, 24-7 by England. That left them one game to play, the third-place play-off against New Zealand four days later. By the time it came around, Galthié had already gone. He was fit but had quit and flown back from Australia to France. Galthié said it was because his uncle had just died, but he had already announced he was retiring right after the semi-final when he admitted in private he wasn’t interested in playing the last game. There were plenty of people who thought Galthié, famously driven and furiously intense, had walked out on the team because he was so utterly focused on winning that he felt like it was first or nothing. It was held against him when he was repeatedly overlooked for the job of national coach, which he wanted so much and went instead to Marc Lièvremont, Philippe Saint-André, Guy Novès and then Jacques Brunel. Some of those appointments look even worse now, given how well France have played since Galthié finally did take over in 2019. He and his crack band of assistant coaches, Shaun Edwards, William Servat and Thibault Giroud, have had a transformative effect on the team. They have shepherded the best of the talented young bunch who won back-to-back titles in the World Under-20 Championship into senior rugby, finished runners-up in the Autumn Nations Cup and in two Six Nations, won their first away victory over Australia in 30 years, and, best yet, beat New Zealand by 15 points in Paris last November. All of a sudden, as the Italy coach, Kieran Crowley, says, France are “the team of the moment” and clear favourites to win what is shaping up to be a fiercely competitive Six Nations. After a decade of dysfunction, there is a sense that things are finally starting to come together. The prospect of hosting the World Cup in 2023 has got the French Federation, run by Galthié’s old coach and great mate Bernard Laporte, and the Top 14 clubs pulling together in the same sort of direction. Which is why Galthié might just be beginning to feel a little twitch of that old anger of his because he, his coaches and players know the one thing they haven’t done yet is win a championship. Edwards has said as much, more than once. “We’re kind of everyone’s second-favourite team at the moment aren’t we?” he said recently. “We’ve got a bit of respect, but we haven’t won anything yet. That’s the next step, and it’s often the hardest one.” And they need to make it soon. Not just because it’s been so long – the French haven’t won the Six Nations since 2010 – but because the World Cup is so close. It’s a young squad buoyed by the sense of expectation, but that could switch pretty quickly and begin to feel like a hell of a lot of pressure unless they prove to themselves, and everyone else, that they can win a trophy. Eddie Jones knows. He picked up on it when he was asked about France’s chances. “You know, France are sitting at the top of the tree in the Six Nations, red-hot favourites, expected to win, and if they don’t the French rugby public is going to be disappointed,” Jones said. “They’ve shown what great depth they’ve got, they had a development tour to Australia and the results were amazing. And then they’ve got the luxury of having 43 players in camp, the grand master of French rugby, Bernard Laporte, has done a great job in getting the clubs to work with the French union. So they don’t have any excuses. And all of that comes with a price.” A price, Jones said, which he was sure France’s new captain, Antoine Dupont, “would be able to handle”, even if “he does have a lot on his plate already”. Which might just be a typical little bit of mischief-making from a coach who knows France are likely to be one of the biggest obstacles to his England team achieving his own dream of winning the World Cup next year. But it still has a hint of Jones’s thinking in it, of the weaknesses he sees, and how he wants to exploit them. As for Galthié, he is handling it by talking up everyone else. “We’re happy and proud to be considered the team of the moment, but Ireland have been undefeated since February, beat the All Blacks in November, and are ahead of us in the rankings. Scotland have put in some great performances. Wales won last year. England won two years ago. They all have the ability to win this tournament.” France’s Six Nations has already had a wobbly start, with Dupont and a group of his Toulouse teammates forced to miss the first week of training after testing positive for Covid. Given they begin with a home game against Italy, they’ll cope, but the tournament is still going to be a test of France’s ability to put together a string of performances like those they will need to in 2023. That win against the All Blacks came after four weeks of prep, all focused on that one match, the squad built up to it through games against Argentina and Georgia. Beating Ireland, Scotland, Wales and England back-to-back is going to be a very different sort of test. Not for the first time in Galthié’s life, winning is starting to feel like everything, and anything else isn’t enough.The inquiry into Downing Street parties could be shared with Boris Johnson as soon as this weekend as cross-party demands mount for the report to be published in its entirety after an intervention by Scotland Yard. The timeline for the publication of the long-awaited report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray on alleged lockdown breaches at Downing Street and Whitehall was thrown into question this week when the Metropolitan police announced on Tuesday that a criminal investigation had been launched. Scotland Yard provoked outrage by demanding that references to matters it was examining be removed from the report. MPs labelled the force, which is investigating possible breaches punishable by fixed-penalty notices, “a broken organisation”. The Met’s intervention has been met with a torrent of criticism, with Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National party calling for full transparency over the Gray report. Sir Christopher Chope, the Conservative MP for Christchurch, became the latest figure to join demands for the report’s publication on Saturday, accusing the Met of an abuse of power. Government sources said on Friday night that Gray’s team had decided to send a redacted version of the report to No 10. There were also new claims late on Friday that the prime minister’s wife, Carrie Johnson, allegedly sent messages to No 10 staff offering to bring a cake to a June 2020 gathering. The Telegraph reported that the inquiry was told she had asked a government official to gather staff together to celebrate the prime minister’s 56th birthday, adding that she would organise the cake. Chope told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Saturday: “I don’t think it’s any of their business. This is a Cabinet Office inquiry and the findings have been concluded, and they’ve been shared – I don’t know why – with the Metropolitan police. “Now the Metropolitan police seem to be interfering both in the content of the report and trying to prevent it being published in an unredacted form.” He said it would have been different if criminal charges had been imminent, in which case the matter would have been sub judice and barred from discussion in the Commons. “Under the rules of law which apply in our country, this is not sub judice … that’s why I think this is an abuse of power by the Metropolitan police,” he said. Adam Holloway, the Tory MP for Gravesham, also called for Gray’s report to be published in its entirety. “The fact is we’re not getting a full and rounded view from what we’re getting from the media, and that’s why I – and probably Boris too – would like to see the whole of Sue Gray’s report, and as soon as possible, so we can end this madness,” he said. Holloway defended Johnson, describing him as “a really remarkable guy who got an 80-seat majority”. He said he “believed him when he said he didn’t know it was a party”. Commander Catherine Roper, the head of the Met’s central specialist crime command, said the timing of the document’s release was up to the Cabinet Office. She defended the force’s request for Gray to limit her report, saying it was a means of protecting the integrity of the police investigation in order to be “as fair as possible to those who are subject to it”.African art music – a bridge between western classical forms and traditional melody and rhythm – has a determined champion in the Romanian-Nigerian pianist Rebeca Omordia. She has made her life’s work a quest to discover and perform the output of composers – often unpublished – from right across that great continent. Judging by her inaugural recital in this year’s African Concert Series, her determination is yielding fascinating results. Imagine, if you can, a sensuous, serpentine Arabic melody in the left hand winding its way up towards a delicate filigree of sparkling stars in the right hand and you have something of the impression that Moroccan composer Nabil Benabdeljalil (b.1972) creates in his beautiful Nocturne No 4 from 2015. His romantic Nocturne No 6 from 2020, which expresses his intense joy at roaming the Middle Atlas mountains after lockdown, feels as though John Field himself might have been a ghostly presence at his side. Christian Onyeji (b.1967) seeks to transfer Nigerian drumming techniques to the piano in his Ufie, Igbo Dance, which becomes a wild celebration of intense rhythm, captured dramatically by Omordia. His piece neatly mirrored the ideas of Akin Euba (1935-2020), who promoted interculturalism in composition and saw pianism as a means to express features of Nigerian traditional music. Euba’s Ore Meta uses percussion – performed here by Abdelkader Saadoun – to drive his sophisticated arrangement of a popular song from the Yoruba region. David Earl (b.1951) grew up in Stellenbosch. Princess Rainbow, from his Scenes from a South African Childhood, shimmers with a lyrical nostalgia as he recalls fishing on the river alongside his father. Coming next month in the series: a whole day celebrating music and musicians from Africa at London’s Wigmore Hall on 5 February. Go – and have your eyes and ears opened. The African Concert Series runs until 5 DecemberBetween greeting regulars at the busy Lisbon bakery where she has worked for two decades – and reaching instinctively for their orders as soon as they cross the threshold – Susana Santos offers her thoughts on an imminent, and altogether less welcome, encounter. Like many of her compatriots, she does not relish the idea of Sunday’s snap general election, which arrives amid a stubbornly lingering pandemic and during a time of economic upheaval and political uncertainty. “They should have left things as they were. That would have been best,” says Santos, 48. “I’m exhausted. I’m tired of all this. What they’re doing is a joke.” The early election was triggered last December after the fragile, but improbably durable, deal between Prime Minister António Costa’s minority Socialist government and its allies in the Portuguese Communist party and the Left Bloc broke down during negotiations to pass the 2022 budget. After weeks of tense negotiations, the Communists and Left Bloc eventually joined rightwing parties in rejecting the budget bill. Not only did the surprise rupture end the alliance known as the geringonça – or improvised solution – which had made Portugal a rare beacon of European social democracy, it also yielded an election that could see the far-right Chega party become the third biggest group in parliament. For Santos and for many others, the timing could not be worse. The early election will delay the approval of a new spending programme, just as the government was poised to jump-start the economy after the pandemic with €45bn (£38bn) in EU recovery funds. Since 2015, Costa’s administration has led an economic turnaround, reversing unpopular austerity measures, such as the cuts to public sector wages and pensions introduced during the European financial crisis. Last year, the government received praise for spearheading one of the most successful vaccination programmes in Europe and bringing unemployment to pre-pandemic levels. The Socialists’ track record is likely to ensure loyalty from voters such as Santos. “I’ll vote for the Socialists because I don’t earn much,” she says. “They didn’t take our subsidies or anything, so it wasn’t bad – but it hasn’t been easy.” Others are more despondent. Armando Mendes, a 68-year-old retired teacher who now works as a private tutor, is disappointed that the election has come two years early, and pessimistic about the chances of an effective government. “I’ve never failed to vote, but I think this is a clown-show,” he says. “They’re playing games – nothing justifies this.” For Mendes, the main priorities of the next government should be strengthening the national health service – which is still reeling from the pandemic – and investing in improving the school system. He is not enthused by the prospect of another geringonça: “I don’t think any government elected without a majority will manage to get anything done.” Although the polls have shown a close race for first place between Costa’s Socialists and the centre-right Social Democrats (PSD), the latter appears to be pulling ahead. A poll released on Tuesday put support for the PSD on 34.4% – up from 28.5% a week earlier – and backing for the Socialists at 33.8%, down from 38.1%. The PSD, which is led by the economist Rui Rio, has pledged to cut taxes on corporate profits and personal income, should it emerge victorious. “We have to reinforce the competitiveness of our economy,” Rio said at the beginning of January. “We have to turn our economic policy towards companies because they are the ones that create better wages and better jobs.” Costa, meanwhile, has denounced his former allies in the Left Bloc and Communist party as “irresponsible” for torpedoing his budget, and is urging voters to give him an outright majority so the Socialists can govern alone. However, neither the Socialists nor the PSD look to be on course for an overall majority, meaning that deals will have to be struck and alliances forged by whichever party wins the most votes. The same poll that gave the PSD the lead also suggested that the far-right Chega could leapfrog the Left Bloc to become the third largest force in parliament. Chega, which is led by the belligerent former TV football pundit, André Ventura, won a seat in the 2019 general election, taking 1.3% of the vote. But when Ventura – an ally of Marine Le Pen of France and Italy’s Matteo Salvini who has repeatedly sought to demonise Portugal’s Roma community – ran in the 2021 presidential election, he attracted 11.9% of the vote. Pedro Magalhães, a political scientist at the University of Lisbon’s Institute of Social Sciences, says Chega will almost certainly consolidate its presence in parliament and could even win 10 seats, thanks to a populist strategy complete with some familiar enemies. “They’ve plugged into attitudes that are either deep-seated in Portugal – prejudice against Gypsies, the perception that the entire political class is totally corrupt – or that, although they may not be widespread, are nevertheless prevalent enough to make a difference: the notions that social transfers go to the ones who least deserve it or that immigration is a threat. “They have a solid presence in social media, good mobilisation, and the beginnings of a true party structure,” he says. “Having said that, whether they can form a parliamentary group of MPs with minimal quality and effectiveness is going to be a major test of their growth as a party.” While Rio has ruled out including Chega in any coalition, the far-right party could still play a big role in shaping and propping up a PSD government. Across the border in Spain, the far-right Vox party has proved crucial to the formation of three rightwing regional governments and is the third biggest party in the national parliament. For many voters, the idea of a powerful far right in a country that is fiercely proud of reinventing itself after the end of the Salazar dictatorship is deeply troubling. Miguel Ameixas, a mechanical engineering student in Lisbon, is still weighing up his vote. “What scares me the most is the prospect of a rightwing majority, with the far right included,” he says.Nick Kyrgios live streamed his entrance and exited with an Instagram post. The latter was a video of himself and Thanasi Kokkinakis strolling back down the tunnel with their trophy in hand and a “WINNNNERS BABYYYYY!!!!!!!” caption. Rod Laver Arena has never seen winners like these before. Tennis in general would be hard-pressed to find a pair. Last week the Special Ks were wildcards with no expectations about results. On Saturday they became the first all-Australian partnership to win at Melbourne Park since the Woodies – Mark Woodforde and Todd Woodbridge – in 1997. The childhood friends’ remarkable journey ended in another entertaining 7-5, 6-4 victory, this time at the expense of compatriots Matthew Ebden and Max Purcell. “I have won some big titles around the world, played some amazing matches. This one ranks No 1 for me,” Kyrgios said. “When I say I wouldn’t want to do it with anybody else, I mean it. It was just special. The whole week, winning each round, I didn’t take it for granted. I was soaking it in. Not one time did it cross my mind that we were going to win the title.” The match, which followed hot on the heels of Ash Barty’s women’s singles title win, began with the usual warm-up antics. Kyrgios, ever the showman, dribbled a tennis ball and squirted a water bottle between an official’s legs. Once it started, though, the duo were almost uncharacteristically serious, aware of the significance of their performance, which comes nine years after Kyrgios and Kokkinakis claimed the junior Wimbledon doubles title together. It is especially meaningful for Kokkinakis, who has been plagued for several years plagued by serious injuries and illness but won his maiden ATP singles title in Adelaide earlier this month. One month ago the 25-year-old thought he had “no chance” of being “I said to my team after, ‘whatever happens, if I snap my knee tomorrow – this was after Adelaide – I’m happy,” Kokkinakis said. “I’ve won a title. Coming from kind of where I felt was the lowest low to come and win a title in my hometown was incredible. It’s just a big weight off my shoulders. “It’s a testament to my team and everyone that stuck by me through a lot of hard times. Hopefully this is a start, but as I said, if this is as good as it gets for me, I’m happy.” The contest was not without a dose of crowd controversy, with Kyrgios asking for a fan to be ejected as Ebden and Purcell were serving to stay in the match. On the whole, though, the atmosphere was less wild than in the matches that led them to this point. “I would say that we’ve created probably the best atmosphere this tournament has ever seen, to be brutally honest with you,” Kyrgios said. “Ash’s [Barty] father came to us and said the crowd was the best he’s ever seen. “Obviously Ash is a hell of a player but I think the ratings speak for themselves. People watch my matches, everywhere I play around the world the stadiums are full for that reason.” Kokkinakis described Barty as “an incredible player, incredible role model” and said she thoroughly deserved her win, which he and Kyrgios both watched. Whether he and Kyrgios will play again as a partnership, though, remains up in the air. “I’m not playing the French [Open], and I’m not playing Wimby [Wimbledon] doubles,” Kyrgios said. “Maybe just US [Open] and then [ATP] Finals.” Kokkinakis laughed. “There you go,” he said. “I’ll just try and find someone else. That’s fine. Didn’t even enjoy it, anyway. [Kyrgios] just wants to rock up for the ATP Finals end of the year, I reckon. That’s all right.”Here’s our snap report. More to follow and thanks for reading the live blog. Thanasi Kokkinakis and Nick Kyrgios receive the trophy. Kokkinakis says: “Nick, I love you, brother.” Kyrgios comes on. “You’ve matured, good to see. I am super happy, I don’t know how we are doing this. I know this big boy is going to be out tonight so ladies, let’s go. I have to stop now, I have crossed the line.” Todd Woodbridge and Mark Woodforde, the Woodies, are there, of course, to present the awards to, first Purcell and Ebden. “Those guys are really really good,” says Ebden. Purcell, by the way, has a fine Aussie mullet, very much in the Henry Ramsay style. Big, big day for Australia. The scenes are emotional, broad smiles, bear hugs and Kyrgios jogs to his partner and they are close to tears. They had just too much for their opponents. Wild scenes in the Melbourne Park outside crowd, too. So, Kyrgios will serve it out. 30-0 comes around fast. So does 40-0, and three championship point. Surely now. And yes, it’s done! Purcell returns and Kokkinakis smashes home the winner. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 7-5 5-4 Ebden &amp; Purcell* A hold, an eventful hold. It all starts with boos and a row round the umpire’s chair as Kokkinakis calls for a let after someone screams out as the serve is made and the point is played out. The culprit is caught on TV and is seen laughing. Kyrgios wants the miscreant chucked out and he gets his wish as security move in. The whole stadium cheers as the shouter and his mates leave. Purcell double faults at 15-15. Then Kokkinakis volleys to leave him and his pal two points short. Kokkinakis overhits to go to 30-30, it was close though. Ebden forces 40-30 with a stop volley. Kokkinakis then forces deuce by crashing the ball at Purcell’s midriff. Kyrgios does his basketball stuff to try and volley home and makes a mess of it. Too flashy. Kokkinakis then saves game point with some speed from the back of the court. Kokkinakis then forces a winner, smashing it with real venom and it’s championship point all of a sudden. That’s saved by some Ebden serving. Then Kyrgios gets too excited again and misses his winner. Advantage, and one claimed when Kokkinakis is sent behind the umpire’s chair and cannot get the ball back. *Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 7-5 5-3 Ebden &amp; Purcell Oof. An ace levels it at 15-15 on the Kokkinakis serve. Then to 30-15. But Ebden forces an error and 30-30, meaning this is a big point. He misses the first serve. But Kyrgios holds firm at the net, sending Purcell scrabbling and unable to get the ball back. Whoops, double fault, and the first of the entire match. But at deuce, Kokkinakis plays a lovely forehand to the back of the court to claim advantage. And then, slipping to the floor, he blasts the ball beyond a hapless Ebden. A huge hold. Kyrgios picks up his mate in celebration. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 7-5 4-3 Ebden &amp; Purcell* A point against the serve? Feels like it’s been a while, and Kokkinakis’s energy forces it. 0-15 and then 0-30 on the Ebden serve. Then Kyrgios bludgeons Ebden into conceding three break points. Kokkinakis claims them with more bludgeoning. The big break is made and the K Boys can scent victory here. *Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 7-5 3-3 Ebden &amp; Purcell Kyrgios’s serve looks less secure than his fellow Aussies but nevertheless he serves out to love too. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 7-5 2-3 Ebden &amp; Purcell* Purcell’s serve continues to be strong. And a whipped second serve means another game served out to love. They should just go to the tie-break and have done with it. *Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 7-5 2-2 Ebden &amp; Purcell Big winner down the line from Kokkinakis takes it to 15-0. His serve looks rock solid, as does his backing-up game. 40-0 soon dawns. As does a service game to love. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 7-5 1-2 Ebden &amp; Purcell* Better serving, better volleying and Ebden and Purcell’s defence is looking strong as they see out the game to love with a Purcell ace. *Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 7-5 1-1 Ebden &amp; Purcell A roar from Purcell as he and his partner seize a 15-30 lead. Kokkinakis’s backhand volley levels it at 30-30. Kyrgios hammers the ball to take it to 40-30. Then moves across the court behind his serve to level. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 7-5 0-1 Ebden &amp; Purcell* Purcell serves, and the second set begins with swordplay from all the players. Kokkinakis’s lob is superb but safety play from Ebden is equal to the task. Purcell volleys home for 40-0. They hold their serve in some comfort. Two serves and it’s 30-0, with Ebden struggling to return. Then Purcell’s error sets up three set points. Kokkinakis, having served, then crashes into the Ebden backhand it’s 1 -0 lead. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 6-5 Ebden &amp; Purcell* A first break, at last. 0-30 suggests an opening for the K twins. But Purcell stays solid at the net and it’s 15-30, then a huge return from Kokkinakis grabs two break points. The first is saved by cool volleying from Purcell, then Kokkinakis misses a big chance for a winner down the line. He reprieves himself with some crashing hits at Ebden’s backhand. But it goes back to deuce. And back once more after Kokkinakis wallops a forehand between the added lines at the width of the court. Then he claims another break point. And with a backhand return he finally claims it. He will serve for the set. *Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 5-5 Ebden &amp; Purcell Kyrgios goes quickly at the task in hand and to 30-0 he races, and 40-15 with a tremendous lob. Still, a fine return from Purcell takes it to 40-30, and then deuce happens after Kyrgios cannot dig out a ball from the baseline and goes long. A huge serve claims advantage and then Ebden masters the net, making a series of volleys at the net to equalise. Then a big leave from Kyrgios sees the ball fly out and he serves it out, and Ebden misses a winner. Still no breaks claimed. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 4-5 Ebden &amp; Purcell* The K twins go to 0-30 on their opponents’ serve but two good serves rescue matters and it’s back to 30-30. Angled serve takes it to 40-30 and leaves Kyrgios dumbfounded. Then some Kokkinakis power forces deuce, and some luck on the net cord wins another. But Purcell is strong at the net to claim an advantage before the hold is confirmed. All pressure on the Kyrgios serve. *Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 5-4 Ebden &amp; Purcell Kokkinakis’s ace takes it 30-15. Then some baseline hitting from him grabs game point. It’s taken up and the service holds continue. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 3-4 Ebden &amp; Purcell* Kokkinakis finishes it off after Kyrgios’s angled drop shot off his shoelaces. Then comes the tennis rabona under the legs, but Ebden and Purcell still serve out. *Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 3-3 Ebden &amp; Purcell These games speed by. Nick Kyrgios serving now, and maintaining his ferocity. A Purcell backhand volley takes it to 40-30 but Kokkinakis volleys home to those tiresome siuuu sounds. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 3-2 Ebden &amp; Purcell* Ebden crashing in the kick serves, and does so to love, finishing with an ace. *Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 2-2 Ebden &amp; Purcell Kokkinakis serves and begins with venom, this is quickfire stuff. Ebden and Purcell are canny operators and reading him well. Nevertheless, the job is completed and the game is going with serve. It’s loud in the stands, all the prawn sandwichers probably headed to the champagne tent. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 1-2 Ebden &amp; Purcell* Kokkinakis loops up a return of the Purcell serve before Edben crashes home a smash for 40-30. Purcell takes the game with some neat volleying. *Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 1-1 Ebden &amp; Purcell 222 km/h is the speed of the serve with which Kyrgios delivers the hold. Plenty of big air from him and his partner. Kyrgios is a decent basketball player, I am told. Kokkinakis &amp; Kyrgios 0-1 Ebden &amp; Purcell* Matt Ebden and Max Purcell look to be cruising to a routine opening hold but Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis find their shots to force deuce. In the end Ebden’s powerful serve down the middle proves decisive. Ever the showman, Nick Kyrgios was live streaming his entrance to the Rod Laver Arena on Instagram. Real action underway shortly... Yet another opportunity for home glory for Australia, and they can’t lose this one. Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis are the fun boy pair while Matt Ebden and Max Purcell, the more cerebral pair, with Ebden a former mixed doubles champion of his home tournament, winning that in 2013. The Melbourne crowd, doubtless featuring a high number of the city’s Greek population, will no doubt be louder on the Special K side but this will be a fun event for the home fans after all the anxiety of watching Ash Barty in the women’s final. Now that Ash has got the job done, this can be a feast of liquid tennis, though perhaps Krygios can offer some devilment into the match.Pam &amp; Tommy Between A Very British Scandal and American Crime Story (and many more), it seems as if every garish episode of recent-ish history will be retold in a multipart drama. Now coming to Disney+ is the very 90s moment when a graphic home video of Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee was stolen – launching the strange sex tape era of pop culture. Lily James and Sebastian Stan star as the happy, unsuspecting couple. Dom &amp; Lily James, seen last year in second world war romantic drama The Dig (Netflix), was embroiled in a minor scandal of her own in 2020, when paparazzi shots appeared to show her enjoying an intimate scooter ride in Rome with her married co-star from The Pursuit of Love (iPlayer), Dominic West. All of which led to the bizarro moment when West and his wife posed for assembled photographers with a handwritten note declaring “our marriage is strong”. Burton &amp; Taylor While West’s finest hour surely remains as McNulty in The Wire, he’s had numerous other notable roles, including opposite Helena Bonham Carter in Burton and Taylor (BritBox), revisiting the tumultuous couple’s final performances together in a 1983 production of Noël Coward’s Private Lives. Merrick &amp; Kendal Kate Burton, Richard’s daughter from his first marriage, is an accomplished actor, too. She’s soon to appear in Netflix’s Inventing Anna, a series about New York con woman Anna Delvey. In 2002 she picked up a Tony nomination for her role as Mrs Kendal opposite Billy Crudup in a Broadway revival of The Elephant Man. A 2014 production on Broadway that went to the West End saw Bradley Cooper take on the challenging part of Joseph Merrick. Heather &amp; Tommy Circa 2006, Burnt’s Bradley Cooper was briefly married to Jennifer Esposito, who in the late 90s featured in the popular political sitcom Spin City. Among its cast was Heather Locklear, one of the 80s and 90s biggest television stars. And long before the passion of Pam &amp; Tommy, she was married to the Mötley Crüe star. All’s fair in love and heavy metal drumming. Pairing notes Watch Craig Gillespie, the Aussie director behind the series, is best known for his comic retelling of another modern scandal in I, Tonya. Eat During lo scandalo Romano di Dom e Lily, the pair were seen at Ristorante Da Sabatino, a traditional spot close to the Pantheon. Three and a half stars on TripAdvisor. Try the fettuccine with mushrooms!Eleanor Perry (Tight) and Daniel Hay-Gordon (Thick) have spent a decade building a unique style, which combines drag, drama, queer culture, lip-syncing, design, mime and high-quality dance. They are extraordinary, and even Perry’s absence from the stage because of Covid couldn’t stop the quality of their working relationship and the power of their imaginations shining through this mixed bill of short pieces. All are choreographed and directed by them, though some are danced by others. The final piece reveals the duo at their absolute sophisticated best, even though Perry is appearing by video link. Cage &amp; Paige: We Could Go On and On pairs the words and movements of the avant-garde composer John Cage with Elaine Paige, queen of the musical, in ways that are hilarious but also revealing. As Cage says: “There are two things that don’t have to mean anything; one is music and the other is laughter. Don’t have to mean anything that is, in order to give us deep pleasure.” The entire bill, part of the London international mime festival, is propelled by similar principles. Ode to Edith is a tribute to the eccentric poet Edith Sitwell, performed by members of Corali Dance Company (on stage) and the Camberwell Incredibles (on screen), both groups that work with learning diverse artists. The dance itself, complete with wonderful net wigs and jewelled hands, is relatively simple, but it’s performed with considerable verve, and its point – that society determines who is an outsider and who accepted – is resonant. In other numbers, Connor Scott dances as Sid Vicious in a vignette that reveals the singer’s vulnerability as much as his attitude; Harry Alexander twists and turns as Twiggy, catching her gestures despite their physical dissimilarities; Azara Meghie offers a warm-hearted tribute to the inspirational qualities of Grace Jones; and Oxana Panchenko does a bawdy impression of Rasputin. Each piece is beautifully performed and life-enhancing. Short and very sweet indeed. Thick &amp; Tight: Short &amp; Sweet is at the Barbican Pit, London, until 29 JanuaryIn 2012, Singaporean teenager Nat Ćmiel felt withdrawn and isolated from society. Perhaps a byproduct of growing up with the internet as second nature, they became fascinated by digital intimacy rather than relationships with their real-life peers. This would lead to an EP, self-titled with Ćmiel’s artist name, yeule, after the character from beloved gaming series Final Fantasy. Over the past 10 years, yeule has been building on the eerie, exploratory electronic pop realised on that first EP, with their debut LP, Serotonin II, brimming with a yearning for human connection. Now 24 and based in London, yeule is releasing their second album, the boldly constructed Glitch Princess (the title presumably a nod to the jarring, sparking sound design present in their music). Yeule self-describes as a cyborg, and in their sonic universe tracks judder to life machine-like, vocals, synths and textures arriving distorted from the ether, sometimes crackling and fuzzy like there’s a bad connection. It’s no coincidence that Danny L Harle, alumnus of PC Music, one the most boundary-breaking labels in recent history, is alongside yeule on production duties. Breathy, experimental music that’s unafraid to play with pitch and expectation, with delicate, disarmingly intimate lyrics embodying the pleasure and discomfort of digital life (“I like touching myself, and I like being far away from my own body”), file this under the spookier end of cyber pop. In yeule’s beguiling music, the future is now. Glitch Princess is released on 4 February on Bayonet RecordsMy body has never been a source of shame and discomfort; I’ve never been insecure or shy about my flesh. We were taken to nude beaches as kids – it was freeing. To this day, I feel no need to hide myself away. Falling down the stairs and hitting my head is my earliest memory. I was on my way to our basement and suddenly slipped. My five-year-old body went thud, thud, thud, just like you see in the movies. I’ve been incredibly clumsy ever since. I’ve been a workaholic since 18. Some models are catapulted into the big time; I climbed up from the bottom with hard work. In 1992, I won a competition and landed a contract – it was my ticket out. I left our little German village for London, Paris, Milan. I didn’t go out partying like the other models. I was in bed keeping my head down. Flying petrifies me. Not seeing the cockpit freaks me out; I hate being totally out of control. I cry like a baby to cope. It gets to the point where it’s hard to know if I’m bawling my eyes out at a mushy film, or because I’m convinced we’re about to fall from the sky. The advice I give to my daughter, who now also models, is simple: say no to anything you don’t want to do, and hold your ground. I was taught to be confident in my choices by my mother, and that I had the power to put my foot down. Whatever they do, I want my kids to feel the same. People often say relationships take hard work, but I don’t believe it. When you need to make a real effort, something has already gone wrong. I never think of being with my husband as laborious – I can’t wait to be with him. If that’s not how you feel, maybe it’s time to move on. The hours before my family wakes up are precious. I share a house with my husband, four kids, two dogs and a cat; from 8am, all sorts of other people are also in and out. So I’m up before 6am. In those hours while everyone else is sleeping, I can focus on myself. I was considered too curvy for fashion during my early years in the industry. I was landing money jobs, but was desperate to be booked for cooler gigs. I tried to fit into the clothes, but I couldn’t. Designers would say, “No, she’s too big.” And I was skinnier then. One agent tried, and failed, to give me appetite-suppression pills. Fashion has come a long way: we’ve more women of colour taking centre stage, more shapes and sizes. Still, more needs to change. I’m 16 years older than my husband. Lots of people seem to have an opinion on the age difference; people love to be judgmental, or tell me it won’t last. I’m older than him and look it… I don’t need reminding! I’m releasing my first single at 48. Why? Because I’m still alive, and only will be once. I’d hate to look back on my life and be all “shoulda-woulda-coulda”. Who cares if it’s a total flop? I’ll keep wearing short miniskirts into my 80s if it makes me happy. Even if I have to sew a few of them together before squeezing myself in. Heidi Klum’s new single, Chai Tea with Heidi featuring Snoop Dogg, is out now, (kaa.lnk.to/chaitea)Last year, hosannas flocked to Little Simz’s album Sometimes I Might Be Introvert like iron filings to a magnet. It was a nuanced document of black British excellence, hard-hitting and beautiful by turns. All those plaudits could serve as crib notes on the forthcoming project by yet another versatile and resonant London MC, Kojey Radical. To be clear: Simz and Radical are very different creatives with distinct voices and life paths. But in their late 20s, both have brought artistic evolution and sumptuous musicality to bear on career-defining narratives. Simz is up for four big Brit awards: artist of the year, best new artist, album of the year and best hip-hop/rap/grime act; we’ll know the results on 8 February. Fast-forward a few months and Radical’s nominations should flow. Almost a decade in the game, Radical is due to release what is officially his debut album, Reason to Smile, in March. This gig is a bijou 600-capacity warmup for all that is to come, a bridge between past and future. (He plays London’s 5,000-capacity Brixton Academy in April.) Backed by a full band, Radical has come dressed in brightly coloured shades and a hyperreal, landscape-pattern suit that echoes the big sky of his forthcoming album cover. There are fluffy clouds across his chest and a waterfall down one leg. The bass guitar is flesh-pink, an electric guitar glitters gold. His choice of songs reflects tonight’s interim nature, with baton passing from era to era. Water, an electrifying old single from 2018, segues into War Outside, a new album track released last September. Both feature the complex lived experience of blackness, nagging choruses and signature eerie whistling. “I’m too scared to speak to God, there’s shooters in the churches now,” Radical raps on Water. War Outside finds him “sippin’ holy water while I listen to hypocrisy”. Nothing is ever straightforward in a Radical lyric, which is why he hasn’t been marketed as a more conventional grime MC. He can go as hard, verbally, as the road rappers or the drillers. But the Radical goal is advancement and healing. His body of work takes in spoken word and the African diaspora as much as it does grime and funk. And his grandstanding is not just scattershot testosterone, but reasoned argument. A few months ago, Radical put out a standalone freestyle on Link Up TV, a portal for UK hip-hop. Tonight, as then, he lays waste nimbly to the opposition. “Anything they say they done did, I done did it twice,” he glowers. “And if I didn’t do it here, I did it in another life.” In case anyone was wondering where he ranks in the pantheon of UK wordplay, Radical can call witnesses: Stormzy, Kano, Wretch 32 and Ghetts. “Stormz said I’m nice, Kane said I’m nice, Wretch said it next, Ghetts said it twice,” he seethes. “I’ve got flesh wounds bigger than you!” he barks on If Only, best known from the TV series Top Boy. Before the pandemic, Radical released Cashmere Tears, an album-length EP full of sex, sorrow and tunefulness. 2020 was supposed to be the year the man born Kwadwo Amponsah finally arrived. Covid dumped ice on that momentum and everything else. Things are so bad in the night-time economy that the National Lottery, in association with the Music Venues Trust, has funded a series of gigs – the Revive Live Tour, of which this gig is a part – to aid ailing concert halls. Hearing many of the highlights of Cashmere Tears again tonight, Hours stands out as a Prince-level funk jam where Radical breaks out his falsetto. “Can we switch positions baby, I got something I wanna show you,” he croons. Reason to Smile follows confidently on from that era. The album title nods to mental health challenges, something Radical says tonight is “not a buzzword, not a moment, not a month” but “continuous work”. Two more of its new songs slap hard. The production on Payback is taut, all thwack and bounce, with Radical rapping about money. So far, so hip-hop, but, as ever, there are subtle points about justice being made here. “Until we multiply black wealth, fuck a statue,” he seethes. Gangsta, the final song, finds Radical sitting down on the edge of the stage. Subverting expectation once again, the song makes the case for his mother being hard as nails and worthy of respect. Again, it finds him welding a singalong chorus to some intensive work on his conscience. Despite an undercurrent of troubled righteousness, this is a rapper who examines himself as much as he eloquently critiques the systems that hold his people back.Underestimate Sarah Palin at your peril Help! I am writing from beleaguered New York City which, on top of dealing with giant rats, a nasty nor’easter, and the surreal “swagger’”of a Bitcoin-obsessed mayor, is also battling a Palinvasion. Sarah Palin, the former governor of Alaska, has spent the past week running around the city eating at multiple fancy restaurants despite the fact that she has tested positive for Covid-19. Palin, who isn’t vaccinated and has said “it’ll be over my dead body that I’ll have to get a shot,” has now become something of a public health hazard: New Yorkers are being told to go get themselves tested if they’ve been anywhere near her. Palin, it should be said, didn’t just come to New York for the food. She’s in the city because she’s suing the New York Times for defamation. The trial was supposed to start on Monday but because of the whole being-infected-with-a-highly-contagious-virus thing it’s been pushed back until 3 February. When it gets going I’m afraid you’re going be hearing a lot more about Palin. This case, to put it in highly technical legal jargon, is kind of a big deal and has massive implications for press freedom in the US. Some quick background: in 2017 the Times published a piece that incorrectly linked an advert put out by Palin’s political action committee with a 2011 mass shooting in Arizona in which six people died and 14 were wounded – including Gabrielle Giffords, then a Democratic member of Congress. The Times was very much in the wrong here, which it quickly admitted in a correction. That wasn’t enough for Palin, who is seeking damages. (It’s not clear exactly how much, but court papers estimate $421,000 in damage to her reputation.) It’s highly unlikely that Palin will win. Thanks to a 58-year-old landmark decision called New York Times v Sullivan there is a high bar for defamation when it comes to public figures: you have to prove an outlet operated with “actual malice”. However if the case ever ends up in the supreme court there’s a not-insignificant chance that Times v Sullivan could be overruled. Two conservative supreme court judges, Justices Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch, have already made it clear that they are keen to rethink the decision and make it easier to sue the media. This would be a dream come true for people like Donald Trump who, while he was running for president, said he wanted to open up libel laws so he could sue people who wrote nasty stories about him. The media should obviously be held accountable for mistakes in their reporting. However creating an environment in which news outlets are afraid to report on powerful people because they’re worried about being sued is obviously not a good thing for democracy. And Palin doesn’t need to win the actual court case against the Times to score a victory against the media and undermine press freedom. As first amendment attorney Ted Boutrous told CNN: “This lawsuit has always seemed to me to be part of a disturbing trend in recent years of high-profile political figures misusing libel suits as political stunts intended to chill speech on matters of public concern – exactly what the first amendment forbids.” Long story short here is that you should not underestimate the harm Palin is capable of causing. Palin is often treated as a figure of fun by the media; she’s caricatured as a ditzy naif. But that image of her isn’t entirely accurate. You know that famous quote that’s attributed to her? The one where she said she could see Russia from her house? One survey found that almost seven in 10 Americans think she actually said that. She didn’t. Tina Fey did in a Saturday Night Live skit. What Palin actually said was that you can actually see Russia from an island in Alaska: this is perfectly accurate. I’m not trying to defend Palin’s honour here or make her out to be some kind of rocket scientist or master political strategist. What I’m saying is that she’s not the simplistic caricature she is often portrayed to be. And while she may be in the news for running around New York with Covid, it’s worth remembering the enormous part she has played in spreading another sort of virus in America: rightwing populism. As Barack Obama has noted there is a “straight line” from Palin being announced as the vice-presidential nominee in 2008 to Trumpism. Laugh at Palin all you want but there’s nothing funny about the role she has played in shaping the divided and angry United States that exists today. A 37-year-old Polish woman died after being refused an abortion This distressing story is a reminder of how safe abortions help save lives. Outlawing abortion isn’t ‘pro-life’, it’s simply anti-women. The death of Agnieszka T has ignited protests across Poland against the draconian abortion restrictions that were introduced a year ago. The untold story of Susy Thunder, ‘the great lost female hacker of the 1980s’ A fascinating story about a woman who pioneered techniques still widely used by hackers today. The fact you’ve probably never heard of her, and she’s now able to live a quiet life collecting coins, is testament to how good she was at her craft. She was never caught. Gotta hope the success of this profile on her doesn’t suddenly blow her life up. New study: giving cash to poor mothers increases brain activity in babies Who would have thought that ensuring babies have enough to eat might be good for them? Can’t wait for the pro-life crowd to get behind this! House committee in Florida passes ‘Don’t Say Gay’ bill Florida wants to ban teachers from talking about things like sexuality and gender identity in school classrooms. A report from the Trevor Project found that LGBTQ+ youth who learned about LGBTQ+ people or issues in school had 23% lower odds of reporting a suicide attempt in the last year. Tennessee school board bans Pulitzer prize-winning Holocaust novel Things in American schools are very normal and not terrifying at all. Italian job advert demands you send in a swimsuit photo “We ask that you send a full photo in a bathing suit or similar,” the advert for the €500-a-month receptionist job read. Other requirements for the role? Be a woman under 30. The Italian labour ministry is now investigating. The week in praytriarchy It would appear that nothing is sacred anymore. According to Buzzfeed, venture capitalists are flocking to invest in Christian worship apps so they can get their hands on the user data. Remember: god is always watching … and so are data brokers. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for order This article was amended on 31 January 2022 to correct an error on the name of a Florida bill.The cameras follow her every move, close to 100 lenses all expertly trained almost singularly on the star of this show. Court-side, the photo pit is full to the brim, its occupants either sat on chairs or crouched on their haunches, each with their assigned sliver of space through which to document their protagonist. Ash Barty stands at the baseline, steals a quick glance up and over the net towards her waiting adversary, then bounces and tosses the ball. Photographers capturing what they see work for different publications but the process is always the same: bodies lean slightly forward and eyes lock on to viewfinders. Then, they are still. Barty serves and sets about wearing Danielle Collins down. With each chase and pivot the cameras shift, just a little but in perfect unison. She nails a winner and they stand down with a prompt pull back of the head and shake of the leg, releasing the tension until the next point. This process occurs again and again for an hour and a half. They are documenting history, shooting an Australian icon-in-waiting, and no moment can be missed. The pressure is on – and they are not the only ones inside Rod Laver Arena feeling it. Such occasions have come and gone more than once in the past 44 years. Barty has tried and failed. Never before, though, has she made it to the final. Now she is here, having steamrolled every opponent in her path. Everyone in the country says she is unstoppable and she might even know she is. But the stadium lights feel even brighter than usual and the thought of her losing feels darker. Everyone, basically, is a little bit twitchy. Quite what Barty is thinking remains one of the great tennis mysteries. Even carrying this mighty load she reveals no emotion. Stony-faced, the 25-year-old saves an uncharacteristically shaky service game with a forehand down the line. Her shots are coming easily. Her backhand slices skim so low the net feels the wind on its neck. She is up 3-2 and has a break point. Collins double faults. When Barty takes the first set the crowd cheers as if she has won the match. And surely she will; all tournament she has dealt only in eviscerations and this has all the ingredients of another. Barty wins the opening set to a stadium-wide standing ovation. Russell Crowe nods in approval from the front row. The Barty Vegemite T-shirt crew are out in force. Australia flags are plentiful. Between them are Aboriginal flags, a nod to the player’s heritage and the importance of this one, single opportunity. Cathy Freeman is here and knows this, almost 22 years after she managed a similarly beautiful achievement. It is Collins to serve first but the cameras point again towards a bending Barty, swivelling her racket between her hands, waiting to receive. Something is stirring in the American, a ball-striker of the highest calibre in her first major final, battling not only the world’s best player but everybody else present. She is not on her turf but will claim it if she has to. She has Barty on the ropes in her opening service game. The local favourite is down 15-40 and needs some encouragement. The crowd give it to her. She thanks them with an ace. But then the cameras follow her back to the furthest corner, where Collins has sent her scurrying and from where she stretches for a speculative lob that practically invites the inevitable smash. Collins has her break and then a 4-1 advantage. She flexes a biceps. If the crowd will not pump her up she will do it herself. The 28-year-old is used to fighting, to overcoming illness and injury and all the pain that comes with it. Something is awry in the home camp. Is this the Australian Open curse the statisticians keep talking about? Can all these strangers in their seats do enough on their own to help exorcise these demons? If only Evonne Goolagong Cawley was here. Collins needs only serve out this set and the nation will surely endure a 45th year without a home singles champion. An ambulance siren sounds on the street outside, a reminder there are more important things happening. But the world begins and ends inside Melbourne Park and when Collins faults a voice cries from the gallery: “Oh yeeeaaaaah.” Unsavoury though it is, it sparks something in the real Barty, who re-emerges from wherever she has been. A winner whizzes down the line. Then another and another and she has two breaks of her own. This had three sets written all over it. What is this sorcery? How is she 5-1 up in a tie-break that was not going to happen? At the change of ends the big screen captures her walking past the trophy. The cameras would have caught that too. Still not a hint of emotion. Until there is and Barty storms into the middle of the court and lets out every inch of the scarcely conceivable pressure so many Australian players have heaved about on this surface for too long. Mouth wide open, almost shaking. Everyone is shaking. Goosebumps appear on skin. A sea of mobile phones rise. Barty races over to the former player Casey Dellacqua, a good friend. She is sitting next to the photo pit, perfect for a close-up to put on the pages of every newspaper and history book. But the photographers did not know what was still to come. Not even Barty knew, until she saw Goolagong Cawley stride out from her hiding place in the bowels of the arena and up on to the stage to present her with her trophy. Tennis and Indigenous royalty, all in one. “Hell of a surprise,” Barty says. “I do not quite know how Craig [Tiley, the head of Tennis Australia] kept that secret. I am really glad I did not know, I think I would have been under the pump, feeling it.” For a short period she was, but this flawed final was also flawless.A dog that went viral when she was stolen and then found within hours thanks to a Twitter campaign has died aged 15. Cabbage, the collie cross of the former BBC journalist Rory Cellan-Jones, trended on Twitter last November when she and five other dogs were stolen together with a van in Acton, west London, after a dog walker left his keys in the ignition. Cellan-Jones, 63, who thanked his 197,000 Twitter followers when all six dogs were found safely the same day, tweeted on Saturday morning: “We have some very sad news. We’ve had to say goodbye to our much loved collie cross Cabbage. “For 14 years she was a lovely, energetic and really smart member of our family. It was time for her to go but we miss her so much.” Thanking his followers for their support, Cellan-Jones added: “For me and Cabbage, an early walk was an essential part of our daily routine, good for our mental and physical health. This morning I went out as normal but the park seemed very empty. Thanks so much for all your kind messages.” Cabbage already had an online following before she was stolen because Cellan-Jones regularly documented their morning walks on his feed. On Friday morning he shared a picture of a final walk with Cabbage, writing: “Home after a gentle stroll.” The BBC Breakfast host Dan Walker and the Sky News broadcaster Ed Conway were among more than 1,000 wellwishers to offer their condolences. The BBC presenter Nuala McGovern wrote: “I’m so sorry Rory, loved Cabbage in my timeline basically telling me to get up and get moving outside.” When Cabbage went missing last winter, Cellan-Jones quickly alerted his followers and asked people to report any sightings, an appeal that was liked and shared thousands of times in what the journalist described as an “extraordinary outpouring of concern”. “Something terrible has happened,” he wrote at the time. “Our dog walker’s van with our dog Cabbage in it has been stolen while he was picking up another pet … Please look out for a black Ford Transit.” Ford’s press office subsequently got in touch to make the dog walker aware of a safety feature that allowed him to track his van through an app. The van was located in Park Royal and four of the dogs were soon found nearby. The other two were located the same evening. More than 60,000 Twitter users liked a picture celebrating Cabbage’s safe return, with Cellan-Jones saying after his dog was recovered: “Social media has lots of negative sides, but you can use it for really good purposes.”I already love the new Batman film, The Batman. I haven’t seen it, obviously, but its lofty self-importance keeps tickling me, from the definite article of the title to Robert Pattinson’s cut-glass cheekbones to the director Matt Reeves’s recent revelation that his Batman is inspired partly by Kurt Cobain. “Is this guy some kind of wayward, reckless drug addict? And the truth is that he is a kind of drug addict. His drug is his addiction to this drive for revenge. He’s like a Batman Kurt Cobain,” Reeves told Esquire, which I read written down, but I heard in an Alan Partridge voice. As I often think whenever I see socks with George Orwell’s face on them, it’s what he would have wanted. It’s unsurprising that the Seven-esque trailer makes The Batman look about as fun as Damon Albarn’s DMs after the Swifties had set upon him. Batman is inherently po-faced these days; the era of tights and little silicone nipples and terrible puns is long gone. Last week, the Hollywood Reporter revealed that The Batman is almost three hours long. That’s with credits, but you no longer get to shave off 10 minutes by leaving the cinema as soon as the director’s name comes up, in case you miss a post-credits sequence or a bloopers reel (in fairness, if there’s a bloopers reel here, I will eat my bat-cape). Is it finally time to agree that three hours is too long for a film? A running time should not require a lavatory break and/or a brief nap for sustenance. Titanic was too long. The Irishman is so long that I still haven’t steeled myself to watch it. Three hours is an ordeal, not because of the debatable notion that our attention spans are declining, addled by dizzying TikToks and those pesky memes, but because I have never seen a film that is more than two-and-a half-hours long that wouldn’t have benefited from a flattering trim. The argument in favour of long films is that they give moviegoers more value for money. But there’s something cynical about the idea that making a film longer will somehow improve its quality. It’s double-spacing your homework, setting the font size to 14. The Batman may well earn every one of its 175 minutes, but in 2015, YouGov found that 55% of Brits believe the ideal movie length is under two hours. Using no scientific evidence whatsoever, I believe this: the ideal movie length is a neat, succinct, respectful and kind one hour and 39 minutes. Emma Thompson: to bare or not to bare – that is the question In her new film Good Luck To You, Leo Grande, Emma Thompson plays a woman who hires a sex worker to help her have her first orgasm. Last week, she explained that she rehearsed for the part in the nude, along with her director, Sophie Hyde, and co-star Daryl McCormack. “It’s very challenging to be nude at 62,” she said during a CinemaCafe discussion at the Sundance festival. This is a transitional time for on-screen nudity. In recent weeks, full-frontal male nudity, usually doled out sparingly, has appeared on television with gusto. And Just Like That... famously showed Charlotte’s husband, Harry, whipping it out, with the show’s creator later confirming that it was a prosthetic. Meanwhile, teen tearaway show Euphoria, rarely coy about anything, has embraced both female and male nudity with extra enthusiasm for its second season. Yet Sydney Sweeney, who plays Cassie on Euphoria, pointed out that there remains a double standard when it comes to nudity. “When a guy has a sex scene or shows his body, he still wins awards and gets praise. But the moment a girl does it, it’s completely different,” she told the Independent, suggesting that she gets more acclaim for the roles in which she does not take her clothes off. Thompson said she didn’t think she could have done a nude scene before she was 62, though added that her age made it challenging, “because we aren’t used to seeing untreated bodies on the screen”. (The prosthetic, I suppose, would count as “treated”.) But we are used to bodies, treated or not, and for women it remains as complicated a decision as ever. Frank Ocean: good luck if you’re trying to cover his songs There are some artists who are uncoverable, either because their songs are so idiosyncratic or because they have such unique, indescribable magic that it’s impossible to do them justice. For all of the times that people have tried, and basing this on my own experience of mangled karaoke, Abba are pretty uncoverable. Covers of Patti Smith seem tough to pull off, though conversely her covers are in a league of their own. I always thought of Frank Ocean as one of the uncoverable artists, for those same reasons. His songs are strangely structured, with their own language, and they are very much his alone. Yet this is the season of Ocean covers, suggesting that people are at least willing to give it a good go. Last week, Machine Gun Kelly released his version of Swim Good, which did not undermine my theory. Cat Power’s new album, Covers, opens with a version of Bad Religion and she has remade and reshaped it in her own image, which did undermine my theory. I went digging, and found a whole stash of new versions of Lost, by corrJoy Crookes, Khalid and Jorja Smith, all finding a different spirit in it. Not uncoverable, then, but it depends who’s doing the cover. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistTwo heavily pregnant women – fortysomething photographer Janice (Penélope Cruz) and teenager Ana (Milena Smit) – share a room in a maternity hospital. The brief moment of kinship, forged through shared confidences, sweat and pain as they puff through labour in tandem, will bond them in ways they could never imagine. Meanwhile, Janice is dealing with the legacy of the Spanish civil war, which scarred her family and that of many of her compatriots. In other hands, this dual focus, which pulls us backwards and forwards, rooted in the past and driven to the future, might seem unwieldy. But Pedro Almodóvar makes a light-footed dance of it, negotiating story threads that extend over decades and tie up in the present day. This latest picture shares with his last full-length feature, Pain and Glory (2019), the message that secrets are best unearthed and confronted if there is any hope of moving forward. But unlike that film’s sumptuous sadness, and despite putting its characters through considerable suffering, Parallel Mothers is a story that is carried on an unexpected swell of optimism. Everything from the joyous colour palette – a cocktail of tangerine and turquoise, watermelon and lemon sorbet – to the Hitchcockian bustle of the score, gives a sense of promise and propulsion. But most of all, it’s Cruz who sets the tone, with a performance that radiates warmth and is refreshingly forgiving of her character’s flaws. She has never been better.On the morning of 6 January, Boi Van Thang set out on a motorbike across the mountainous terrain of Chin state in western Myanmar. He would travel to a nearby village, he told his wife, and bring back meat for her and their seven children. He never returned. Three days later his wife, Thida Htwe, received a call. Boi Van Thang’s body had been found. The bodies of eight other men and one boy had also been discovered. Thida Htwe said that her husband’s throat was cut, that he had a knife wound in his chest and as well as several in his back, and that one of his legs was broken. Photographs apparently from the scene, seen by the Observer, show a body that Thida Htwe identified as her husband. He is naked apart from his underwear, and his feet are tied. His clothes are in a pile beside his body. Further images provided by Chin Human Rights Organisation (CHRO) show other victims of the massacre who were reportedly found nearby. In one photograph, five bodies are lying beside one another; some have their hands tied or material placed over their eyes or mouth. They have numerous wounds to their throats, chests and stomachs. The youngest of those killed was 13. Chin journalist Pu Tui Dim was among the dead. He had been travelling with villagers, apparently on his way to visit family. He has been described as an “experienced ethnic media personnel who helped pave the way for independent news media in Chin state”. Almost one year ago, Myanmar’s military ousted the democratically elected government of Aung San Suu Kyi and seized power in a coup. Since then, the country has descended into turmoil. The UN estimates the crisis will have driven almost half the population into poverty in 2022. Public services are barely functioning, as large numbers of teachers and medical staff are refusing to work in junta-controlled facilities, and instead operate their own networks. The military has used violence and terror to stamp out dissent and silence opponents. Some 1,500 people have been killed by the military, and 11,800 arrested, according to a local human rights group. But opposition remains. As well as peaceful protest movements, local civilian defence forces have emerged, some of which are supported by established ethnic armed groups. The military has in turn launched artillery and air strikes. In Chin state, where there is a strong resistance movement, as many as 80,000 people have been forced to flee their homes by fighting, according to the CHRO. Almost 900 were arrested between February and December last year alone, according to the group, while 182 people were killed during the same period. Some are thought to have been kidnapped and used as human shields. “I have lived through the previous military regime and I read stories and reports from all over Chin state,” said veteran activist Salai Za Uk Ling of the CHRO. “I have never seen this level of brutality in my life.” In December, more than 30 people, including children, were killed in Kayah state on Christmas Eve. Their bodies were found burned beyond recognition. Earlier in the month, the military rounded up and killed 11 people in the Sagaing region of Myanmar’s north-west. The group was shot and then set on fire, according to local media reports. Alongside such massacres, the military has increasingly deployed a scorched earth campaign as part of its intensifying reign of terror. Myanmar Witness, which collects evidence of military abuses, has corroborated 57 incidents where buildings in villages and other civilian areas have been set alight. Many have been attributed to the military. Extensive damage has been recorded within Thantlang, in northwest Chin state. Such violence was reminiscent of the Rohingya crackdown in Rakhine state in 2017, said Aung Myo Min, human rights minister of the National Unity Government (NUG), the administration in exile. “They sent more troops, they went village to village and torched all the houses, and forced the massive displacement to other areas,” he said. “It’s the same pattern.” The NUG is investigating the killing of Boi Van Thang and other civilians murdered that day. It will submit its findings to a group established by the UN Human Rights Council to collect evidence of violations of international law committed in Myanmar. “It is important for us to bring justice and make sure the culture of impunity is no longer in the future of Myanmar,” said Aung Myo Min. Activists suspect the junta has targeted Chin state because it wrongly believes local resistance can easily be silenced. “They always have this perception that the people of Chin state are weak and can be easily subjugated,” said Salai Za Uk Ling. The state, in western Myanmar, is the nation’s poorest, and home to the Chin people, a mostly Christian ethnic minority that has long suffered oppression in the Buddhist-majority country. Churches are among the buildings that have been torched. Activists say the military’s assumption that it could impose order in Chin state have been wildly inaccurate. According to CHRO, close to 80% of its civil servants are refusing to work after joining the civil disobedience movement. “The administrative apparatus no longer functions in Chin state apart from in towns or capitals like Hakha,” said Salai Za Uk Ling. Tuesday marks the first anniversary of the military’s seizure of power in Myanmar, he said, but added: “The coup has not succeeded yet.” In some villages, most young people had joined the armed resistance, he said. The murder of Boi Van Thang and others on 6 January has prompted a fresh wave of people from villages near to Matupi, a strategic crossroads in Chin state, to flee their homes. El Zamoon was among those who fled. He spent eight days travelling, mostly by foot, across steep roads to seek safety across the border in India’s Mizoram state. Children, exhausted, fell from their bikes along the journey. El Zamoon fled when the military began firing heavy artillery at his village. “Everyone here wants to go back to their homes, but they are afraid of the soldiers,” he said. Families of those killed left without the opportunity to hold a ceremony for their loved ones. Thida Htwe was unable to see her husband’s body or hold a memorial. She said he was a kind-hearted man who, in his spare time, would tutor village children. “He was only 38 and a good father to our kids,” she said. “Now I am left with seven kids. I don’t know how to raise them without him,” she said. When she sees other families she feels a deep sadness. “I wish he were here with us. We will never forget him.”The musician, DJ and broadcaster Nabihah Iqbal was born in London. She graduated from Soas University of London with a degree in ethnomusicology and history and trained as a human rights lawyer before turning to a career in music. In 2017, Iqbal released her debut album, Weighing of the Heart. She is currently rerecording the follow-up after an early version was stolen from her studio in London in 2020. Today and tomorrow, as part of the Purcell Sessions, Iqbal will perform new work at the Southbank Centre with visual artist and quantum physicist Libby Heaney, and she is currently working on a new album. 1. Book London Labour and the London Poor by Henry Mayhew I’m reading this book as research for my Southbank show, which uses the Thames as a focal point. It’s a comprehensive cross-section of what life was like for poor people in London in Victorian times. For me, as a Londoner born and bred and history being my favourite subject, it’s really interesting to read, because it’s so detailed. I’ve been reading about kids walking shoeless from Clerkenwell to St John’s Wood to sell flowers, and “pure finders”, who collected dog poo and sold it to tanneries. 2. Music Jeff Buckley videos on YouTube Jeff Buckley was one of my favourite artists as a teenager and I’m rediscovering his work. The first time around was pre-YouTube, so I’d never seen a video of him performing. Now there are so many amazing videos of interviews and live shows. The recording of him performing Grace on the BBC Late Show is one of the best live performances I’ve ever seen. I also found a recording of him in New York singing a Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan song in Urdu. The audience laughs at him at first, but then you can feel them getting captivated. 3. Museum Leighton House, London This is one of my favourite places in London – the Holland Park house where the painter Frederic Leighton lived. It’s like stepping into a secret world. Leighton travelled a lot around the Middle East and became a big fan of Middle Eastern architecture, ceramics and tile work. It looks like a normal Victorian house from the outside, but inside there’s a beautiful courtyard, with blue tiles imported from Iran, Afghanistan and Syria, and a fountain in the middle. It’s just so peaceful and amazing – I wish I could live there. 4. Cafe Arôme, London WC2 Arôme is a really nice Japanese-Parisian cafe in Covent Garden that’s quite new. They bake everything from scratch. They have amazing croissants and Japanese-style pastries and really good hot chocolate. It’s quite near my studio in Somerset House, so I like to go in there to treat myself. There are so many big chains in central London, and finding good independent places can be tricky, but Arôme is really good. 5. Documentary The Stolen Maharajah – Britain’s Indian Royal, BBC Four This is a BBC documentary about the last ruler of the Sikh empire, Duleep Singh. His story is really sad. While he was still a boy, the British removed him from Lahore and he was later exiled to England. He became quite close to Queen Victoria and was accepted into the upper echelons of British society, but they wouldn’t let him go back to India. As he got older, he became really angry about his exile. It demonstrates how deeply the British empire affected people from the Indian subcontinent no matter their social status, rich or poor. It’s a really good documentary. 6. Place Loch Long, Scotland I’m in Scotland at the moment, at an artist’s residency near Loch Long, about an hour north of Glasgow, trying to finish my album. I wanted to work on music without any distractions and this really is the middle of nowhere. It’s so magical – close to the water, with mountains all around, and really dark at night. If you live in a busy city and are trying to do creative work, I really recommend changing your surroundings. You can’t force creativity, but you can coax it out, and being in this sort of setting allows you to do that as much as possible.A 95-year-old second world war veteran twice denied an absentee ballot under a restrictive Texas voting law has attracted support from prominent figures including Beto O’Rourke, a voting rights campaigner and former presidential candidate now running for Texas governor. Kenneth Thompson, who served in the US army in Europe, told Click2Houston, a Harris county news outlet, he had voted in every election since he was 21 and even remembered paying a 50-cent poll tax in the 1950s. “I’ve been voting many, many years and I’ve never missed a vote,” he said, adding that he considers voting a duty. But under a voting restriction bill known as SB1 and passed last August, Thompson could be unable to meet the state’s 31 January voter registration deadline for an absentee ballot. According to the new law, Thompson is required to submit a social security or driver’s license number that matches state or county records. When Thompson registered to vote decades ago, however, such requirements were not in place. “He registered to vote in the 1940s and they didn’t require that,” said Delinda Holland, Thompson’s daughter. Support for Thompson has poured in, including from O’Rourke, who tweeted out Thompson’s story and a call to fight against voting laws introduced by Republicans seeking to restrict voting among communities likely to vote Democratic. “Now we need to fight for him by taking on [Governor Greg] Abbott’s voter suppression law that is making it harder for Kenneth and millions of other Texans to participate in our democracy,” O’Rourke tweeted. As Thompson did not meet new requirements under SB1, his application for an absentee ballot was denied twice. He says he was not notified either time by county officials and had to call to confirm his status himself. “There’s gonna be a lot of people not gonna vote,” said Thompson. “If I hadn’t have called in about mine, people wouldn’t have known.” On behalf of her dad, she said, Holland tried to call authorities including the office of the Texas secretary of state, seeking to add his license number to his registration file. She discovered there wasn’t a way to do so, which meant he would have to re-register. “We know it’s a new law, we’re happy to correct [his registration],” said Holland. “He’s a law-abiding citizen. He doesn’t want to miss voting and yet there’s no mechanism to add that driver’s license to your record.” Thompson said he now checked his mailbox every day, hoping his absentee ballot had arrived. If it did not, he said, he would vote in person. “I can get out and move around and go to a regular polling place,” he said, “but … lots of people just can’t.”Rory McIlroy publicly places little stock in two previous wins at the Dubai Desert Classic but one can be certain the rest of those vying for the famous trophy are well aware of his record at the Emirates Club. Should he prevail here, McIlroy would join Ernie Els as a three-times Desert Classic champion. “I live in Ernie’s old house in Florida,” said McIlroy. “It would be nice to do something else sort of intertwined with him.” McIlroy’s 69 – one stroke more than the best round in an 81-strong third-round field – puts him in the final group in his second start of 2022. Justin Harding produced his highest score of the week, 71, but still leads McIlroy’s 10 under par by two. Tommy Fleetwood and Erik van Rooyen are firmly part of this equation at minus nine. Yet given his status and previous glories, all eyes are fixed on McIlroy. “I’m excited,” said McIlroy. “I had a really good chance in 2018 here and let it slip through my fingers. It is good to give myself another opportunity.” So what of course and distance specialism? “It’s a new tournament, it’s a new year,” McIlroy said. “It’s basically a new course. You just go out there and try to play your best. The only thing is more experience and being in these positions before. Winning around here twice is nice but I don’t think it gives me any sort of advantage.” Plenty will disagree. The hype around McIlroy, especially with another Masters tilt on the horizon, will intensify should be complete the three-timer. Having played the front nine in 34, one under, McIlroy’s day was kickstarted by an eagle three at the 10th. He converted a putt from 16ft there. In increasingly testing conditions, with the greens particularly slick, McIlroy was on course for a 70 before reaching the 18th green in two and making a two-putt for birdie appear blissfully straightforward. “There has definitely been progress,” he said of his week. This would easily be the biggest triumph of Harding’s career. It is only slightly unfair to point out his main claim to fame is dating a former winner of The Apprentice. Not that the South African is any mug; he has produced four bogeys in 54 holes. He also has little to lose on day four. “I’ve just got to go out and keep doing what I’m doing,” he said. “Make a couple of birdies and shoot 70, 69, something like that, and make them shoot five or six under par, then credit to them. Just another day at the office.” Fleetwood’s return to prominence after a prolonged period of mediocrity has been widely welcomed. He added a 69 to rounds of 67 and 71. “I’m so excited about playing tomorrow, getting the juices flowing on a Sunday and seeing how my game goes,” he said. “I would love to be competing down that back stretch and who knows, it might be my week, might not be but I am excited about where my game is heading. You’re always looking for affirmations to say that what you’re doing is right, don’t sort of miss them as they come along, and I think today showed that.” Paul Casey is eight under; it would be better but for a missed putt from 3ft at the last. “I’m not going to be hard on myself,” said the defending champion. “It is a very, very difficult course.” Henrik Stenson, meanwhile, has offered the strongest indication yet that he wants to captain Europe at the 2023 Ryder Cup. The Swede’s situation is complicated by a continual link with a breakaway, Saudi-backed tour but he appears willing to prioritise the Ryder Cup. “I would prefer to leave that answer for the person who would ask the question but, yes, I am very much still interested,” he said. “I have a little bit of a rough idea what is involved. I have asked Thomas [Bjørn] about it, I have asked Pádraig [Harrington]. I asked Monty [Colin Montgomerie] when we played together this week.”There are faster and better horses in training than Paisley Park, but none that are more popular with the Cheltenham racegoers. Emma Lavelle’s 10-year-old took centre stage once again here, beating off Champ, the odds-on favourite, in the Cleeve Hurdle before getting three cheers from the crowd as he returned to the winner’s enclosure after his first victory since December 2020. It was a dramatic performance by Paisley Park from start to finish, as the 2019 Stayers’ Hurdle winner whipped round and handed his rivals many lengths at the start. In the final half-mile, however, much of the determination and limitless stamina that carried Paisley Park to the staying hurdlers’ championship had returned. Having been a 33-1 shot for this year’s race in the morning, he is now an 8-1 chance to reclaim the title after a three-year gap. “He was able to make the ground up and Aidan [Coleman] did that quietly, quietly,” Lavelle said. “Then he just kept galloping and that was vintage Paisley. “There is nothing like having a winner at Cheltenham with that walk-in and that noise, that’s what we’ve missed during Covid. It means so much to all of us that they have taken to him like we have.” The only thing missing was Paisley Park’s owner, Andrew Gemmell, who is recovering in hospital after heart surgery. “He has just had a new valve fitted,” Lavelle said, “but he will be back for the Festival, don’t you worry.” Champ, who finished nearly four lengths behind Paisley Park, went into the race as a narrow favourite for the Stayers’ Hurdle but is now out to 6-1, in a market headed by Flooring Porter, last year’s winner, at 7-2. It was still a significant afternoon for JP McManus, Champ’s owner, however, as his famous green and gold colours had earlier been carried to victory for the 4,000th time aboard Chantry House, the 5-6 favourite for the Cotswold Chase. Chantry House’s performance was neither foot-perfect nor entirely comfortable, and he did not jump or travel with any real fluency for much of the race. But it was still a big improvement on his disappointing run when favourite for the King George VI Chase at Kempton on Boxing Day and he is now a 16-1 chance for the Cheltenham Gold Cup on 18 March. “The [first-time] cheekpieces were a bit of a response to Kempton,” said Nicky Henderson, Chantry’s House’s trainer. “He was very sharp before that and he just wasn’t on the day, he was lost after three or four fences. “Nothing gives me more pleasure [than training McManus’s 4,000th winner] and it’s lovely that it’s not at Ballygobackwards, it’s here in a proper race at Cheltenham.” Ireland’s buying power when it comes to useful jumping prospects was underlined in the juvenile hurdle as Pied Piper, who was bred by the Queen and raced for her on the Flat, sauntered home on a tight rein and replaced Fil Dor, a stable companion at the Gordon Elliott yard, as favourite for the Triumph Hurdle. Pied Piper won two of his 11 starts on the Flat before being sold for 225,000gns to his current owners, Caldwell Contruction Ltd, who have more than 20 horses in training with Elliott, including Fil Dor. The only Irish-trained runner in the race stretched nine lengths clear of the runner-up, Moka De Vassy, under a motionless Davy Russell and is now top-priced at 3-1 for the Triumph Hurdle on 18 March with Fil Dor – who is due to run at the Dublin Racing Festival next weekend – on 7-2. Gary Moore’s Porticello, at 16-1, is the shortest-priced contender from a British stable.A 35-year-old man has been convicted of stalking the tennis player Emma Raducanu. Amrit Magar was convicted at Bromley magistrates court on Friday and will be sentenced next month. The court heard how Magar, a former Amazon delivery driver, visited Raducanu’s home three times and stole one of her father’s shoes as a “souvenir”. He tracked down the US Open champion’s London home address and left notes, flowers and Christmas decorations, according to the Daily Mail. In a statement to the court, Raducanu, 19, said the ordeal had left her feeling afraid to go out alone. “Since all this has happened I have felt creeped out. I feel very apprehensive if I go out, especially if I am on my own,” she said in a statement reported by the Mail. “Because of this I feel like my freedom has been taken away from me. I am constantly looking over my shoulder. I feel on edge and worried this could happen again. I don’t feel safe in my own home, which is where I should feel safest.” Magar, from Edgware, north London, discovered Raducanu’s address by travelling to the London suburb where she lives with her parents and asking people for directions. He then left her messages, including a map he had drawn showing the distance he had walked from north London to her address, with a note attached reading: “23 miles walked 4 you.” On Magar’s last visit to the property in early December, he decorated a tree in the front garden with Christmas lights and stole a shoe belonging to Raducanu’s father from the porch, believing it to belong to the tennis player. He was caught by Ian Raducanu, who recognised him from previous visits and followed him by car while calling the police. After being arrested with the shoe in his bag, Magar, 35, told police he had wanted a souvenir. The tennis player told police: “I want to move to a new house with better security because I am worried he might come back as he knows where my home is.” In evidence on Friday, Magar said he was ashamed to learn that his actions had upset Raducanu. The district judge Sushil Kumar said: “His inability to explain how he did not think this was harassment is incapable of belief.” Magar was bailed on the condition that he does not contact Raducanu or her parents or visit their street.James Blunt has jokily threatened to release new music on Spotify if the audio streaming service does not remove a podcast by the US commentator Joe Rogan that has been criticised for promoting anti-vax views. The English singer-songwriter wrote on Twitter on Saturday: When a Twitter user queried whether Blunt meant instead to say he would not release new music, another user commented: “He means he will. It’s a common joke of James’s on Twitter that his releasing music is a negative thing for the world.” Blunt’s comments come after Joni Mitchell became the second high-profile musician after Neil Young to remove their music from Spotify in protest against the platform’s promotion of the podcast The Joe Rogan Experience. Young had demanded Spotify take down his songs unless episodes of the podcast he considered to contain false information about Covid vaccines were removed. The Canadian-American musician publicly accused Spotify on Monday of “spreading fake information about vaccines – potentially causing death to those who believe the disinformation being spread by them”. “They can have Rogan or Young. Not both,” he said. Many of Young’s fans and supporters of his pro-vaccine stance called for other artists to follow his lead. The hashtags “I stand with Neil Young” and “CancelSpotify” were soon trending on social media. Mitchell, 78, said removing her music from the platform was an act of “solidarity with Neil Young and the global scientific and medical communities”. “Irresponsible people are spreading lies that are costing people their lives,” she said. Spotify began to remove Young’s music on Friday, saying it regretted the move and hoped he would return to the platform soon. Blunt added the hashtag #youwerebeautiful to his intervention on Twitter, in reference to his 2005 song You’re Beautiful.Snow fell lightly as Joe Biden stared into the wooded hollow where, just hours before he arrived in Pittsburgh, a half-century-old bridge had collapsed. It was a dramatic illustration of what had brought the president to the City of Bridges: his urgent drive to rebuild crumbling US infrastructure. Last year, Biden signed a $1tn infrastructure bill, an achievement that eluded his most recent predecessors and one he was eager to champion after legislative setbacks. “There are another 3,300 bridges here in Pennsylvania, some of which are just as old and just as in decrepit a condition as that one was,” Biden said later, in a speech at a manufacturing research and development center. Funding in the infrastructure law would help repair the Pittsburgh bridge and “thousands of other bridges across the country”. “We’ve got to move,” he said. “The next time, we don’t need headlines saying that someone was killed.” The visit to Pittsburgh was the beginning of an effort by the White House to change the narrative of Biden’s presidency, as he shifts from an inaugural year mired in legislative battles to elections that will determine control of Congress. The new approach was a recognition of a stalled agenda, an unyielding pandemic, rising inflation and flagging popularity. Yet the week brought a much-needed burst of good news, a reminder that the electoral landscape may look very different come November. The supreme court justice Stephen Breyer announced his retirement, giving Biden the opportunity to name his replacement. The commerce department reported that the US economy grew last year at its fastest pace since 1984. US households began receiving free coronavirus tests from the government. And suddenly, after months of gridlock, the administration is optimistic Congress will pass a plan aimed at making the US more competitive against China. Democratic strategists, progressive activists and former party officials welcomed Biden’s use of the bully pulpit, urging him to seize such momentum by touting economic success and drawing sharp contrasts with Republicans. “In the districts, people can’t tell you a thing that’s in Build Back Better but they can tell you to the penny how much a tank of gas is,” said Chuck Rocha, a progressive Democratic strategist. “They can also tell you what their relief check meant to them. “We just have to not be afraid to beat our chest as Democrats,” he said. ‘Toast in the midterms?’ Historical patterns suggest Republicans are well-positioned to win the House and possibly the Senate in November. The party that holds the White House typically loses seats during its first midterm elections, the extent of such losses often correlating with a president’s popularity. Biden will use time away from Washington to build support for his legislative priorities while highlighting what his administration has accomplished: a poverty-reducing coronavirus stimulus package, the infrastructure law, full vaccination of more than 210 million Americans. Strategists say his travels may remind Americans why they voted for him. Biden began his presidency with high approval ratings and broad public confidence in his ability to confront the pandemic. But the national mood darkened, sending Biden’s popularity plummeting, including among Black, Latino, female and young voters – core segments of his coalition. A survey by Pew Research this week found the president’s approval rating down to 41%, from a high of 59% in April. “We need to get Biden’s approval numbers up or else we’re toast in the midterms,” warned Lanae Erickson, senior vice-president at the moderate thinktank Third Way. Disappointment with Biden’s handling of the pandemic is a key factor weighing down such ratings. Now that vaccines have proven effective, including against fast-spreading variants like Omicron, Erickson said voters want to hear the White House strategy for living with the virus. “Right now people are hearing a lot of ‘Stay home, stay safe’ from Democrats. But people are tired of staying home,” she said. “We have to be the party that’s talking about getting people back to work.” Biden’s relatively infrequent travel during his first year in office was partly due to the pandemic. But he was also grounded by negotiations on Capitol Hill. In September, the White House canceled a trip to Chicago so Biden could hammer out a deal on his domestic spending package, only to see such efforts collapse soon after. This month, Biden’s visit to Capitol Hill to pressure Democrats to pass voting rights protections was forestalled by Senator Kyrsten Sinema, who declared her opposition to changing the filibuster, thereby dooming the legislation, in a speech just before the president’s arrival. Biden appeared to acknowledge that his involvement with negotiations on Capitol Hill hurt his standing with voters, who wanted to see him govern more like a commander-in-chief. Defending his reputation as a bipartisan dealmaker, built over 36 years in the Senate, Biden conceded that the role of president required a different type of engagement. “The public doesn’t want me to be the ‘president-senator’,” he told reporters this month. “They want me to be the president and let senators be senators.” The retirement of Justice Breyer immediately put a spotlight on one of the most consequential responsibilities of any presidency: filling a vacancy on the supreme court. At a press conference this week, Biden said he would draw up a list of candidates based on his promise to nominate a Black woman. Stefanie Brown James, co-founder and executive director of the Collective Pac, which aims to build Black electoral power, said the assurance “felt monumental”, particularly after the disappointments on domestic spending and voting rights. Though the replacement would do little to shift the ideological composition of the court, after three Trump-era appointments created a conservative supermajority, James said appointing a Black woman would “right a historic wrong”. Antjuan Seawright, a South Carolina Democratic strategist, said the chance for Biden to add a woman of color could be a “galvanizing” moment for Democrats, a reminder to supporters Biden can still deliver on his promises. “The president won because of our votes, Black voters, the most consequential and loyal voting bloc in the country,” Seawright said. “And so this is going to remind them of the net worth of their vote and why it’s important to keep showing up.” ‘Look people in the eye’ A natural retail politician with a zeal for campaigning, Biden lamented that he had so few opportunities to “look people in the eye” in his first year as president. On Tuesday, he stepped out of the White House to visit a boutique that opened during the pandemic, purchasing a necklace for his wife and a coffee mug featuring the face of Kamala Harris, his vice-president. The excursion also included a stop for ice-cream, where he posed with employees after greeting US marines. On Wednesday, Biden bantered with the General Motors chief executive, Mary Barra, about the speed of a new electric vehicle, during a White House roundtable with the heads of major US companies. “I’m looking for a job, Mary,” quipped the president, a car enthusiast, after Barra told him the vehicle went from “zero to 60 in three seconds”. Next week, Biden will travel to New York to discuss plans for combatting gun crime with Mayor Eric Adams, after the fatal shooting of two police officers. The White House has sought to elevate efforts to combat rising violent crime as Republicans attempt to portray the country as lawless. Centrist Democrats believe Adams, a retired NYPD captain who campaigned on a promise to reduce crime, offers a model for how the party can beat back such attacks. The White House insists the president hasn’t given up on passing Biden’s Build Back Better agenda or voting protections, but is scaling back his involvement – and his ambitions. Activists and progressives are pressing him to ramp up use of his executive authority. Cristina Tzintzún Ramirez, president of NextGen America, a youth voting organization, said canceling student debt was one of the “most basic and critical” steps Biden could take to deliver for young people. She said the issue was a top priority for voters under 35, and would help fulfil a promise to reduce the racial wealth gap. Biden has expressed doubt whether he has the legal authority to enact widespread student loan forgiveness. In December, he extended a moratorium on student loan payments put in place by the Trump administration in the early days of the pandemic. “Young folks overwhelmingly supported the Biden administration and now it’s up to the Biden administration to support young people,” Tzintzún Ramirez said. “We understand they can’t pass every single policy but on student debt they hold the power to make it happen.” ‘Best messenger’ If Biden’s standing slips further, his visits could become a political headache for Democrats in battleground states. On Friday, a leading Democratic contender in the Pennsylvania governor’s race was noticeably absent from Biden’s Pittsburgh event, citing a scheduling conflict. Earlier in the month, Stacey Abrams, the leading Democratic candidate for governor in Georgia, also cited a scheduling conflict for her absence at Biden’s Atlanta speech on voting rights, which was boycotted by some civil rights groups. Beto O’Rourke said he was “not interested” in help from the president or any national politician in his bid to become governor of Texas. Ed Rendell, a former governor of Pennsylvania, said Biden was still the “best messenger to motivate our rank-and-file Democrats” in battleground states. But Rendell said the time for bipartisan backslapping had passed. Biden’s message to voters, he said, must be clear: Republicans, not Democrats, are squarely to blame for his stalled agenda. “We have to fight back with the weapons at our disposal,” Rendell said. “We’d rather negotiate peace … but we’re not going to fight with a hand tied behind our back.”The president of the National Farmers’ Union has accused the government of using British food producers as a “pawn” in post-Brexit trade deals. Minette Batters, who has led the organisation representing British farmers since 2018, said “the most prized food market in the world” had been “handed over for nothing” by ministers, in their rush to sign wide-ranging free-trade agreements with Australia and New Zealand after the UK’s departure from the European Union. Under the terms of the UK-Australia deal, which was signed in December, Australian beef and lamb farmers will gradually gain more access to the UK market over the first 10 years, before all tariffs and quotas on imported meat are removed. Similar arrangements have been agreed for Australian dairy products, with a five-year transition period, and eight years for sugar. “It does feel like a betrayal,” Batters said in an interview with the Observer. “My greatest fear was that we would be used as a pawn in trade deals and effectively that is what’s happened.” The nation’s food producers said they had been promised by successive environment secretaries, since Michael Gove held the post between 2017 and 2019, that any post-Brexit free-trade deals would include permanent protection for domestic food producers, in the event of a wave of imports. “These are really bad trade deals for the UK because there are no checks and balances, she said. “We were promised as farmers that there would be forever-and-a-day safeguards, so if there was a problem, they could do something about it.” Farmers have long feared that trade deals with food-exporting nations, such as Australia and New Zealand, would lead to a flood of cheaply produced meat, dairy and sugar arriving on British shores, driving down the price of food produced domestically to a higher standard and at a higher cost. NFU members believe these agreements have set a dangerous precedent for talks with much larger food producers such as the United States, Canada and Brazil. Batters disputed the suggestion by some ministers that UK farmers need to be more ambitious and export more of their produce. She insisted there will not be any demand for British beef and lamb in Australia, which has much larger farms, combined with a smaller population, and a higher cost of living than the UK. Batters criticised what she described as the “adversarial” approach required to negotiate with government. Food producers have pleaded for the allocation of a higher number of seasonal worker visas in the first few years following Brexit, to ease the transition from a reliance on temporary EU workers. Labour shortages following Brexit and Covid have already resulted in unpicked fruit rotting in fields, and a cull of healthy pigs on farms, because of a lack of staff at slaughterhouses. The seasonal worker scheme has been extended by the government until 2024, allowing 30,000 foreign workers to come to the UK to help with fruit, crops and – from this year – plants such as daffodils. The government has retained the option of increasing the number of visas by 10,000 if required, but this still falls short of the total requested by food producers. “We’ve had to fight so hard for what we’ve achieved,” Batters said, adding that the industry works in “partnership” with government in other countries, including Australia and New Zealand, where farmers are included in trade missions. Ministers in Westminster are far removed from farmers and rural communities, Batters said. “Agriculture underpins the entire rural economy. In some very fragile parts of the country, if you didn’t have agriculture, the village schools, the local community, the allied trades, the local veterinary practice, the auction market, are all put at risk.”Hollie Wright spotted an opportunity. Working in property management, she came across a company that needed to furnish a home for an employee moving in for a few months. What if they could rent everything from one place and pay a subscription? Two decades later, her business, Instant Home, allows people to pay a monthly rent starting at £220 for the basics for a one-bed flat (or £500 for more premium versions). When the rental ends, her company takes everything back. The furniture rental market has traditionally been about showhomes at property developments. But British department store stalwart John Lewis started experimenting with a service last year, and Wright is finding more and more households ready to lease their interiors. “We’ve got these younger people coming in who are environmentally sensitive, who are much more used to renting things than the older generation,” says Wright. “I think they’ve got their head around not owning everything.” In fact, the subscription economy is on the march through almost every aspect of daily life – from long-established businesses such as pay-per-view TV and car rental to energy, food and even clothing. If you can use it, you can rent it. There are attractions for consumers and businesses. The subscriber avoids the hassle of having to sort out purchase payments every time, or even of having to make a choice; for larger items such as cars, they can avoid a substantial upfront cost. Businesses can lock in repeat purchases and guarantee less volatile earnings (albeit sometimes at the cost of a discount). And there are also potential environmental benefits if items are reused. Here are some subscription models that could be shaping our lives in the years to come. Solar panels The installation of home solar panels and battery kits at no upfront cost enjoyed a short-lived heyday in the mid-2010s after the government introduced feed-in tariffs for a household’s excess energy. In exchange for receiving a household’s lucrative monthly payments for sending electricity back to the grid, many companies were happy to install solar systems for nothing. The schemes dwindled as subsidies were cut, but two key developments could mean similar deals make a return. First the cost of solar technology has plunged. Second, the government launched its smart export guarantee (SEG) last year, which also pays households for the excess renewable electricity they generate but don’t use. Industry experts believe the scheme could encourage a new breed of ultra-low tariff that allows energy companies to offer solar kits which are paid for using the SEG, while households enjoy lower bills. Electric car charging A boom in smart technology could soon mean electric cars will help to balance the national grid – and make savings on electricity costs. Already Octopus Energy and Ovo Energy have begun offering half-price tariffs for electric vehicle charging. Cars power up when prices are low, during quiet times on the grid, and in return the companies draw electricity from idle car batteries back into the grid when prices are high. By aggregating electric cars and other smart energy devices – such as heat pumps – to create “virtual power plants”, energy firms can earn money by helping to balance the grid when supplies are tight and offer significant savings to customers in return. Experts believe it won’t be long before the savings could be used to cover the cost of installing car chargers, heat pumps or other smart devices at no upfront cost. Home insulation The UK’s draughty housing stock is among the least energy-efficient in Europe. As climate goals become more pressing, and low-carbon heat pumps are rolled out, homes will need to be as cosy as possible to reduce our energy use. The upfront cost of home energy efficiency measures – such as properly glazed windows and insulating solid walls and lofts – is often out of reach for the households that could benefit most from warmer homes and lower bills. But in the US new business models – such as one pioneered by Sealed – have met the upfront cost of insulation work, and then been repaid from the savings on a home’s energy bills. The UK’s Energy Systems Catapult, a research centre, has been running trials on how home heating solutions could be offered to bill payers as a one-stop monthly service. Food One of the lasting effects of the pandemic will be the huge numbers of people made comfortable with ordering online – including a wave of sign-ups for meal kit services. Gousto, HelloFresh and Blue Apron are among the companies in different markets that will deliver meal ingredients in various states of preparation for a weekly or monthly fee. Prices start at about £4 a serving. Oddbox offers the enjoyable, if unpredictable, twist of delivering a weekly box of fruit and vegetables that were rejected from supermarkets for aesthetic reasons. Pret a Manger got in on the subscription act during lockdown to try to drive footfall, offering up to five drinks a day for £20 a month. Clothing and consumer goods There is a steep cost to keeping up with the latest trends, so it’s perhaps unsurprising that clothing rental has gained most traction at the designer end of the scale. Rent the Runway pioneered the model in the US, charging $135 (£102) per month for eight rented items which can then be returned by post to be used by someone else. In the UK, Eshita Kabra-Davies quit her job at an investment firm in late 2019 to set up By Rotation, which allows users to rent designer clothes from others. The company is still a startup, but already eyeing other big-ticket items such as art or high-end sports gear. “Millennials want access to those items and don’t necessarily need ownership,” Kabra-Davies says. Technology Kabra-Davies said she grew up in Singapore, where leasing more expensive goods like sofas or TVs was common – as it was for decades in the UK, where Radio Rentals became a household name for doing exactly what the name suggests. That model has almost vanished as technology prices have tumbled, but it is making a return – without the eye-watering mark-ups of rent-to-own retailers who tend to target the least wealthy. Apple, the world’s biggest technology company, has already launched its “upgrade programme” – essentially a subscription service for the iPhone. At £37.45 a month (before adding a mobile network contract) the price stacks up quickly, but customers are eligible for the latest model every year. Most Britons are subscribers to the content we consume on these devices in one way or another. Audience measurement firm BARB counts 18.8m households who subscribe to a video streaming service such as Netflix, Amazon Prime Video or Disney+, while Spotify has rapidly become the dominant force in the music industry. And of course one business has been relying on the subscription model as long as any: the news industry.My name is Camilla, so why, for the first 25 years of my life, did everyone call me Mandy? My Jamaican mother loathed the name Camilla. She said my Nigerian father chose the name, but she thought Camilla sounded too damn serious and upper-class. And she was right. Growing up in Luton in the 70s and 80s, there weren’t too many Camillas knocking about the council estates of Bedfordshire. My friends’ names were plain and simple. They were called Debbie, Tracey, Jean. They were easy on the ear. Or their names were culturally appropriate – Jyoti, Shabana, Patience. But Camilla? It might have been the name written on my birth certificate, but my mother had other ideas. She had a plan. And it was hatched in the months after my birth – a new name. But there were caveats. Unlike Camilla, the new name had to be popular, jolly and understated, with preferably two syllables. So, she drew up a list of potentials: Donna, Paula, Charmaine, Joanne. Then bingo, she came up with the name: Mandy. Not Amanda, but Mandy. Plain. Simple. Easy on the ear, Mandy. Camilla wasn’t changed by deed poll, instead, my unofficial “new name” seeped into everyday life. Mandy seamlessly embedded itself on to the register at primary and secondary school, university and around the water cooler. The name Camilla became a relic of the past, a family joke, dragged out at Christmas like eggnog. And what about my middle name? Camilla might be quintessentially British, but my middle name isn’t. It’s unashamedly Nigerian, and once my mother divorced the perpetrator of my first name debacle, my middle name joined Camilla in the names trash bin. She said my middle name – Adebisi – “screamed ethnic”, and if I wrote it on future job applications, it would be chucked into the “not one of us pile”. Mum said I should initialise Adebisi. In her opinion, the letter A gave choices. My middle name could be Abbie, Alice, Annie. Plain names. Assimilated names – AKA not foreign-sounding. Names matter. We all appreciate a good name. They hold a strange fascination and intrigue. When we’re introduced to someone, we can’t help ourselves, we don’t want to, but we form judgments because names carry all kinds of juicy information. Dr Rebecca Gregory from the Institute for Name-Studies says, “Socrates and Plato wrote about names in some of the earliest western philosophy but, historically, given names in the UK were drawn from an established pool of names (an onomasticon), which came from a few main origins: biblical sources, some from classical sources and others from vocabulary words.” But as we’ve become culturally and linguistically diverse, our naming conventions have changed. They’ve become varied and complex. We’ve witnessed the rise of the wacky name – Solo, Exton, Sixtus. The penchant for creating names from words or places – Apple, Chicago, Atom. Nature-inspired names – Willow, Sky, River. And the biggie – the influence of television on names. As Gregory says, “In 1996, there were no baby girls named Arya in England and Wales, but in 2019 it peaked at 427, and I think we all know why that is.” Names fall in and out of fashion. My mother-in-law was born in the 1930s and named Shirley, after Shirley Temple, but Shirley is outdated for our modern naming tastes – although there is some appetite for old-fashioned first names with a whiff of a “vintage, royal vibe”. According to the Office for National Statistics, the name Archie leapfrogged into the upper echelons of baby-name popularity courtesy of Meghan and Harry. But why was the reaction to Camilla so extreme? Why didn’t my mother simply shorten it to Milla, like Becky for Rebecca, Jimmy for James, Tan for Tanya? And why Mandy? When I hit the gobby, hormonal, arms-folded-across-the-chest teens, I asked my mother why she didn’t call me Molly, Maureen or Mary. They possessed the required two syllables. Why Mandy? In response, my mother hummed the song Mandy for a few moments and said, “If it’s good enough for Barry Manilow, it’s good enough for you. You’re Mandy. It means lovable. It’s a great name.” After that how could I disclose the truth? I liked the name Camilla. It was glamorous. Cool. The name Mandy didn’t fit. Most times I felt like I’d squeezed into a pair of ill-fitting, size-six jeans and the zip was breaking. When I said my name it felt dishonest. I wanted to say, hold on wait a minute, it’s not – I’m not Mandy. But I realised this might sound crazy. So I persevered. Everyone knew me as Mandy. I was Mandy, goddamit. I made a Herculean effort to love the name. It’s not a terrible name. In my teens, I searched out fellow Mandys, and the only Mandys I came across were Mandy Smith and Mandy Rice-Davies, and I later found out Rice-Davies’s first name wasn’t even Mandy, it was Marilyn. At 18, I went through a phase of Mandy-spelling experimentation. Out went dull Mandy, in came Mandi, then Mandie; I even added a double ee combo at the end; Mandee. I tried shortening it, but Mand didn’t quite cut it. By the time I got to university, first names got serious. Slews of confident students hung around lecture halls sprouting elongated names with more than two syllables – Alessandra, Henrietta, Viviana. So I thought I’d join them. I took the plunge. I introduced myself to someone as Camilla, only to be told I didn’t look like a Camilla. “What does a Camilla look like?” I asked. They replied, “Red-haired. Pale-skinned. Freckles. Celtic-looking. Wears tweed. Likes Enya. They don’t look like you.” After that, I kept my real name to myself. I didn’t divulge my first name to anyone else except my boyfriend – now husband. On our first date, I blurted out my real first name and he said: “Mandy’s a nice enough name, but Camilla’s beautiful.” But how could I reclaim Camilla? Everyone knew me as Mandy. The name was intertwined with my sense of self. But was it? Gregory says: “People adapt or change their names to suit the person they turn out to be. They want to use a name that fits their sense of identity.” So that’s what I did. In my mid-20s, I reclaimed my name. There wasn’t any fanfare. There was no Stars in Their Eyes, “Tonight Matthew, I’m going to be Camilla,” moment. I told a few close friends. I took a deep breath, explained my complicated name history and said, “Can you call me Camilla, not Mandy?” When I’d finished the feeling was similar to someone placing a warm blanket over my shoulders. For the first time in years my name fitted. The psychotherapist Sarah Parkin says: “When we feel we ‘fit’ our names, the effects can be hugely empowering and transformational.” And it was, but when you change name midway through your life, there’s bound to be the occasional blip or hiccup. Swathes of friends who knew me as Mandy had to adapt to my new first-name status, and they often forgot. Sometimes I forgot, too. I’d introduce myself as Mandy, then Camilla, and for a while, confusion reigned. Camilla went through a long bedding-in process. For those first few years, it was easier to say, “Call me whatever you feel comfortable with.” Parkin says: “Feeling comfortable with your name signals to the world you’ve found who you truly are.” For me, taking responsibility for my middle name and my actual first name, not a randomly chosen one, felt life-affirming. But not to one person – my mother. For her, the name Camilla comes with ex-husband baggage. And there’s another, perhaps more significant, reason for her reluctance to call me Camilla – Diana, Princess of Wales. As Princess Diana’s number one super-fan, she finds the name synonymous with Charles’s other woman. This seals the deal for my mother’s anti-Camilla sentiment. No further ammunition is required. Over the years, I have tried and failed to soothe her anxiety over my real name. On the few occasions she calls me Camilla, my mother morphs into Hyacinth Bucket meets Lady Danbury. She puts on her faux posh voice and, on her lips, my name sounds like she’s caught a rotten oyster in her throat. I might be Camilla to most people, but for her, I will forever and always be plain, simple, two syllables, easy on the ear, Mandy. @CamillaBalshawDerby isn’t known as a tourist hotspot. Often overshadowed by nearby Nottingham, bypassed on the road to the Peak District, locals here know the hotels are quietest at weekends when visiting business folk leave. That hasn’t stopped its leaders making a tilt to become UK City of Culture 2025. Bidding to reinvigorate civic pride and economic growth after the fallout from Covid-19, the aim here is to showcase the city’s unique industrial heritage as a crucible for the art of manufacturing. “It’s our version of the Olympics,” says Adam Buss, the chief executive of the city’s Quad arts venue and bid director for the 2025 campaign. “We’ve always lived a bit in the shadows – maybe people go past on the M1, or the train. But what we want to say with city of culture is ‘Stop! Come here.’” Pitting itself against seven other places – including Southampton, Bradford, Stirling and the entire county of Cornwall – Derby hopes to replicate some of the economic growth, investment and feelgood factor enjoyed by previous winners such as Hull and Derry-Londonderry. With final bids for the longlisted entrants due this week, it comes as ministers prepare to launch the long-awaited “levelling up” blueprint for places like Derby – with a white paper from Michael Gove’s department expected within days. As the city puts its cultural offering in the shop window, there is also cause for concern. Its most high-profile attraction – Derby County football club – is in trouble, at risk of collapsing into liquidation with unsustainable debts. “It would be catastrophic if something significant happened,” says Buss. Losing the Championship side managed by Wayne Rooney would hit the city’s cultural heft on the national stage. “It should be a wake-up call for the UK and the rest of the football world.” Locals know the city of culture bid might raise one or two eyebrows, coming from a place often bypassed by big-name musicians on tour. Most big acts play at Nottingham Rock City, requiring a trip down Brian Clough Way – a stretch of the A52 named after the football manager celebrated for bringing success to both cities despite a fierce rivalry between the two. Derby’s largest venue – the Assembly Rooms – has remained derelict since fire ripped through the brutalist building in 2014. But critics miss the point, says Buss. “It’s a bit like Hull. A lot of their messaging said, ‘It’s OK to criticise us, but do you know us? Have you been here? Do you understand what’s going on?’” Rather than a prize for the most vibrant place in Britain, the city of culture award is best understood as an arts-led catalyst for rebooting the fortunes of overlooked places that have untapped potential. In Derby, the plan is to show that its industry and artistic prowess are vital ingredients for economic and cultural success, and why some of Britain’s biggest manufacturers – including Rolls-Royce, Toyota and Alstom – still call the place home long after John Lombe built the world’s first fully mechanised factory here on the River Derwent in the 1700s. Chris Cholerton, president of civil aerospace at Rolls-Royce, who sits on the global firm’s executive leadership team, is Derby born and bred. A season ticket holder at Pride Park, he fears for the football club’s future. “We sometimes joke – and it is probably just a joke – that the productivity on Monday mornings at the factory is always far higher when Derby has won. We’re a football city. It’s a big piece of our fabric, so we’re hoping it all works out.” The engineering giant has called Derby home since 1908, employing about 12,000 people to design, manufacture and test its Trent jet engines built to propel Airbus and Boeing passenger aircraft around the world. Rolls suffered an unprecedented hit during the pandemic as planes were grounded, forcing it to cut 9,000 jobs globally – including in Derby. Production volumes have halved, but the firm still picked its historic home to consolidate to when making cuts to save money. In the vast engine assembly hall, equipment used to put together the jet turbine blades – each thin twist of metal harnesses the power of an F1 car – is waiting to be put to use after being shipped back from Singapore, where Rolls closed a plant last year in a cost-saving drive. While the local arts scene isn’t a big reason to come back, Cholerton says culture can play an important role. “As we go forward in decarbonising aviation, it won’t be static; we need to attract more engineers. That continuing ability to attract talent and retain it – with both a great working environment and a great city to live in – is very powerful.” Manufacturing still accounts for a quarter of Derby’s economy, well above the national average and more than double that of other industrial revolution crucibles such as Manchester, Glasgow or Birmingham. In a place where Joseph Wright expressed the industrial age through painting in the 18th century, that is a reminder that culture takes many forms and isn’t always the type found in a grand gallery or opulent theatre. Down the road at Alstom, the French multinational manufacturer is building monorail carriages destined for the Cairo metro in engine sheds dating back to 1876. As one of Britain’s biggest railway hubs, the firm uses its base here to design and manufacture its latest models; including those for HS2 and London’s new Elizabeth line. Nick Crossfield, Alstom’s UK and Ireland managing director, says younger employees increasingly choose where they want to work before looking at the industry they want to work in. Sprucing up Derby’s cultural sites will be key to attracting coders and developers, as well as graphic designers, to a city that already has status in the gaming industry as the birthplace of Lara Croft: Tomb Raider. “The facilities, the institutions, the profile that Derby has is really important to us,” he says. At the vast Toyota plant in Burnaston on the outskirts of the city it’s a similar story. Tim Freeman, the deputy managing director of Toyota Manufacturing UK, says investing in culture and arts in the city will create an environment to attract new talent. Most of the cars trundling along the miles of conveyer belt are left-hand drive, destined for export to the EU, despite tougher barriers to business after Brexit. Though a supporter of Derby’s arch rivals, Nottingham Forest, he views the city of culture bid as an opportunity to help the city’s recovery from the pandemic. “Derby, like many other cities has been badly impacted in terms of their economy by Covid. And I think through this activity they’re engaging in I think that can help regenerate some economic growth.” While hopes are high for the cultural bid, Derby has suffered years of austerity directed from Westminster, with the local council being forced to cut 50 jobs to find budget savings of more than £13m next year. Towns and cities outside London and the south-east have had harsher cuts to culture, with council funding for arts down 38.5% in a decade. According to the Fabian Society, Arts Council England National Lottery funds contributed the equivalent of £50.40 per person to organisations based in London, compared with £21.26 per head for the rest of England. There are no guarantees of extra lottery money for the winning city of culture bid. But previous title-holder Coventry secured £16m of government funding, while Hull received £15m. A government spokesperson said the format of the 2025 competition hadn’t changed, while it could also be a catalyst for inward investment. Buss says the expectation is that funders will come forward. However, his biggest hope is that Derby can become a focal point for tackling big cultural and economic challenges facing the UK in the 21st century, from climate change to technology. “The start of the industrial revolution happened here. But if you ask people where they’d go in the country for answers to big challenges, they might not say Derby. City of culture can give us that beacon.”Everyone knows by now that a distinctively British style of jazz emerged in the 1960s, and it’s often said that Stan Tracey’s Under Milk Wood suite (1965) was its first unmistakable masterpiece. The 1959 Sessions, from a tape recently unearthed during a studio clear-out, is six years pre-masterpiece but welcome nonetheless. As both pianist and composer, Tracey developed his style under the twin influences of Ellington and Monk. This set him apart from the usual run of modern jazz in the 50s, and there was always the slight doggedness of the loner about him. Of the eight tracks here, three are standard songs, one a venerable jazz number and four are Tracey originals. The songs bring out the Monkishness – displaced accents, sudden excursions into unlikely keys – all performed with faultless accuracy. The originals are more intriguing, because in each one the improvised solos grow inseparably out of the tune. The best of the lot, for me, is the splendid, up-tempo Pitter, Patter, Panic. Technically, it’s not a perfect recording, even for 1959, but it shows that, by the start of the 60s, Tracey was already a force to be reckoned with.Once upon a time, a very long time ago – until Thursday 28 October 2021, to be precise – the term “metaverse” was known only to lexicographers and science fiction enthusiasts. And then, suddenly, it was everywhere. How come? Simply this: Mark Zuckerberg, the supreme leader of Facebook, pissed off by seeing nothing but bad news about his company in the media, announced that he was changing its name to Meta and would henceforth be devoting all his efforts – plus $10bn (£7bn) and thousands of engineers – to building a parallel universe called the metaverse. And then, because the tech industry and the media that chronicle its doings are basically herds of mimetic sheep, the metaverse was suddenly the newest new thing. This was news to Neal Stephenson, the writer who actually invented the term in his 1992 novel, Snow Crash. “Since there seems to be growing confusion on this,” he tweeted, “I have nothing to do with anything that FB is up to involving the metaverse, other than the obvious fact that they’re using a term I coined in Snow Crash. There has been zero communication between me and FB &amp; no biz relationship.” In a 2017 interview with Vanity Fair, Stephenson modestly said of Snow Crash that he was “just making shit up”. If so, some shit. The book is not just a great read, but eerily prescient. It’s set in a US where the government has more or less disintegrated and where everything is run by corporations that function like principalities in medieval Europe. The CIA has merged with the Library of Congress to become the CIC, a for-profit outfit that knows everything (Palantir, anyone?) The novel opens with an unforgettable car chase in which the main character, Hiro Protagonist, who works for the mafia’s pizza delivery conglomerate, races desperately to deliver a pizza on time (Deliveroo?). Failure to deliver within 30 minutes of an order being placed earns you a death sentence. So the chase is a life-and-death struggle as Hiro races his GPS-enabled electric car through the streets of Los Angeles before he runs out the clock and faces the anger of the mob. And this was written in the early 1990s. But the really intriguing thing about the new obsession with metaverse(s) is that it seems to have missed the point that the future envisaged in Stephenson’s novel is a deeply, deeply dystopian one. His metaverse is a vision of how a virtual-reality-based internet, resembling a massively multiplayer online game, might evolve. Like many multiplayer games, it’s populated by user-controlled avatars, as well as system demons. And status in this virtual world is a function of two things: access to restricted environments such as the Black Sun, an exclusive metaverse club, and technical acumen, which is often demonstrated by the sophistication of one’s avatar. The irony of this metaphor being solemnly valorised by the boss of a powerful tech corporation seems to be lost on the industry. The original video in which Zuckerberg shows himself in the metaverse defies parody. “Imagine,” he burbles, “you put on your glasses or headset and you’re instantly in your home space [sic]. There’s part of your physical home recreated virtually. It has things that are only possible virtually and it has an incredibly inspiring view of whatever you find most beautiful.” It goes on like this for 11 minutes. Do keep a sick bag handy in case you decide to have a look. If it were a spoof, you’d give it full marks, but apparently it’s intended to be serious. And because Zuck is surrounded by the reality-distortion field created by vast wealth, other apparently rational tech moguls are scrambling to pay homage to his fantasy. The other day, for example, Microsoft, hitherto a serious computer company, laid out nearly $70bn of shareholders’ money to buy computer gaming company Activision Blizzard. Various rationalisations have been proposed for this splurge. The logical one is that computer gaming is a huge industry in which Microsoft already has a significant presence. Owning Activision, which makes some of the most popular titles, including Call of Duty and Candy Crush Saga, would make it an even bigger player. QED. But there is another, more intriguing interpretation, which is that Microsoft’s chief executive, Satya Nadella, has caught the metaverse bug. For one thing, metaverses are, by Stephenson’s definition, basically immersive virtual-reality environments and the games industry specialises in creating just such environments. For another, Nadella has been heard burbling about his desire to create an “enterprise metaverse”. At which prospect, fevered visions loom – of avatars of tech moguls in pinstripe suits and chinos stalking one another in virtual boardrooms, doing battle with lightsabers. And then one realises that such folk have no need of a parallel universe, meta or otherwise. They already live in one. What I’ve been reading Environmental alarm call Can Science Fiction Wake Us Up to Our Climate Reality? is an unmissable New Yorker profile of writer Kim Stanley Robinson by Joshua Rothman. Learning to love oneself On Not Hating the Body is a truly extraordinary essay on body hatred in the journal Liberties by the philosopher Martha Nussbaum. Mentioned in dispatches Dan Wang’s letter from China is always a memorable annual event; his 2021 missive continues the tradition.There are few jobs that allow you to see the fruits of your labours, season after season. Minette Batters has one of them. She has been producing beef, lamb and crops on 150 hectares (370 acres) in south Wiltshire for almost a quarter of a century – the place where she grew up and which was farmed for decades by her parents. “The fences weren’t here. The barn didn’t have a roof, it was derelict,” says Batters, recalling the state of the farm when she began running it in 1998. It wasn’t a given that she would take over the tenancy from her parents. She convinced the landlords to give her a chance by promising to renovate two dilapidated 17th-century farm cottages, in exchange for taking on the land and buildings. In the years since, she has restored the cottages, turned the once-roofless building into a chic wedding venue, and increased her herd from 15 suckler cows to 100. “It was a pretty challenging business starting off,” Batters says, as her 10-year-old dog, Basil, scampers alongside. “It’s been a life’s work. People ask, ‘Why would you do all this when you don’t own it?’” * * * CV Age 54 Family Divorced, 17-year-old twins. Education A-Levels at Wiltshire Technical College. Trained as a chef in London, completing a Cordon Bleu diploma. Ran her own catering business for weddings and large parties across the south of England for 25 years, in parallel with farming, until becoming NFU president. Pay Undisclosed, but it allows to keep her farm running in her absence. She says: “We are a not-for-profit organisation. I’m not there to make money out of the NFU.” Last holiday Woolacombe in Devon last summer. Best advice she’s been given “The adage which has had more influence on my life is, ‘You make your own luck.’ I keep saying to my kids: ‘there is no shortcut in life, the more you put in, the more you’ll get out.’” Biggest career mistake “I think I’ve made lots of mistakes in my life. And all I’d say is I’ve probably learned more from the mistakes than the successes.” Word she overuses “Extraordinary.” * * * While her business has grown in size and scope in size and scope, more recently she has had her sights fixed on the Palace of Westminster, a world away from this patch of land close to the New Forest. Since 2018 she has represented the interests of 55,000 farmers in England and Wales through arguably the industry’s biggest upheaval in living memory, as president of the National Farmers’ Union (NFU). During that time, the nation’s food producers have had to contend with huge changes to agriculture policy following Brexit, including the end of the EU subsidy scheme, coupled with discussions about land use and environmental standards in the face of the climate crisis. To top it all, a pandemic disrupted domestic and international supply chains and made people think twice about where their food comes from. “This is the biggest change since 1947. What is decided now will dictate our levels of self-sufficiency. Don’t forget, in 1947 we were only 30% self-sufficient.” In recent years, UK domestic production has met about 60% of its food needs. But farmers are struggling with a string of problems, including the post-Brexit and post-pandemic labour shortage – which has already resulted in unpicked fruit rotting in fields, and a cull of healthy pigs on farms. All this before British agriculture has felt the impact of freshly minted trade deals with the major food-producing nations Australia and New Zealand. “My greatest fear was that we would be used as a pawn in trade deals, and effectively that has been what’s happened,” she says. “These are really bad trade deals for the UK as there are no checks and balances,” she adds, pointing out that the Tories’ 2019 manifesto promised “they would never undermine farmers in their trade deals”. Batters believes this promise has been resoundingly broken. She, and her members, are most concerned by the removal of all tariffs and quotas on imports of Australian beef and lamb after the initial phase-in period. Batters says UK farmers were always told any deal would contain lasting safeguards to protect domestic food producers, in what she calls “the most prized food market in the world”, and she does not believe that has happened. She is exasperated by what she calls the government’s “adversarial” approach, lamenting the lack of “partnership” between the industry and ministers, which she says is evident in other places, including the Antipodes, where farmers are invited on trade missions. Sitting in her farmhouse kitchen, Batters never sounds more passionate, or indeed more frustrated, than when she is discussing whether the current crop of politicians understand the importance of agriculture – not just for domestic food supply, but for rural communities across the UK, located far from the capital. She doesn’t think this is grasped by ministers, despite the government’s levelling-up ambitions. “I feel now that politicians are very, very removed from food systems and food production,” she says. “Agriculture underpins the entire rural economy. In some very fragile parts of the country, if you didn’t have agriculture, the village schools, the local community, the allied trades, the local veterinary practice, the auction market, are all put at risk.” Batters speaks with conviction of her “deep connection” to the land she farms. During her childhood in Wiltshire, rearing calves on the farm, she only considered careers involving animals, or produce. Dissuaded by her father from pursuing point-to-point horse racing, she went to London to train to be a chef and completed a Cordon Bleu diploma, before setting up her own catering business, which she ran alongside the farm until becoming head of the union. Batters’s father didn’t live to see her elected the NFU’s first female president, but thinks it would have left him “flabbergasted”, having worked in an era when farming required more physical labour and was considered a male job. Dressed in a pale-blue jumper and jeans, she is far from the stereotype of a tweed-wearing, middle-aged male farmer. However, she was frustrated that reports of her election as the NFU’s first female president, 110 years after the organisation was founded, focused on her gender rather than suitability for the role. Despite this, Batters acknowledges she is often approached by women who thank her for inspiring them to get involved in the sector. More women than ever are pursuing careers in agriculture: they outnumber men on higher education agriculture courses by two to one, while a third of all workers in the sector are women, according to figures from NatWest bank. Batters’s 17-year-old twins, who are studying for their A-levels, haven’t decided if they will take over running the farm, but it remains a family business. Her son and daughter help out at weekends, and her mother, who is in her 80s, lives in one of the farm cottages Batters renovated at the start of her tenancy. In February, she is standing for re-election for the third time at the NFU’s annual conference, where she will need 75% of the vote. “I feel it’s unfinished business,” she says. Batters believes UK food producers should concentrate on growing more of what they can - including apples, pears, berries and field vegetables – in part to take the pressure off countries suffering from water scarcity. However, retailers and ministers will also need to get on board. “This is a really exciting place to be,” she says. “We can lead the world in climate-smart agriculture and it’s getting politicians to alight on the huge possibilities that there are. Farmers are up for that challenge.”Ash Barty says she was amazed when it was revealed Evonne Goolagong Cawley was present to hand her the trophy after her Australian Open triumph on Saturday. Tennis Australia did not disclose Goolagong Cawley’s appearance in Melbourne until Todd Woodbridge, the MC, announced her presence. “I thought she wasn’t coming. I’d spoken to her earlier in the week and she was staying at home and not being able to travel down,” said Barty, smiling. “To have that surprise was amazing. I can’t believe Craig [Tiley] kept it a secret. “It was really special just to be able to give her a hug. It’s the first time I’ve seen her in 12 months. We had a few hugs for a few different reasons, and to be able to see her in the flesh and chat to her was incredible.” Barty, a Ngarigo woman, is the second Indigenous Australian Open champion after Goolagong Cawley. She considers the seven-times grand slam winner an idol and friend who played an important role in her return after she took a hiatus from the sport. “To be able to experience that together on such a big occasion, on such a beautiful court, and in a tournament that means so much to both of us,” Barty said. “It was really nice to have her there just as someone to lean on when I wasn’t really sure what to do. She’s an amazing human being, and I’m very, very lucky to be able to call her a friend. Very lucky to be able to give her a hug in some of the biggest moments in my life.” As Goolagong entered the court to present the trophy to Barty, Cathy Freeman, another of Australia’s most famous Indigenous athletes, was scrambling to take a picture of her. Barty said she did not know Freeman was there and she only glimpsed her after the match had ended. The trio posed for a picture together. “Looking up at the end to see Cathy, she is an inspiration to so many people all around the globe,” said Barty on Channel Nine. “For our heritage and family, she is just the best. To share that tonight with Evonne Goolagong and Cathy, I will never forget it.”Everton have formally offered Frank Lampard the chance to relaunch his managerial career at Goodison Park and hope to conclude contract negotiations with the 43-year-old by Sunday. Lampard has been offered the job of succeeding Rafael Benítez as Everton manager having emerged as the club’s preferred choice following a final round of interviews in London on Friday. Talks are now under way on the details of Lampard’s contract and the make-up of his immediate backroom team as Everton attempt to resolve their latest managerial search before Monday’s transfer deadline. The club could be in a position to confirm Lampard’s appointment on Sunday, providing talks run smoothly. The former Chelsea and Derby manager has been out of work since being sacked at Stamford Bridge 12 months ago. He is in line to take over an Everton team that has lost 10 of its last 14 Premier League games and stands just four points above the relegation zone. Lampard’s first game would be the FA Cup fourth round tie at home to Brentford next Saturday with a critical trip to Newcastle following in the league three days later. Everton board members, and majority shareholder Farhad Moshiri, interviewed Lampard, Duncan Ferguson and Vitor Pereira on Friday as they sought to conclude another fraught and at times farcical managerial search. An immediate move to replace Benítez with the former manager Roberto Martínez was rejected by the Royal Belgian Football Association, who refused to allow their manager to job share in a World Cup year, while Pereira gave a live television interview to defend his record after news of his anticipated appointment by Moshiri sparked a hostile reaction among some Everton fans. Ferguson also impressed Everton’s interview panel in London and has his backers at the club. Lampard, who has been interviewed several times over the past two weeks, was told to expect an offer following the final round. He is set to become Moshiri’s sixth permanent manager in under six years after Ronald Koeman, Sam Allardyce, Marco Silva, Carlo Ancelotti and Benitez. Everton’s owner has also gone through two directors of football in that time and the club are conducting a strategic review into their entire football operation following six years of extravagant spending for little reward. A new midfielder is the priority before the transfer deadline with Abdoulaye Doucouré, Tom Davies and Fabian Delph all sidelined until March with injury.A Treasury minister who resigned over the government’s “schoolboy” handling of fraudulent Covid business loans has said there has been “not a zippo” of detail about how the chancellor plans to deal with the issue. Theodore Agnew of Oulton, who was the Tories’ anti-fraud minister, publicly resigned from his Cabinet Office and Treasury posts on Monday over the government’s decision to write off £4.3bn in fraudulent loans. He called the oversight of the scheme “nothing less than woeful”. Discussing his dramatic exit in an interview with the Times, Lord Agnew said: “I didn’t want to blow my top, but I was very angry.” Agnew accused the government of “arrogance, indolence and ignorance” in its attitude to tackling fraud estimated to cost £29bn a year. “This isn’t natural for me, I took no pleasure from it but the failure of government to tackle fraud felt so egregious, and the need for remedy so urgent, that I felt my only option left was to smash some crockery to get people to take notice,” Agnew said. “In life, one should try to stay inside the tent to win the arguments but ultimately there comes a breaking point.” HMRC figures show fraudulent claims for furlough and other business relief schemes have resulted in a loss of an estimated £5.8bn. Reports suggest £4.3bn stolen of that sum has been written off as unrecoverable, but the Treasury has since disputed this figure. The minister’s dramatic departure drove Rishi Sunak to assure that the government would “do everything we can” to recover stolen funds. “I’m not ignoring it, and I’m definitely not ‘writing it off’,” the chancellor tweeted on Wednesday. However, Agnew told the Times that there had been “not a zippo” of detail about how the chancellor plans to tackle the situation. Agnew said his resignation, which comes as Boris Johnson battles to survive in his role as prime minister, was not an attack on the Tory leader, but that he could not remain in post. “Given that I am the minister for counter-fraud, it would be somewhat dishonest to stay on in that role if I am incapable of doing it properly. It is for this reason that I have sadly decided to tender my resignation as a minister across the Treasury and Cabinet Office with immediate effect,” he told the House of Lords on Monday.As the Conservative party plots a way out of “partygate”, with or without its current leader, the path towards re-election in 2023 or 2024 is looking hazardous. In December 2019, flush with an 80-seat majority and a public spending deficit of just 2.6%, the outlook was rosy for a cabinet dominated by Brexiters keen to reward their supporters with one spending initiative after another. Spraying money around was not a problem while the deficit was low and the extra borrowed funds were clearly earmarked for investment. Criticism from small-state Tories, mindful of the demand from constituents for tax cuts, would be smothered by the joyful urge to spend after a decade of austerity. And there was the added bonus of political cover offered by a Labour party that had argued over several years for higher spending on infrastructure, support for small businesses and skills training. Billions and billions of pounds were going to be spent pump-priming a stagnant economy that had suffered badly since the 2016 Brexit vote, not that Brexit was ever going to be blamed. According to the rhetoric, boom-boom Britain was just a few steps away, with its attendant fruit of high-skilled, high-wage jobs for all. That was then. The outlook these days is far from rosy, especially now that the pandemic has soaked up so much of the magic money tree’s imagined largesse. Underlying the arguments over April’s national insurance rise and the extent to which it will add to the rising cost of living is a more fundamental battle between low-tax Conservatives who believe in public spending restraint and those who still carry a flame for Johnson’s more extravagant plans. With his job-protecting furlough scheme declared a resounding success, Rishi Sunak considers himself, as chancellor, more on an equal footing with No 10, much as George Osborne did post-2010. As such, he leads a hawkish brigade who focus on the deficit and the overriding need to bring it back to pre-pandemic levels, with tax cuts to follow. The Office for Budget Responsibility says government borrowing reached a peacetime record of £320bn, or 15.2% of GDP, in the financial year 2020-21. The current year is expected to see that figure fall to £183bn, or 8% of GDP. Emphasising the dilemma facing those on both sides of the debate, the figures for December’s public spending show the deficit to be on an even lower trajectory. According to Johnson supporters, this hands the Treasury enough cash to boost welfare payments and offset the worst of rising prices for most people on low incomes while staying in line with the OBR forecast. Sunak supporters dismiss this way of thinking and ask why the deficit should not fall at a faster rate. The OBR forecast does not determine government policy: it only provides a framework, as its outgoing chief economist, Charlie Bean, emphasised last week. Bean, who was deputy governor of the Bank of England during the 2008 crash, told Bloomberg that ministers “look at the central OBR projection and say we’ve got whatever billions to play with, and then spend that exactly”. He added: “The consequence is that when we change our forecast by even a modest amount, that translates one-for-one into what the government thinks it can spend. It troubles me that policy is made that way.” And so it has proved in the pandemic. In March, the OBR will have another crack at the numbers. If it upgrades its forecasts, there will be yet more pressure on Sunak to spend the difference, while Sunak will still argue for years of austerity. Johnson and his supporters, foreign secretary Liz Truss among them, are desperate to recreate the spirit of that election victory in 2019 by spending every penny “allowed” by the OBR forecast and as much as they can get away with on top. If the economic landscape in 2022 looked like 2019, that might be a plausible position. Sadly, for them and the rest of us, large parts of the public sector are in desperate need of repair, to the extent that they will soak up any extra spending before anyone begins to even consider options for investment. The government could ignore the millions of school pupils who need to catch up with their studies and set aside hospital waiting lists, freeing up money for investment. Likewise, the 50% sliced from the skills training budget, the billions of pounds stripped from local authorities and the clamp on public sector pay could all remain in place. Yet that hardly seems plausible without beckoning forth an electoral rebellion when the Tories seek a new mandate. Too many contradictory promises have been made. Ousting Johnson cannot by itself resolve them.Feast Is Feast With Big Zuu | Global Remi Burgz (Radio 1Xtra) | BBC Sounds Going Home With Vick and Jordan (Radio 1) | BBC Sounds Wild Things: Siegfried and Roy | Apple TV+/At Will Media If you, like me, are in search of some joy during the longest January ever recorded, may I recommend the new food podcast Feast Is Feast, from Big Zuu? Zuu, real name Zuhair Hassan, “aka Zig Buu, aka Fat Mo Salah” (he’s a Liverpool fan), is a grime artist, rapper and TV chef with a cooking show on Dave, Big Eats, where he makes meals for comedians. Big Eats is also the name of a track Zuu made with his cousin AJ Tracey. On this “poddy”, he’s louder, warmer, sillier: “You say random things! It’s a poddy!” He’s a complete delight. The show is, on the surface, similar to other well established foodie podcasts out there. Like Table Manners with Jessie and Lennie Ware, or Out to Lunch with the Observer’s own Jay Rayner, or Comfort Eating with Grace Dent, it uses food as a way into understanding a celebrity interviewee. But with each of these shows some eating is involved, whether a full meal or a comforting snack. Zuu’s approach is simpler. There’s no actual food here at all. He just chats with his interviewee about food-related stuff: what they ate as children, how they eat today, how they use meals in their job, what turns their stomach. So far, he’s had two guests: musician Craig David and footballer turned pundit Jermaine Jenas. Both episodes are revelatory, not just in content, but in tone. Zuu brings the right vibes, married to the correct respect, and you can hear his guests relax. Their professional demeanour melts away, replaced by something more jokey, intimate and honest. You realise just how much they’ve been dialling down their full personalities for mainstream audiences. David, in particular, is a brilliant listen. He clearly loves food – not cooking it, but eating it – and his pleasure is thoroughly infectious. He talks about selling (and eating) chocolate bars at school (“getting high on my own supply”), and describes how much he loved a particular chicken wrap made at an Ibizan hotel. Jenas is a surprise too, his Nottingham roots much more noticeable than on TV. Born to a Jamaican dad and a British mum, with all the culinary variety that implies, his ideal food is northern “stodge”: sausage, mash, gravy inside a big yorkshire pudding. But truly, this podcast should be heard simply for David describing the complicated way he eats Ben &amp; Jerry’s Cookie Dough ice-cream. I hope you noticed that I got through an entire section on food podcasts without using the words “ambush” and “cake”. In this, I am unlike Greg James, who, on Wednesday, asked his Radio 1 breakfast listeners to call in with their personal cake ambush scenarios. That’s where we are as a nation, politics-wise. I’ve been flipping between dials at breakfast, and every time I’ve gone back to the Today programme, I hear another lower rank politician minutely parsing the meaning of the words “party” or “work” or “rules”. And I switch to another station, again. Anyway, after Zuu, I decided to extend my cheerful listening by tuning to 1Xtra in the afternoon, where new recruit Remi Burgz is into the second week of her afternoon show. Burgz is a born chatterer, with a mad laugh, and knows to ride the music when she occasionally searches for words. Her show will develop; for the moment, she’s nailing the good-time atmosphere. Over on Radio 1, in the Going Home slot, Vick Hope and Jordan North are another upbeat listen. Now six months into their slot, they easily spin silly chat into something listener-inclusive. And, for us oldies, now that Radio 1 music can be anything and everything, the playlist can sound weirdly familiar. At one point Hope and North played a track (Ben Hemsley’s Love Peace and Harmony) that was so early-90s, I started having flashbacks. Straight after, they went into an impromptu riff about “-ation” words, inspired by the “higher and higher – temp-ta-tion” Heaven 17 sample in the Hemsley song. Later, some daftness about whether you should be able to video-call friends from the bath. Listeners responded to both, immediately. A nice way to forget about real life. I was hoping for more escapism with Wild Things, a podcast about the madly camp magic-with-white-tigers-in-Vegas act of Siegfried and Roy. Unfortunately, presenter Steven Leckart has elected to take S &amp; R seriously, which rather kills the fun. Dry, diligent reporting is not what this story needs. It requires more surprise, more sugar. Where are those cake ambushers when you need them?Watching TV feels like a benign pastime, but as all TVs become “smart” – connected to the internet via your router – they are gaining the ability to watch you too. As soon as you switch them on, smart TVs made by the likes of LG, Samsung and Sony are gathering data from the TV itself, as well as from the operating system and apps. Then there are the devices you plug into your TV, such as Google’s Chromecast, Apple TV and Amazon’s Fire Stick. A TV is no longer just a device for showing you content – it has become a two-way mirror allowing you to be observed in real time by a network of advertisers and data brokers, says Rowenna Fielding, director of data protection consultancy Miss IG Geek. “The purpose of this is to gather as much information as possible about your behaviour, interests, preferences and demographics so it can be monetised, mainly through targeted advertising.” Smart TV spying is difficult to avoid. A study by researchers at Northeastern University and Imperial College London found data from TVs and smart devices was sent to Google’s ad business and to Netflix, even if people didn’t have Netflix. What does your smart TV know about you? The data collected by your smart TV depends on its manufacturer, brand and version. In theory, most smart TVs are capable of collecting audio, video and TV usage data, says Toby Lewis, global head of threat analysis at cybersecurity company Darktrace. Voice activation is one feature with the potential to gather large amounts of data. Microphones and software are listening for instructions and they can capture conversations and other sounds within range. These recordings might be sent to third parties to be analysed. Cross-device tracking is another issue to consider. Data collected via your smart TV is more valuable when combined with information from other smart devices such as mobile phones, laptops and home automation gear, according to Fielding. “This allows individuals to be profiled in detail: geo-location history, web browsing activity and social media information can be added to TV data.” Then there are the cookies and trackers. Apps and browsers on smart TVs use cookie- and pixel-tracking technologies just like websites do to track, recognise and identify devices for user-profiling. “Most apps installed on your smart TV will be snitching to a large network of advertisers and data brokers,” Fielding warns. What does your TV do with the data? There is no clear-cut answer. What exactly is done with the data is complex and “highly opaque”, says Lewis. “When looking at what a smart TV does on the network, it is often unclear why certain data is being harvested and where it is being sent.” There is not much difference between TV brands. Manufacturers claim to use your information for “personalisation” and quality of content, but it is common to sell this type of data, anonymised or semi-anonymised, to third parties, advertising companies or streaming services. “After the data has been sold, it is out of the manufacturer’s control,” Lewis says. “It is often unclear what data exactly is being sent back, depending on the T&amp;Cs and privacy settings, and it can be very difficult to change default settings once you have agreed to them.” How streaming services are also gathering data Using streaming services on a smart TV is another surefire way to hand over lots of your personal data. Apps such as Netflix, Amazon Prime and Now TV tend to claim they only use data for necessary services such as recommendations or credit checks. But this can include data such as device identifiers, geo-location, browser type, email address and payment information. Netflix’s powerful recommendations algorithm fuels the quality of its service by helping you choose which shows to watch. If you log on to Netflix via your browser, you can tweak the privacy settings to limit the data that’s collected and shared. Yet most of the data Netflix gathers, such as the shows you watched and when, is so core to its service that you can’t opt out of it. What is automatic content recognition or ACR? Back to the smart TV itself. One scary feature to look out for is automated content recognition (ACR). Often turned on by default, this uses analytical techniques to identify video and audio running on the TV, matching it against a big database to identify what’s being played. It’s pretty creepy stuff – ACR works on anything played on the TV including DVDs and Blu-rays, CDs and games. Viewing data and habits are shared with manufacturers and ultimately sold to advertisers in order to target you with ads, says Jake Moore, global cybersecurity adviser at security company ESET. When your TV is connected to your home router, data will include your IP address and location too, he adds. And in theory, ACR could be used for even more unsettling profiling, says Lewis. “With the analytical technologies available, data from facial recognition, sentiment analysis, speech-to-text and content analysis could be gathered to build an in-depth picture of an individual user.” Instead of matching content against a list of known movies, ACR could in theory be analysed for political position, ethnicity, socioeconomic position and other things that could be abused in the wrong hands, Lewis says. Should you use your TV as a browser or your smartphone as a TV remote? Using the browser on your TV might be convenient, but it’s a major attack target for hackers. This is because your smart TV browser lacks the antivirus and additional security settings built into your smartphone or PC. “Cyber-attackers can eavesdrop on the browser’s traffic and compromise the cookies that manage authentication to online services, such as social media accounts or online banking, and impersonate people,” says Dr Francisco Navarro, a senior lecturer at De Montfort University’s Cyber Security Centre in Leicester. But in contrast, experts say using your smartphone as a TV remote is fine. Just be mindful that connecting to a smart TV with a mobile will be done via Bluetooth or across the network, says James Griffiths, cofounder and technical director at security consultancy Cyber Security Associates. “If the smart TV was hacked, it might be used to attack your mobile device, but the risk of this happening is low.” Protect yourself from smart TV spying As long as they are connected to the internet, smart TVs will collect data and you can’t stop this from happening altogether. In many instances it’s not in your interests to do so as it will affect your viewing experience – take Netflix’s useful recommendations features as an example. Yet there are some basic measures you can take to protect yourself from smart TV spying. Turn off ACR in the settings, disable personalisation, opt out of all advertising features and cover or disable cameras and microphones. It’s also important to make sure your router is protected by changing the password and setting up a guest network. You can improve security by opting out of web tracking when it’s offered and applying software updates as soon as they’re available.Cruise ships, called “floating petri dishes” early in the pandemic for their role in propagating infection, are back in the news. One company, in what would be an ugly alliance of capitalist and communist exploitation, is accused of colluding with the government of Cuba to force Cuban crew members to work under “slave labour” conditions. Another, Crystal Cruises, chose not to return its ship Crystal Symphony to Florida, for fear that it would be arrested for $4.6m (£3.4m) in unpaid fuel bills. It was diverted to Bimini in the Bahamas and its passengers were obliged to end their two-week dream cruise with a vomit-inducing ferry trip through what was called “inclement weather”. According to a legal expert quoted by the Washington Post, their claims for compensation are likely to be limited by the terms and conditions that cruise companies tend to impose on their customers. No one familiar with the dark arts of this multibillion-dollar business will be surprised after the notorious “poop cruise” of 2013, in which raw sewage backed up into passenger areas. Lawyers for its owner, Carnival Cruise Line, argued that the “ticket contract makes absolutely no guarantee for safe passage, a seaworthy vessel, adequate and wholesome food and sanitary and safe living conditions”. Inflating the problem When George Osborne launched his help-to-buy scheme in 2013, which was supposed to support homebuyers with government-supported loans, its likely flaws should have been obvious to anyone with the most basic grasp of economics. By increasing demand it would push prices up, which would defeat the purpose of the exercise. The main beneficiaries would be those selling the product in question, the volume housebuilders who went on to make large profits and award handsome bonuses to their executives. Now, a recent House of Lords report finds that the scheme, “which will have cost around £29bn in cash terms by 2023, inflates prices by more than its subsidy value in areas where it is needed the most”. It is usually left-leaning administrations that are accused of squandering public money on ideologically driven projects, but here a Tory government has done just that. Such money would have been better spent on actually building humane and beautiful affordable housing. Peter Barber is an architect who for years has been creating just that, within the exacting demands of the business of constructing homes. Last week, the Royal Academy of Arts made him a Royal Academician, an honour that puts him in the same ranks of celebrated artists such as Tracey Emin and Anish Kapoor. It’s heartening to see such recognition for the application of creativity to the places where people lead their everyday lives. Pundits in paradise In the Caazapá region of Paraguay, there’s an attempt to build a utopia for those who want to escape “the socialist trends of current economic and political situations worldwide”. It welcomes vaccine sceptics, doubters of the US 2020 presidential election and those who fear 5G, fluoridated water, healthcare mandates and Muslims. It is a place for people, whom the project’s founder, Erwin Annau, calls “enlightened Christians”, who “are concerned about our daughters”. El Paraíso Verde, as it is called, says that it seeks “innovative thinkers, engineers, hairdressers, restaurateurs, shopkeepers, alternative healing practitioners”. I don’t wish any more trouble on Paraguay than it already has, but I hope that this community will also welcome the know-nothing loudmouths in the rightwing British media, who for nearly two years have been opposing every sane step, from mask-wearing to working from home, without which this country’s death toll would be even higher than it is. • Rowan Moore is the Observer’s architecture correspondentThe rising fortunes of the world’s billionaires during the pandemic helped fuel a record £5.3bn in superyacht sales last year, prompting calls for new curbs on their emissions. New figures reveal that 887 superyachts were sold in 2021, an increase of more than 75% compared with the previous year. Yachting brokers say some of the demand has been from wealthy clients seeking a secure refuge from the pandemic. Sam Tucker, head of the superyachts team at VesselsValue, the maritime and aviation data firm which compiled the report, said: “It has been the strongest year on record for the number of transactions and the money spent.” He said low interest rates and rising stock markets had meant more disposable income for the world’s richest people. A superyacht is typically defined as a privately owned vessel 78 feet (24 metres) or more in length. According to industry data, there are more than 9,300 on the seas worth a total in excess of £50bn. While maritime construction yards are keen to promote the green credentials of many superyachts, they are major polluters. It has been estimated a superyacht with permanent crew, helicopter pad, submarines and pools emits about 7,020 tonnes of carbon dioxide a year, more than 1,500 times higher than a typical family car. Paul Stretesky, a professor of social sciences at Northumbria University and co-author of a 2019 report, Measuring the Ecological Impact of the Wealthy, said more financial levies were needed on the superyacht industry. He said: “The damage done by this conspicuous consumption is incredible. It’s not something we should aspire to, it’s something we should stop.” Stretesky’s report found that the annual fuel costs of a superyacht can be about £300,000. A report last year by the environmental platform EcoWatch analysed the carbon footprint of 20 billionaires. It found a superyacht was “by far the worst asset to own from an environmental standpoint”. The Russian tycoon Roman Abramovich, who is reported to have owned at least five superyachts, topped the list published in February last year, accounting for estimated annual carbon emissions of nearly 34,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide. The biggest vessel in his fleet is the 163-metre (535ft) superyacht Eclipse. It has nine decks, with the top one containing two helipads and a garage. It has a 16-metre (53ft) swimming pool that can be converted into a dancefloor. It is estimated to be worth £1bn after extensive refurbishments. Amazon tycoon Jeff Bezos was near the bottom of the carbon footprint league table in last year’s analysis, but has rapidly climbed up the table in 2021 with a trip to the outer edge of space and reports he had commissioned a new superyacht with the project name Y721. The £350m yacht will accommodate 18 guests with a 40-stong crew and will be escorted by its own support vessel. New rules were due to come into force in 2016 to curb some of the most dangerous nitrogen oxide emissions from superyachts, which can be about 300 times as potent as carbon dioxide at heating the atmosphere. The industry successfully lobbied for the International Maritime Organization (IMO) emission standards to be delayed for five years for superyachts under 500 tonnes. They were finally implemented in January last year, but the US Coast Guard has said it will not enforce the regulations after lobbying by the marine industry which says the bulky equipment required to remove pollution out of engine exhaust is impractical on many yachts.Despite Worcester’s latest defeat at the hands of a polished Northampton, the Warriors players on show can consider this a successful audition for lead roles in the club’s new era. Steve Diamond’s appointment as Worcester’s new director of rugby was announced this week – he remains lead rugby consultant for now – and the former Sale coach begins a two-year contract this summer. “I thought we were competitive but the scoreline doesn’t suggest that,” Diamond said after watching his team’s spirited second-half fightback, led by the captain Ted Hill and Scotland wing Duhan van der Merwe, come up short. “Our defensive frailties were evident in the first half. [But] we’ve got people who actually care about what they’re doing. “Let’s get a bit more streetwise, a bit more understanding in our ‘D’, and I think we’ll push on.” A breathless, scoreless opening at Sixways would have satisfied Diamond but the class of Northampton eventually began to tell. A perceptive pass by the new Wales captain, Dan Biggar, sent Sam Matavesi scorching through a midfield hole after 20 minutes. Worcester scrambled but Northampton won a penalty and Biggar kicked for the corner. The visitors gained metres with a driving maul and Rory Hutchinson touched down. Biggar converted for 7-0. The 19-year-old Worcester fly-half, Fin Smith, replied with a penalty but Northampton soon threatened again with a rousing charge forward by the dynamic No 8 Juarno Augustus. Worcester’s Perry Humphreys was yellow-carded for a deliberate knock-on, Biggar again kicked the for the corner, and Matavesi flopped over following another well-executed drive. Two minutes before half-time, Saints tightened their grip when the scrum-half Alex Mitchell darted through a gap and raced over from near halfway. It was 19-3 and seemingly game over. Biggar added a penalty seven minutes after the break but Worcester kept bashing away, and a bullocking run by Rory Sutherland soon had the crowd on their feet. Van der Merwe nearly crossed on the right wing following a rampaging break, and attacking momentum was maintained until Sutherland scored. That brought the hosts to within 14 and when Hill charged into space on the left and was tackled just short, Sixways was rocking. Ashley Beck cantered over with 15 minutes left to reduce the deficit to nine and a thrilling finish seemed in store. It was not to be. Another muscular lineout drive resulted in a try for the Northampton replacement, James Fish, a bonus point for Saints, and the end of Worcester’s challenge. Diamond has his work cut out but a few gems to polish up, too. “You can’t do better than get five [points] away, so very happy with that,” said the Northampton director of rugby, Chris Boyd. “Dan Biggar continues to be the ultimate professional for us. He came out of the Welsh camp on Wednesday, trained with us Thursday, he jumps in his car now and goes back to Wales. It’s a tough gig for those guys, but that’s why they get paid the big bucks.”If Sunderland’s recent past is littered with embarrassments, this was another candidate for the title of a historic low. They can seem to be slumming it in League One, but they slumped to their heaviest ever defeat in third-tier football. Their afternoon was summed up when Danny Batth, with a finish that was both unwitting and unstoppable, donated Bolton’s fifth goal with a spectacular diving header. In a meeting of the inspired and the insipid, Bolton’s third win in a week at least suggested League One has some restorative powers for them. For Sunderland, it seems the land of broken dreams. Much more of this and their ignominious exile from their natural terrain will continue. For manager and club alike it represented a nadir. “It is the worst feeling I have had in football in a career of 20-odd years,” said Lee Johnson, as he submitted an apology to 5,000 travelling fans. “I can’t give answers. I didn’t see it coming. The players felt embarrassed. I was angry. I am hurting.” His despair contrasted with Bolton’s delight. “Everything went right,” said manager Ian Evatt. Bolton’s biggest victory at their home of 25 years was orchestrated by a recent arrival who had appeared evidence of their decline. A ground that hosted Atlético Madrid in 2008 will stage Accrington in April. Bolton used to sign from Real Madrid. Now they have recruited Accrington’s striker Dion Charles and a January signing ran Sunderland ragged as he scored his second and third goals for his new employers. Chalk it up, perhaps, to the curse of Evatt. In October, Bolton’s manager branded his team the best in League One and they promptly went on a losing run. This week, he declared Sunderland were the division’s best footballing side. Bolton made them appear the worst. “We have fallen unbelievably short in every facet of football. There were so many poor individual performances,” added Johnson after Sunderland were blown away. If Bolton’s 19-year-old goalkeeper, James Trafford, could claim the assist for their opener, so could the Pennine winds. Trafford’s punt forward lured his Sunderland counterpart, Thorben Hoffmann, off his line, held up in the gale and allowed Charles to nip in and lob him, though a gust made a valiant effort to stop the ball from crossing the line. “Our strikers were outstanding,” said Evatt and Charles dovetailed brilliantly with the electric Dapo Afolayan in a new-look partnership. The former West Ham forward’s stay at this level may be brief, whether or not Bolton’s is, and he tucked in the second when teed up by Kieran Lee after the marauding Charles broke clear on the right. There was a role reversal when Afolayan headed Gethin Jones’ deep cross into the path of Charles, who hooked in a half-volley. Lee, elusive and excellent as a No 10, added the fourth after a slick passing move involving Afolayan and Aaron Morley. “We looked disjointed and we looked disorganised,” said Johnson and even after Evatt took mercy on Sunderland and substituted his front duo, the luckless Batth and Declan John delivered further goals. In all the carnage, Jack Clarke and Patrick Roberts made inauspicious Sunderland debuts in cameos. They are wingers who cost Tottenham and Manchester City a combined £22 million. If Sunderland has become a home for lost talents, this instead felt a staging post in careers that have taken the wrong path. But then recent years have contained more than their fair share of indignities for clubs with a combined total of 6,142 games among the elite. If neither has never fully recovered from Sam Allardyce’s departure, they clashed in the top flight in the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries and first met in the third tier in 2019. Bolton headed down to the fourth thereafter. At least they are glad to be back in a division containing two of the last seven FA Cup winners and with seven members, including Charlton, Ipswich, Portsmouth, Sheffield Wednesday and Wigan, who have played in the Premier League in the 21st century. There are tales of administration, relegation and recrimination, of mistakes and mismanagement. For Bolton, at least, a thrashing was a story of renewal, for Sunderland, one of purgatory in a footballing netherworld.Standout individual performances at domestic level can be a double edged sword for clubs that value consistency. The benefits are obvious, and any coach will tell you how much they enjoy seeing their charges achieve higher honours. But there are costs whenever a national selector comes calling for star players. Rob Baxter now understands the sting of this particular blade as his Exeter Chiefs squandered a 14-point lead to lose at London Irish. Five of his stalwarts now call Eddie Jones their boss as they gear up for England’s Six Nations campaign starting next week. Only Leicester and Saracens have had to relinquish more players for the Red Rose. And in Luke Cowan-Dickie, Sam Simmonds, Jonny Hill, Henry Slade and Jack Nowell, the Chiefs have effectively had their backbone ripped out. Not that they looked spineless in the opening exchanges in West London. A superior kicking game and relentlessly swift ball from the breakdown saw wave after wave of white shirted bodies crash over the gain line. Close-range tries from Olly Woodburn and Patrick Schickerling inside 20 minutes was just as much as Exeter deserved. London Irish were hospitable during this period. Coughing up the ball in the tackle and failing to match their guests’ ferocity. But momentum is a fickle concept and the tide turned once Paddy Jackson came into the contest. Wraparound loops and neat pops off his shoulder found the regular runs of Curtis Rona and Lucio Cinti. The two Wallaby locks Adam Coleman and Rob Simmons exerted themselves around the fringe and Tom Pearson emerged as the most prevalent presence at the breakdown. And so the pendulum swung. Matt Cornish had the last touch on a move orchestrated by the forwards midway through the half. Jackson missed the shot at extras but made no mistake with two penalties shortly after. He had the last say in the half with a conversion following James Stokes’ try in the right corner. It was an excellent score with Jackson breaking a line before Ben Loader’s offload under pressure found his full-back on the gallop. Stokes deserved his try after expertly staying in touch and satisfying a lengthy review from the TMO. The home side were value for their lead and looking to secure a Premiership double over the men from Devon for the first time since 2011. Such was their confidence that they opted for consecutive scrums from a penalty right under Exeter’s posts with only a four-point lead. The second half was an arm wrestle and Exeter could have used some of their heavier hitters. Credit must go to Irish though who scrapped like a side conscious of their standing. This win moves the hosts above the Chiefs into sixth place. It is 11 years since they made the play-offs. Their fate is now with them as they have a clutch of games against teams above them. And though they remain a long shot to end among the top four, their mongrel will give them belief. Every time Exeter romped towards their red zone they found a way of securing a turnover. Cinti’s steal after 73 minutes ensured that the remaining action would take place with the Exiles in control, so much so that Jackson’s two missed penalties were irrelevant. “It is a double-edged sword,” Exeter’s director of rugby Baxter said. “It’s become more of a challenge this season. With the Covid scenario, which has expanded the league, you just create more and more clashes. You work toward a squad that is built around what you know about the season and the fixture list and the challenges, and then it changes. But every team needs to adapt.” The Chiefs will know they let this slip after such a commanding lead. Dealing in hypotheticals and what-ifs is not helpful but Baxter will surely wonder what might have been if he had some of his regulars to hand.A couple of hours before kick-off a small boy stood outside the players’ entrance draped in Turkey’s national flag. It was presumably a way of welcoming Hull’s new owner, Acun Ilicali, to East Yorkshire but there was no sign of the Turkish reality TV mogul, then still up in the clouds en route back from a flying visit to Istanbul aboard his renamed private jet “Tiger Force One”. High winds occasioned by Storm Malik delayed Ilicali’s arrival until half-time but at least his new manager, Shota Arveladze, arrived on schedule. The Georgian, installed as Grant McCann’s successor last week, took time to endear himself to his new public, happily posing for selfies with fans before tackling the challenge of initiating an unlikely promotion challenge. Considering Hull sit 18th in the Championship it seemed a little ambitious but Ilicali has tasked the one-time Rangers and Ajax striker and former manager of Uzbekistan’s Pakhtakor Tashkent with securing a play-off place and Arveladze certainly made a decent start. The wind was capricious but, on the pitch at least, there were no signs of turbulence. With five minutes gone Hull, playing with a high-pressing back-three, were ahead when Tom Eaves connected with the impressive Brandon Fleming’s fine cross and volleyed beyond Ben Hamer. The only shame was that Ilicali was not present to witness it. Instead, the 52-year-old who paid £30m this month to end the Allam family’s controversial 11-year stewardship of the club was in transit after a bumpy landing at Humberside airport. Turkey’s answer to Simon Cowell missed the second goal too. Registered in the 16th minute it involved another cross, from George Honeyman this time, and a close-range scoring shot from the on-rushing, and excellent, Keane Lewis-Potter. Blessed with a lovely touch, the 20-year-old forward is the jewel in Hull’s crown and owner and manager are adamant he will reject any more bids from Premier League clubs, with Brentford and West Ham at the front of the queue. Arveladze, who at 48 has also managed in Turkey and Israel, wants to pair Lewis-Potter with the much admired Iran striker Allahyar Sayyadmanesh. The “new Mo Salah” is expected to complete a £5m move from Fenerbahce by Monday night. Like Cowell, Ilicali is convinced he possesses a knack for talent spotting and has promised Sayyadmanesh will be joined by three more similarly exciting signings. Arveladze’s existing side looked far too strong for Swansea and the ground soon echoed to choruses of “Shota, Shota, give us a wave,” from the crowd of 13,101, a season’s best. Perhaps wary of tempting fate, he did not oblige, yet although the visitors improved in the second half, twice hitting a post and having a goal disallowed for a tight offside, Hull never looked in peril of being blown off course. It seemed that what Ilicali terms a “beautiful journey” had truly begun. With the memories receding of Assem and Ehab Allam’s often unpopular tenure – when failed attempts to change the club’s name to Hull Tigers rather clouded two promotions to the Premier League and an FA Cup final appearance - Ilicali is promising £2 match tickets for under-16s and seniors. But why Hull? Ilicali, who started out as a football reporter before moving on to greater things, says it is all about love and he was smitten by his new habitat the moment he first crossed the Humber. “Hull has the Humber Bridge like Istanbul has the Bosphorus bridge,” he said. “This is a sign of destiny. Even the shirt colours attracted me so much. This is now my city and my team.” He regards Leicester as a role model and believes his new club can, one day, emulate their success. “This club has the potential to win trophies. There is nothing Leicester has that Hull does not.” The bar seems set ominously high for Arveladze but this was a sure-footed start. “If someone had written this scenario for me I would definitely have wanted it to turn out this way,” he said. “Now we need to continue this way.”Unmesh Desai recalls feeling righteous frustration as he sat opposite the head of the Metropolitan police on Tuesday morning. For months Cressida Dick’s force had refused to investigate what appeared to be unambiguous breaches of Covid regulations at Downing Street. “The perception is that you’re covering for those in power,” Desai told the commissioner. Arms folded, Dick leant towards those assembled for the Greater London authority police and crime committee meeting in Southwark and responded: “We police without fear or favour.” Moments later, at 10:08am, Dick dropped the bombshell that sent shock waves thundering a mile west to Downing Street and nearby parliament. Desai felt the room go quiet, with others clearly sharing his “total surprise,” at the commissioner’s revelation. Ditching the Met’s long-stated position of waiting for Sue Gray’s report on Downing Street’s lockdown parties, Dick announced a criminal inquiry into “serious and flagrant” breaches of lockdown rules. Five days on, however, some believe the commissioner’s lofty reference to “fear and favour” appears increasingly questionable. From refusing to investigate Downing Street’s lockdown parties, the Met’s intervention has effectively neutered the most eagerly awaited report in recent political history, an inquiry whose findings seemed likely to dictate the future of Boris Johnson. And after appearing content on Tuesday for Gray to publish her report in full, on Friday, without warning, the Met requested that the civil servant make “minimal reference” to the events it was investigating. The abrupt U-turn has left Desai and committee members believing they were duped by Dick. “Why were we not told this during the meeting? Dick has still not explained directly and publicly the rationale for this request?” Desai told the Observer. For some, the Met’s change of tack has seen talk of incompetence turn to conspiracy. Nazir Afzal, former chief prosecutor for north-west England, said the last-minute request for Gray to water down her report was troubling. “It gives the perception of collusion, the perception that they’re not acting without fear or favour.” What it means for the prime minister remains similarly open to interpretation. Some argue that it offers a reprieve, a chance for Johnson to steady the ship. Others say the Met has intensified the pressure on Gray to shoot the silver bullet. “The issue now is if the report doesn’t point the finger at Johnson, people are going to say it’s a stitch-up,” said a senior prosecution source. “At the same time Gray is under pressure to publish something and if it’s anodyne because of the Met’s request, from a government perspective that’s brilliant.” Another prosecution source, also requesting anonymity, said that the Met’s trajectory from seemingly not wanting to get involved to blundering into constitutional matters was tantamount to a “perversion of public business”. They added: “The optics look poor, from doing nothing to investigating parties in the heart of government to watering down a report that effectively may save the prime minister.” Former director of public prosecutions, Ken Macdonald, was more circumspect but could see no justifiable reason for diluting Gray’s report over what appears to be a series of fixed-penalty notices. “It seems completely disproportionate to hold up the publication of a report that’s going to shed light on what may be a public scandal,” he said. For some observers, the saga is symbolised by the Met’s use of the word “prejudice” to explain why it told Gray not to publish key passages. The term suggested that the force was investigating more serious offences than fixed-penalty notices (FPNs), offences that could be tried before a jury. Macdonald was among those who felt that the Met’s legal team must have signed off the term in its criminal law context. Yet that was not the case. Yesterday police sources insisted that the investigation was solely in “FPN territory”. “Using the word [prejudice] meant that for a crucial bit of the debate the rationale was that Sue Gray had found people systematically deleting emails or something, it was very odd,” said a senior prosecuting source. Yet an innocent explanation may well be likely. The senior prosecution source said that it was highly possible that the Met had sought legal counsel on Thursday from a cautious barrister who advised that Gray’s report couldn’t be published in full: “This is not a conspiracy and Cressida Dick is not corrupt. She’s independent and robust, and neither would No 10 take the risk [of meddling].” For others with intimate knowledge of the Met, the damaging episode should never have been allowed to happen. Dal Babu, former chief superintendent, said that the Downing Street lockdown parties should have been dealt with when details began to emerge months ago. “They should have spoken to the individuals, issued fixed-penalty notices, and that would have been that. From a policing point of view I cannot understand why it wasn’t pursued. Instead, you’ve ended up with this absolute mess,” said Babu. “Not doing anything, and suddenly doing too much, shows the police haven’t understood the political situation. There appears a level of naivety in not understanding the implications.” However, Gray, according to Babu, is not entirely blameless. He believes that the moment she found evidence of criminality she should have handed responsibility to the Met. “That hasn’t happened here for whatever reason. Despite clear evidence of criminality, it continued to be reviewed by a civilian,” he said. That civilian is expected to deliver her report on No 10 parties to the PM imminently without waiting for the police inquiry to conclude. Regardless of what Gray finds, the events of the past week may have further eroded trust in police and the government. “What’s happened has shaken public confidence in the institutions. The sooner we get light [from Gray] shed on this, the better,” said Macdonald. Afzal added that the perception that those who make the rules can bend the rules had been reinforced. “This entire issue is about integrity at the heart of public life. All this does is feed the narrative that there’s one law for some …”... and that’s your lot for this edition of Clockwatch. We’ll leave you with Louise Taylor’s take on a fast start at Hull for Shota Arveladze. Thanks for reading! FULL TIME: Fulham 1-1 Blackpool. A deserved point for battling Blackpool at the home of the Championship leaders. Best wishes to the supporter whose medical emergency caused the game to be delayed. Richard Jolly was at the University of Bolton Stadium to watch Wanderers hand Sunderland their heaviest-ever defeat in third-tier football. His report has landed, so get clicking. More details on a poor day for Rangers goalkeeper Allan McGregor. Celtic’s Liel Abada would double the pain for the leaders a couple of hours later. Blackpool are still holding Championship leaders Fulham 1-1 at Craven Cottage. Around 20 minutes still to play. Updates to come. Bolton 6-0 Sunderland Cheltenham 0-0 Wigan Crewe 0-2 Rotherham Gillingham 2-7 Oxford Aberdeen P-P St Johnstone Celtic 1-0 Dundee United Dundee P-P St Mirren Hearts 2-0 Motherwell Hibernian 2-3 Livingston Ross County 3-3 Rangers Barnsley 0-1 Bournemouth Fulham 1-1 Blackpool (L) Hull 2-0 Swansea Luton 0-0 Blackburn Middlesbrough 1-0 Coventry Millwall 2-0 WBA Preston 2-2 Bristol City QPR 4-0 Reading GOAL! Fulham 1-1 Blackpool (Bowler 57). Josh Bowler shoots through a crowded box and the Championship leaders are pegged back! GOAL! Preston 2-2 Bristol City (Jakobsen 90+5). Emil Jakobsen denies the Robins with a screaming last-gasp volley! GOAL! Celtic 1-0 Dundee United (Abada 90). Liel Abada wins it at the death for ten-man Celtic, who close the gap on Rangers to two points. The Old Firm derby coming up during the week! More problems at the game between Crewe and Rotherham. The linesman earlier hit by an object thrown by a Rotherham fan has stopped the game and walked off. Not sure if he’s been hit a second time, if he’s concussed as a result of the earlier incident, or if something has been said. Whatever, it’s a thoroughly depressing affair. The linesman is replaced by the fourth official. GOAL! Bolton 5-0 Sunderland (Batth og 85). GOAL! Bolton 6-0 Sunderland (John 88). Danny Batth sends a spectacular header past his own keeper, then, three minutes later, Declan John scores a scrappy sixth. Meanwhile Oxford are now 7-2 up at Gillingham. Not a penalty this time, so y’know. FOUR PENALTIES FOR CAMERON BRANNIGAN! This is astonishing. The Oxford midfielder secures a place in the history books by sending a fourth spot kick whistling past poor Gillingham keeper Pontus Dahlberg. His team are currently 6-2 up. The punters at Priestfield have certainly got their money’s worth today, even if they might not appreciate it right now. GOAL! Preston 1-2 Bristol City (Semenyo 81). City retake the lead through Antoine Semenyo, and a rare win for Bristol City over Preston could be on after all. RED CARD: Bitton (Celtic). A second yellow for Nir Bitton on 81 minutes, and Celtic’s hopes of closing the gap on leaders Rangers are quickly running out. Speaking of promotion hopefuls in freefall ... Rotherham have just taken a 2-0 lead at ten-man Crewe. If they hold on for the win, they’ll go top of League One, pushing Sunderland, currently on the end of a 4-0 thrashing at Bolton, out of the automatic promotion places into third. What’s more, Sunderland will have played two matches more than Rotherham, and four more than second-placed Wigan. Like West Brom in the Championship, if they don’t get back into the groove soon, even the play-offs could become a pipe dream. GOAL! Millwall 2-0 WBA (Afobe 76). Benik Afobe doubles Millwall’s lead. West Brom had genuine designs on automatic promotion, but this will extend their current form sequence to one win in seven. It’ll be play-offs at best, perhaps even mid-table if they don’t rediscover their mojo quicksmart. It’s half-time at Fulham. The hosts go in 1-0 up over Blackpool. Meanwhile at Crewe, one of the assistant referees has been hit by something thrown by a Rotherham fan. Another depressing incident for the ever-expanding What’s Wrong With People? file. ... so having said that, United keeper Benjamin Siegrist has just denied Celtic striker Giorgos Giakoumakis with a stunning point-blank save. Be careful what you wish for, Simon McMahon. It’s still goalless at Celtic Park. “What’s going on?” wonders our unofficial Dundee United beat reporter Simon McMahon. “Didn’t the United players see my email before kick off about winning at Dens on Tuesday rather than today? Surely we can’t do both! The last player to score the winner for United at Celtic Park? Duncan Ferguson. 30 years ago.” GOAL! Millwall 1-0 WBA (Bennett 67). Mason Bennett slams home from a tight angle to give the Lions a deserved lead at the New Den. GOAL! Hibernian 2-3 Livingston (Forrest 59). The visitors have turned it around with two goals in six minutes, Alan Forrest putting the artists also formerly known as Ferranti Thistle in front for the first time. GOAL! Bolton 4-0 Sunderland (Lee 59). This is getting embarrassing now for the Black Cats, Kieran Lee taking the match towards the realms of the spanking. GOAL! Hearts 2-0 Motherwell (Simms 58). Ellis Simms doubles Hearts’ lead as they look to consolidate third place. Hats off to Cameron Brannagan! The Oxford midfielder has just completed a hat-trick of penalties, the Us setting about Gillingham in the grand style. They’re 5-0 up at Priestfield. GOAL! Hibernian 2-2 Livingston (Fitzwater 53). A second equaliser at Easter Road for the artists formerly known as Meadowbank Thistle, courtesy of Jack Fitzwater. GOAL! Middlesbrough 1-0 Coventry (Sporar 58). Boro are looking to make it five home wins on the spin. Andraz Sporar gives them the lead at the Riverside. GOAL! Preston 1-1 Bristol City (Jakobsen 52). City have only beaten Preston once in their last 17 meetings, a miserable sequence that looks like being extended now Emil Jakobsen has equalised. GOAL! QPR 4-0 Reading (Dunne 51). Jimmy Dunne makes it four for Rangers, and the way things are trending right now, Reading will be playing Sunderland in League One next season. GOAL! Bolton 3-0 Sunderland (Charles 50). A second goal for Dion Charles, and Sunderland are in all sorts of bother here. All of the second halves are now underway, with the obvious exception of Fulham-Blackpool. No early goals. There’s some big Africa Cup of Nations action kicking off right now. Will Unwin has the latest as hosts Cameroon take on Gambia in the first quarter-final. The teams are back out at Craven Cottage. The ill supporter is being taken to hospital. Hopes, prayers, and best wishes for a quick and full recovery. Aberdeen P-P St Johnstone Celtic 0-0 Dundee United Dundee P-P St Mirren Hearts 1-0 Motherwell Hibernian 2-1 Livingston Ross County 3-3 Rangers (FT) Barnsley 0-1 Bournemouth Fulham 1-0 Blackpool (L) Hull 2-0 Swansea Luton 0-0 Blackburn Middlesbrough 0-0 Coventry Millwall 0-0 WBA Preston 0-1 Bristol City QPR 3-0 Reading The game at Fulham still hasn’t restarted. Meanwhile at Wycombe, some of the MK Dons support have aimed offensive chants at Adebayo Akinfenwa, forcing the club’s official Twitter account to tell them to pipe down. GOAL! Bolton 2-0 Sunderland (Afolayan 42). Oladapo Afolayan doubles Bolton’s lead in the big League One showdown. Sunderland started the day in second place, but as things stand they’ll slip to third, with Rotherham leapfrogging them. Rotherham and Wigan both have games in hand, too. GOAL! Hearts 1-0 Motherwell (Halliday 37). Andy Halliday gives Hearts the lead on his 50th appearance for the club. GOAL! QPR 3-0 Reading (Amos 37). Yep. Luke Amos makes it two in three minutes for the Super Hoops, and the Biscuitmen are well and truly broken. GOAL! QPR 2-0 Reading (Dykes 35). A second goal for Lyndon Dykes, and it’s already looking like a fifth defeat in a row for Reading. GOAL! Hibernian 2-1 Livingston (Cadden 32). Hibs regain the lead at Easter Road through Chris Cadden. Meanwhile Dundee United are currently giving as good as they’re getting at a quiet Celtic Park. No goals yet as the hosts look to capitalise on Rangers’ draw at Ross County. The game at Craven Cottage is still on hold as a spectator receives medical assistance. No other significant action elsewhere to report, either. GOAL! Hibernian 1-1 Livingston (Obileye 18). Hibs keeper Matt Macey flaps, and Ayo Obileye grabs the opportunity to equalise with both hands. There’s been a medical emergency in the stand behind one of the goals at Craven Cottage. The referee has taken the teams off. Here’s hoping whoever is struggling right now pulls through. GOAL! Bolton 1-0 Sunderland (Charles 19). Another showdown between two giants slumming it in League One. Dion Charles gets the opener in this one. GOAL! Preston 0-1 Bristol City (Martin 12). City have lost four of their last six. Chris Martin does his bit to arrest that slide. GOAL! Hull City 2-0 Swansea (Lewis-Potter 17). Some start for the new boss Shota Arveladze, Keane Lewis-Potter doubling the home side’s lead. GOAL! Barnsley 0-1 Bournemouth (Billing 12). Bournemouth have lost three of their last five matches, so will be glad to run into bottom club Barnsley. Philip Billing with the early breakthrough. GOAL! QPR 1-0 Reading (Dykes 13). Downwardly mobile Reading are in trouble already, thanks to a Lyndon Dykes header. GOAL! Sheffield Wednesday 1-0 Ipswich (Johnson 6). A big game between two struggling giants in League One. Sheffield Wednesday maintain their record of scoring at Hillsborough in every game this season. Marvin Johnson with a crisp volley. GOAL! Hibernian 1-0 Livingston (Mitchell 6). Demetri Mitchell gives the Hibees a fast start, as they look to leapfrog Motherwell into fourth place in the Scottish Premiership. GOAL! Fulham 1-0 Blackpool (Mitrovic 6). No surprise here. Fulham score their 74th goal of their Championship campaign. Blackpool at sixes and sevens? GOAL! Hull City 1-0 Swansea City (Eaves 5). The perfect start for new Hull boss Shota Arveladze, courtesy of Tom Eaves. No super-early goals in any of our big games ... or indeed anywhere else. You’re welcome. Pulitzer, please! It’s 3pm! Kick off! Some more pre-match reading, courtesy of our unofficial Dundee United correspondent Simon McMahon. “United go to Glasgow today on a red-hot streak of two straight wins, following last Saturday’s extra-time defeat of Kilmarnock in the Scottish Cup, and a last-minute winner against Ross County in midweek bringing a first league win in, well, ages. Looking at the league table, fourth place is still very much up for grabs, but then so is fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth. I’d happily take a defeat today if it meant a win at Dens on Tuesday.” Some pre-match reading to whet the appetite. The eagle eyed will have noticed a truncated card in Scotland today... and yes indeed, a couple of Scottish Premiership games have been postponed. Storm Malik has done for the games between Aberdeen and St Johnstone, and Dundee and St Mirren. The struggling Staggies snatch a point at the death! They edge a little closer to ninth-placed Livingston, and a little further away from 11th-placed Dundee. Meanwhile at the top, Rangers drop crucial points in their pursuit of Two In A Row. They’re five clear of Celtic, who will close the gap to two if they see off Dundee United in the next couple of hours ... and the Old Firm derby comes up later in the week! This could turn out to be a pivotal few days in the title race. GOAL! Ross County 3-3 Rangers (Wright 90+5). No they can’t! County force a corner. Rangers can’t clear it. Some pinball in the box. Allan McGregor should claim a ball that bobbles towards him, but inexplicably allow it to bounce off his chest, teeing up Matthew Wright, who slams home from a couple of yards! Scrub that. Seven added minutes. Can Rangers hold out and open up a seven-point lead over Celtic at the top? Ross County keeper Ashley Maynard-Brewer has taken one full in the face. An accidental collision with one of his own defenders, or perhaps Fashion Sakala, who was closing in on goal. Looks like a broken nose. You wouldn’t blame him for calling it a day, but he’s determined to continue. He takes some patching up, though. As a result, there will be six added minutes at Victoria Park. There is one Scottish Premiership game underway already. Rangers have made the trip north to Dingwall, and they’re currently 3-2 up against Ross County with ten minutes to go. Amad Diallo, freshly arrived on loan from Manchester United, needed just five minutes to score his first goal for the Light Blues, today playing in purple. Jordan White and Regan Charles-Cook capitalised on a couple of mistakes to put the Staggies 2-1 up at the break, but James Tavernier and Connor Goldson have tipped the balance back in favour of Rangers, who are pushing for a surely decisive fourth. It’s tipping down in the Highlands, by the way. Welcome to today’s low-fat, semi-skimmed, high-fibre edition of Clockwatch. No Premier League this weekend, but we do have some top-drawer Scottish Premiership action as well as an extensive Championship card that features free-scoring Fulham. Look here! Celtic v Dundee United Hearts v Motherwell Hibs v Livingston ... and here! Barnsley v Bournemouth Fulham v Blackpool Hull v Swansea Luton v Blackburn Middlesbrough v Coventry Millwall v WBA Preston v Bristol City QPR v Reading It all kicks off at 3pm. Other matches, and the stories they throw up, are available, and may well be mentioned in dispatches. It’s on!Boris Johnson will visit Ukraine and hold crisis talks with Vladimir Putin next week amid fears of a Russian invasion. The British prime minister is determined to “accelerate diplomatic efforts” and “ramp up deterrence to avoid bloodshed” in the coming days, according to government sources. The planned trip to the region comes amid rising tensions between Ukraine and Russia, which is continuing to build up its forces on its neighbour’s border. However, it will not go unnoticed that the prime minister’s overseas visit comes at a time of rising tensions on the domestic front, with a redacted version of the long-awaited Sue Gray report expected to be published imminently. Labour has accused the prime minister of “playing catch up with other world leaders” on deterring Russian aggression against Ukraine. The shadow defence secretary, John Healey, said the government was “paralysed by a mess of its own making” domestically as Johnson awaits the report. Tobias Ellwood, the chair of the Commons defence select committee, on Saturday said the tensions in Ukraine were “our Cuban missile crisis moment and we must not blink”. He told Sky News: “From a Russian perspective, there’s never been a better time to invade Ukraine – something Putin has been wanting to do for a long time. “He’s enjoying this international attention. Every time a leader puts their hand up and says ‘I’m going to go to Moscow’, of course he’s going to say yes. “He’s spinning this out. I doubt whether an invasion will take place before the Beijing Olympics, China would have made sure of that.” A Downing Street spokesperson said: “The prime minister is determined to accelerate diplomatic efforts and ramp up deterrence to avoid bloodshed in Europe. “He will reiterate the need for Russia to step back and engage diplomatically when he speaks to president Putin this week.” It comes after Johnson asked defence and security chiefs to consider further defensive military options in Europe during a high-level intelligence briefing on the situation last week. He will consider a range of options to deter Russian aggression in the region, including fresh deployments and bolstering Nato’s defences after a Ministry of Defence meeting this weekend. Meanwhile, the Foreign Office is expected to announce tougher sanctions on Monday, meaning the UK can target Russia’s strategic and financial interests – despite reported US worries over the extent of “dirty” Russian money in London. American diplomats have raised concerns that any sanctions imposed on Russia over the potential conflict would prove to be ineffective due to the sheer amount of Russian wealth in the capital, also referred to as “Londongrad”.Thank you very much for joining me. Nick Ames will provide us with his review of the day very soon. That is a fully deserved result. Cameroon were on top from start to finish pretty much and Gambia could not offer any answers in response to the questions asked. It is good news for the hosts as they reach the semi-finals. 90 mins: Three minutes added on. 89 mins: The referee and fourth officials are having a chat about something or other but then play resumes. No idea what’s going on there. 87 mins: Ngamaleu is heading off, with the help of Musa Barrow who wants him to hobble a bit quicker. Cameroon should finish things off as Onana pings a pinpoint pass over the top for N’jie but his attempted lob is saved and then Aboubakar sends the follow-up wide. 85 mins: Gambia get a corner on the left but it is easily headed clear by Castelletto. 83 mins: Time for Gambia to throw the kitchen sink at this one. 81 mins: Cameroon are slowing things down to a snail’s pace. In the end the ball is hoofed out so a player can get treatment. Spurs legend Clinton N’jie and Pierre Kunde come on for Cameroon. 79 mins: Both teams have been lining up subs for the last five minutes but the ball has not gone out! These lads need their international caps. 77 mins: Hongla drives at the Gambia defence and decides to go have a go from distance but his effort is a weak one that the goalkeeper holds with ease. 75 mins: Ngamaleu takes down the ball on the left, cuts inside and tries a shot but it dribbles into the goalkeeper’s arms. 73 mins: Aboubakar tries to curl the ball into the bottom corner from the edge of the box but his effort drifts just wide. 71 mins: Colley sends a dangerous cross into the box for Gambia which is headed behind for a corner. At least it is a vague sign of content. The corner is headed clear. 69 mins: Onana catches a Modou Barrow cross and gets a warm round of applause from the crowd, as a nice reminder that he is involved. He is yet to make a save. 67 mins: There is so much dust coming off the pitch whenever the ball or a player moves. Why is there so much dust on the pitch? 65 mins: A rare Gambia attack earns a throw need deep in Cameroon territory but they quickly lose the ball and the hosts are on the front foot once more. I’m not sure Gambia know how to get back into this match. 63 mins: Rather than sitting off now the job is pretty much done, Cameroon want more to entertain the crowd. 61 mins: A pass is sent out to the left wing but it takes a horrific bobble and bounces out for a throw. Just a little reminder of how bad this pitch it. I can’t wait for it to host the final next week. 59 mins: Gambia made a triple substitution just before the second Cameroon goal, which might have left their defence confused and out of place. I am not sure they can get back into this. I think that might be Game, Set and Match as Toko Ekambi sneaks in at the back post to tap home a sublime low cross from the left. 54 mins: An attempted through ball hits the referee on the back which makes it a better pass as it allows Aboubakar through on goal but the official has to call it back due to his intervention. Moments later Fai slips behind the defence to reach a pass but he is off balance as he pings a shot high and wide from six yards while on the run. I think we can blame the pitch for that one. 52 mins: Do Gambia have a response? They have barely left their half since the opening couple of minutes so will need to change things to get back into this match, I suspect. The stadium erupts as Toko Ekambi leaps like a salmon to connect with a fine Fai cross and send the ball into the top corner. 49 mins: Ngadeu goes into the book for a late challenge on Touray near the halfway line. He needs to be careful now. 47 mins: Onana collects a trickling cross, so at least he has now had something to do. Here we go again! The players are coming back out. Peter Oh offers: “The Gambian players are up against it, but with Bobb and Marreh in the midfield I’m pretty sure that every little thing gonna be alright!” For those who are not aware: that is a pun. Cameroon are absolutely on top here but have only tested the goalkeeper once thanks to the competence of the Gambia defence. 45 mins: One minute added on. 44 mins: Ngamaleu sends in another cross which is very close to the goalkeeper but it goes just over his outstretched hand and away from danger. 42 mins: Fai lifts a cross into the box but it is headed up and out. 40 mins: There are no shortage of crosses going into the box for Aboubakar to attack but the latest lacks accuracy and drifts out for a goal-kick. Goalkeeper Gueye goes into the book for time-wasting, which is less than ideal after 40 minutes. I suspect the referee is reacting to the crowd. 38 mins: Gambia earn a foul and take an absolute age to take it, much to the referee’s chagrin who tells them to hurry up. There could be a lot of time-wasting if this stats goalless. 36 mins: It is all Cameroon now and they should be ahead after a beautiful cross from the right is met powerfully by Aboubakar who heads the ball straight at the chest of Gueye from six yards out. 34 mins: Ngamaleu gets down the right flank and is absolutely cleaned out Jagne near the byline, which is a rash decision from the Gambia defender, who is rightly booked. The subsequent free-kick makes its way to the back post and ends up with Castelletto who makes the obvious choice to perform an overhead kick, which is blocked by Gomez. 32 mins: Aboubakar drifts away from his marker Gomez, who is ball-watching, to head a diagonal ball into the box towards goal but the effort slips just wide. 30 mins: The crowd think it’s gone in! Fai receives a pass 25 yards from goal and lets fly with a thunderous strike, it ripples the outside of the net, much to the crowd’s delight, but it is certainly not a goal. 28 mins: Cameroon have enjoyed 68% in the game and I would not argue against those stats. It is no surprise considering the gulf in class between the two on paper. 26 mins: The game does seem to be opening up and the pace quickening, which is good news for this fixture as a spectacle as the opening stages were a little dull. Tolo darts into the area from the left and gets enough space to fire off a shot but it is a weak one that the goalkeeper gobbles up. 24 mins: Aboubakar takes a couple of good touches, including a fine 180 degree turn to get away from a defender on the byline to allow him a free run into the box. He then pulls the ball back to Toko Ekambi whose shot is blocked. 22 mins: Sonko pulls back Aboubakar near the halfway line and goes into the book for his cynical troubles. 20 mins: The Cameroon buildup play is pretty slow which can be explained by the fact Gambia are currently operating with something akin to a back eight when the hosts are in possession. 18 mins: Janko goes down under a challenge and the referee does nothing. The Gambia man complains and the official awards a free-kick. 16 mins: Gambia are camped inside their own half, looking to turn Cameroon around with long balls but they just can’t get rid at the moment. 14 mins: Cameroon have now found their feet and are pushing Gambia back as they look to get on top. They are trying to shift the ball quickly but the pitch does not help with such a plan. Aboubakar decides to do a ludicrous flick in an attempt to convert Ngamaleu’s dangerous cross but he miscues his effort and it loops wide, as the offside flag goes up. 12 mins: Toko Ekambi sends in a dangerous cross from the right for Aboubakar to attack but it is flicked behind for a corner. 10 mins: The pitch is pretty underwhelming, as are Cameroon who are operating at a pretty slow tempo. Surely this atmosphere could inspire something better than this current performance. 8 mins: Bevan Jones emails: “I note that the BBC have also saying the same but please - the country is called ‘The Gambia’ not Gambia. The official name is the Republic of the Gambia.” It is a good point and the Guardian style guide states you are correct. I was following the rules of this Nick Ames article which does not add the The. I anticipate an email from the permanently alert to these matters Philip Cornwall to correct me. 6 mins: Cameroon move the ball quickly across the pitch but Fai fails to control the ball on the right touchline and it drifts out of play. 4 mins: Gambia are trying to put some early pressure on the Cameroon defence who have had their issues in the tournament thus far. The hosts have looked quite disorganised in defence, so they can be got at. 2 mins: The main thing to note in the opening couple of minutes is the volume in the stands. It should make it a great occasion. Peep! Peep! Peep! Here we go! We will have a minute’s silence prior to kick-off in memory of the eight people who died in Yaoundé. I’ve had a couple of glimpses of the pitch and it looks a little underwhelming but the white lines are very neatly painted, so there is that. The players are out on the pitch for some hearty renditions of the national anthems in front of a backdrop of massive flags. It is so loud inside the ground that Geremi cannot hear the questions he is being asked. A bit of insight from Nick Ames who is inside the stadium. They’ve gone to Geremi pitchside. BBC Breakfast had Eric Djemba-Djemba on this morning. If they can find Roger Milla, then I will be a very happy man. BBC have a nice chat with Salford City’s Ibou Touray, who is very Liverpudlian, and Ebou Adams. Me and the BBC have the same Cameroon team, so it must be right. Forest Green’s Ebou Adams is back on the bench for Gambia. He has attracted interest from Blackpool this month. Would be a fine achievement to reach an Afcon semi-final at Afcon. The lovely Nick Ames has written this on Gambia. Gambia: Gaye, Bobb, Gomez, O Colley, Janko, Jagne, Badamosi, Marreh, Touray, Sonko, Barrow Cameroon: Onana, Castelletto, Ngadeu, Tolo, Fai, Hongla, Zambo Anguissa, Oum Gouet, Ngamaleu, Toko Ekambi, Aboubakar (There are a couple of different versions of the Cameroon team out there but this is the one of the official CAF website). Here is Jonathan Wilson and Nick Ames on the tragedy in Cameroon. Naturally, the events at the Olembe Stadium which saw eight people die have overshadowed Cameroon’s hopes of winning the Africa Cup of Nations, but they are back on the pitch looking for a last-four place at the expense of Gambia. Cameroon have not looked particularly dominant on their way to this stage of the tournament but now they are here they will feel confident of going all the way with the backing of their fans. Even against a 10-man Comoros side with a left-back in net they could only muster a 2-1 victory, so will be desperate to do better this time around. Gambia are ranked 150th in the world, the lowest of any side in the tournament, and are playing in their first Afcon but they are providing plenty of entertainment on their run to this stage, winning three matches 1-0. They have conceded just once in their four match thus far, too, proving how difficult they are to beat. There will be plenty of intrigue when it comes to the pitch, which is poor and the reason behind the fact the stadium has had two matches taken away in the hope it will be in a fit state to host the final next Sunday. Let’s hope for a fine match. Kick-off: 4pm GMT.Gary Shteyngart, 49, is the author of six books, including a memoir, Little Failure, and the satirical dystopia Super Sad True Love Story, which won the Bollinger Everyman Wodehouse prize for comic fiction. His latest novel, Our Country Friends, opens in March 2020 and follows a group of middle-aged friends sheltering from Covid at a country house in upstate New York, where the author himself spent the early part of the pandemic. Shteyngart, who was born in Leningrad and emigrated to the US in 1979, spoke to me from New York City, where he teaches creative writing at Columbia University. You’ve had to find a new publisher in the UK for this book. In America, it seems to have done very well but my usual British publisher, Hamish Hamilton, didn’t want it: they said it was too pandemicky. Even my friends were like: “Who’s gonna read this when it’s published? Covid will be a distant memory.” But when I started writing in late March, early April 2020, I had a feeling that Covid wouldn’t be over in a year as was predicted. I wrote the novel in six or seven months, the fastest I ever wrote. I just think we’re entering a time of permanent crisis. We’re going to be constantly writing about this stuff. Not just pandemic-ravaged New York or whatever; it’s going to be flooded New York, flooded London, burnt-down Sydney and burnt-down Los Angeles. The pandemic is the amuse-bouche to the endless meal of crap we’re going to be getting without any respite. I’m really not selling this book, am I? Now Allen &amp; Unwin’s going to dump me too. It’s a very funny novel. I do funny, I don’t do not funny, but actually to me this is probably the least funny book I’ve ever written. I write about tragic things: the collapse of the Soviet Union, now the collapse of America. If you think of an intercontinental ballistic missile, like the sort we and Russia may soon launch at each other, the missile is the humour, but the nuclear payload is the tragedy, right? The humour’s just a way to get that payload across to a reader who doesn’t want to sit down with 330 pages of tragedy. But by the end of my books there usually is some kind of tragedy, as there is in this one. The humour is my way of saying: “Just come along for the ride, I’m not gonna hurt you…” Then blam! You say you wrote fast, but it’s less hectic than your other novels. This was the sloooowest period of our lives, especially around the pandemic’s first iteration, as they’d call it in Silicon Valley. Things were super, super slow. There was so much time and endless silence that I could almost hear the turtles crossing the road, scraping across the gravel. But if you were a writer in a safe place, it was also an opportunity to slow the pace of your thinking, the pace of your sentences and paragraphs, which for this book was very helpful. And here’s the other thing: I was able to be more functional because there weren’t these evenings with other writers where you consume five drinks at a clip and then wake up in the morning, you know, urgh, now I’ve gotta write my three pages. I was like, I’m gonna write six pages, I’m completely sober! So that was really super-helpful to the process. The pandemic prompts the novel’s migrant cast to reflect on what their adopted country has become. A lot of the characters are Asian-American and one of their concerns – which is a concern of people in America and maybe in the UK as well – is that their parents gave up their culture and moved here because they thought they might find a sense of safety. Some of that safety feels very much like a mirage now. My wife is Korean-American and we’re having this conversation about, you know, if Trump wins in 2024, where do we go? She says maybe we can move to Seoul – she can probably reclaim her citizenship – and our son is already taking Korean lessons. You know, our parents brought us here because they wanted us to have a better chance and now we’re thinking of where to escape. The rightwing establishments talking about “China flu” and “the China virus” aren’t gonna tell that my wife’s Korean, not Chinese, it’s all the same to them. The book reflects that danger we felt; it’s funny, yeah, but under the surface are real fears. What were you reading while you wrote? I reread all my Chekhov, not just the plays but the short stories, in Russian and in English. There’s a very good new translation, Fifty-Two Stories, by Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky. I had a great time rereading him, because in all Chekhov’s books, people are in the countryside turning a certain age talking about their regrets, which was perfect for this novel. I also watched the Japanese reality show Terrace House, which is highly recommended. Everyone just sits around, makes soba noodles and has these low-stakes conversations that actually aren’t really low stakes. There’s 500 episodes and we’d watch three or four a night. What books do you assign your writing students? I’m about to start teaching a course about comic fiction, so I’ve been rereading a lot of very contemporary humorous fiction. Andrew Sean Greer’s Less is in there, so is Raven Leilani and Fleishman Is in Trouble. Going back further we have Nabokov, Philip Roth and Zadie Smith’s White Teeth, which is a very funny novel still and holds up well I think. I started writing around the same time as Zadie and we’ve known each other since about that time. It’s interesting to read it now because that book so much ushered in the idea of multicultural fiction, at least in the UK. There’s almost a kind of optimism about this new kind of society being born and now it’s like, oh shit, it didn’t work out the way we expected it to work out. To me, it’s a really strong story about these two families and the children they have, their origins and the after-effects of colonialism and how British society fails and sometimes works. • Our Country Friends by Gary Shteyngart is published by Allen &amp; Unwin (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply“Just before the last dragon, I catch my heel edge and suddenly I’m skidding, losing speed, trying to keep it together. Then I hear Belle Brockhoff, right behind me, scream and crash and I’m like: ‘Oh shit.’ And I’m telling myself: ‘Stay on your feet, you can’t crash. You’re not allowed to do that.’” Charlotte Bankes’s mind is tumbling back in time, to the scene of her greatest victory, the 2021 world snowboard cross championships in Sweden. She has watched it back only a couple of times – it’s not a perfect race, which makes her wince – but she retains total recall. As she talks through the final, move by move, moment by moment, every zig and jump and zag, it is as if she is watching on ultra HD. The race lasts just under a minute and a half. But, listening to Bankes, each second almost becomes a short story in itself. And, when put together, they give a compelling insight into Team GB’s best shot at gold at the Bejing Winter Olympics, which start on Friday. “What was I thinking about on the start line at the worlds? I’m going all in. Whatever happens I’m going for the win. I’ve got Michela Moioli, [the 2018 Olympic gold medallist] and Eva Samkova [the 2020 world champion] and Belle, the best girls basically, with me. But once I put my board on and I’m in that start gate, the pressure has gone and I’m really calm and then PULL! and we’re under way …” Few sports at the Winter Olympics are more exciting or chaotic than snowboard cross. The idea is simple enough. Four competitors, a mountain, whoever gets down first wins. But jeopardy lurks on every sharp turn and steep bank. And crashes and calamities are a fact of life. Bankes, though, insists she feels comfortable amid the chaos, trusting her ability to make the right decision even when one competitor is weaving inside her, another is barking at her shoulder, and a ramp is fast approaching. Having competed internationally since she was 15, she says that little fazes her – even, as at the 2021 world championships, if she makes a slow start. “Early on in that world championship race, we have a choice: stay on the ground or go into the air for a double. I am losing speed, so I go for the double. I know I am slow but my aim is to generate speed for further down the mountain. It is tough when everyone is in front of you. But once I get past the first three features I am thinking: ‘Right, now my race starts …’” While Bankes’s name is unfamiliar to most British audiences she has competed in two previous Olympics – but in the red, white and blue of France, not Team GB. She was born in Hemel Hempstead but her parents moved from the UK to L’Argentière-la-Bessée in the French Alps when she was four. It meant that competing for Les Bleus, including coming 17th at the Sochi Games in 2014 and seventh at Pyeongchang in 2018, seemed the natural thing to do. Behind the scenes, though, she was increasingly struggling. A long-term hip problem, sustained in 2011, was blighting her performances and her enjoyment of the sport. At one point she contemplated retirement, frustrated at both her injuries and a perceived lack of support from the French system. So when Team GB offered her the chance to transfer four years ago, she seized it. It has taken some time for her body to recover – she repeatedly stresses how helpful GB Snowsport has been – but a silver medal at the 2020 world championships, followed by gold in Sweden a year later, proved she was on the right track. “Just before halfway in the world championships, I realise I’m on the inside of Eva, which is on the toe side on the next turn, and I don’t really want to be there. So I make a split-second decision and change my line to go over her board and on to the outside. Without that, I would have had too tight a turn and I wouldn’t have been able to properly come out with speed. Now, though, I can slingshot off the bank and go from third into first …” Her victory in Sweden made her the first British woman to claim a world title in a winter sport in 85 years and she began this calendar year with back-to-back World Cup wins in Krasnoyarsk, in Russia, to climb to the top of the snowboard cross standings. To prepare for Beijing she spends her mornings on the slopes and her afternoons in the gym, beefing up her legs for the battles ahead. There is every chance, she concedes, that victory could come down to hundredths of a second. “When you are behind in a race, like I was in Sweden, you’re looking at everything. But now I’m in the lead, I have this extreme tunnel vision. I’m just looking ahead, trying to choose the fastest lines. But it’s not easy as the others are trying to draft off me. The other thing I’m doing is to cut the inside lines on the entry to all the banks as we hit the bottom section. Now I just need to put the legs back on, and give it everything. But they are starting to hurt, and then I hit the dragon …” Bankes, 26, has been to China before and raced in a test event in November, where she was second to Samkova. She did not find the course as spectacular as those at Sochi or Pyeongchang, although she expects it to be changed for the Olympics. But whatever she faces in Beijing, there is a quiet sense that she will be ready. “After Belle’s crash I know I’ve lost quite a lot of speed. So I am trying to push and generate as much power out of every feature just to stay in front, because I know they are hunting me. Then I start to hear them. I can’t see anything, but I hear them getting louder. And then I hit the back of the roller and I’m just like: ‘Oh no,’ and I’m losing more speed and I don’t believe I am going to manage to stay in front. But the line comes just in time.” Her margin of victory over Moioli at last year’s world championships? Just 0.08sec. She admits it was a fantastic race, but when she is asked about her prospects of gold in Beijing – and the suggestions that Bankes is the British banker – it is like a Team GB media manager has given her an autocue to read. Suddenly she becomes vague, talking only about the unique pressures and challenges of an Olympics and her hopes to do well. Yet when asked if she is looking forward to what lies ahead, the fire returns to her eyes. “Nobody never ever knows what’s going to happen in a board cross race. That’s what makes it so so fun.”On the coastline around Kaikōura, the rocks seem to be moving. Jutting from the sea, shimmering in the summer heat, their grey planes begin to shift and ripple. Step closer and you recognise them, first by their sound: a distant honking, barking, yelping. Then, by their smell: thick and potent, a mixture of kelp and excrement. Seals, hundreds of them, possibly thousands, are coming ashore for pupping. They roll in constant, joyful helixes in the rock pools, emerge from the sea to glisten like puddles of oil, or bask unmoving in the sun like comatose adolescents recovering from a hangover. Once they would have been even thicker on these shorelines. Before humans came to New Zealand, millions of fur seals populated the coasts. They were hunted almost to extinction, but in the century since the sealing industry collapsed, they have become a protected species and started to flourish, recovering to more than 200,000. That comeback has not been without complications. As seal numbers have grown, their colonies increasingly expand into areas of human habitation – bringing them into increasing, troublesome, occasionally violent contact with people. Victory and new challenges Fur seals are not to be trifled with. While they look ungainly out of the water, they can move on land at a brisk 20km/h – an alarming speed for up to 180kg of solid muscle and blubber. They can be aggressive and will bite when provoked. When one group of researchers required DNA specimens, for example, they had enormous trouble getting close enough to jab the creatures’ blubber for a sample. The scientists finally landed on a strategy – borrowing riot shields from the local police station. They would take a boat to the rocks, disembark with riot shields up, attempt to keep balance on slick, seaweed-covered rocks and spend as short a time as possible poking increasingly enraged seals as they lunged. “Those were pretty interesting days for collecting,” Dr Adrian Paterson says. An associate professor at Lincoln University studying New Zealand’s ecological evolution, Paterson and his colleagues used genome sequencing from those samples to reverse-calculate the size of New Zealand’s historic seal populations. They landed on the figure of about 3 million. “One of the things that motivated our research was just saying, ‘Well, how many seals were there in the past? How much bigger could the population get? What can be sustained effectively by the seas around us?’ And basically, what we found was that the population could get huge – hugely larger and much more widespread.” A huge and growing population of seals would be both an enormous conservation victory and a thorny question for New Zealand’s human populations, who live in sometimes uneasy proximity to them. “That’s a big question for society for the next couple of decades, because you’ll have your million-dollar property by the sea, and if a smelly fur seal colony turns up that’s not going to be good for your property value,” Paterson says. “As tensions rise in the future with more and more human-seal contact, it’ll be interesting to see how that pans out.” A ‘heartbreaking’ attack At times those tensions can erupt into shocking violence. Harming a seal is a criminal offence in New Zealand, punishable by up to two years in prison or a fine of up to $250,000 – but the years have been marked by occasional ugly incidents of seals being targeted for sport or in disturbing killing sprees. Last month Department of Conservation (DoC) rangers found 19 seals dead at this lookout – at least nine of which they determined had recently been shot. In 2010 two men who worked on a salmon farm were charged with clubbing 23 seals to death. The men, who were found guilty, argued the seals were pests that had depleted the fishing stocks. In 2005, former All Black Andrew Hore and two other men returned from a fishing trip and shot and killed at least one seal on the coast. “It was extremely distressing – actually heartbreaking,” says Dr Jody Weir, of the seals killed last month. A senior marine biodiversity ranger based in Kaikōura, she was one of those who had to deal with the incident, and her voice is emotional as she looks out over the colony. “It’s not the norm, however – 99% of people have a great respect for this ecosystem and the amazing animals that play a part. There are a few people that have misguided ideas.” There’s a misconception among fishers, Weir and Paterson say, that seals are consuming the fish that people want to catch. In fact most of their diet is lanternfish and octopus. But even their presence – smelly, territorial, unsafe to approach – can raise some people’s hackles. “They are dangerous animals, you don’t want them to bite you,” Paterson says, “You’ve got to be careful around them and that just adds to the tensions.” The pup count This month, working along the Kaikōura coastline, Weir is in the middle of a pup count – the first since the 2016 Kaikōura earthquakes radically reshaped the shoreline and displaced some of the fur seal colonies. She walks the shoreline armed with binoculars and a pair of clickers, counting how many new pups are being born in the colony. “You want your movements to be slow, but not sneaky,” she says, edging down a hillside to get a better look at a collection of pups playing in a rock pool. A specialist in animal behaviour, Weir says conservation involves understanding both wildlife and human activity – “because, of course, we’re animals as well” – and attempting to ease friction between them. “With the fur seal colony changing and growing … this isn’t something that’s going to go away. Fur seals are here now, thank goodness, they’re part of the system. So how do we learn to grow alongside them to minimise those kinds of conflict?” She points to a new stretch of fencing, installed to stop seals getting stuck on the highway. They were sometimes hit by cars – a disaster for both the seal and any bumper hitting a 300 pound animal at speed. So far the fence seems to have worked: a small step to ease the relationship between the marine mammals and their bipedal neighbours. Weir says she often thinks about the hundreds of southern right whales that used to have their calves in a bay north of Kaikōura township. “There’s records in the town hall, notes about people complaining that they were too loud, that they were trumpeting, the racket of these whales,” she says. As the whaling industry arrived, they were slaughtered – and even when industry declined and the whales were protected, for decades they never returned to the bay. “It used to be that they were the pests, that they were the ones that were annoying,” she says. “If we look at that on a bigger scale and think: right now, people are grumbling about fur seals – some people, a small minority of people. But if we pan out and realise the damage that people can do, but also the treasure that is the wildlife that we have here? It helps to turn that around.”Next month, it will be 20 years since the Pop Idol final. Watched by 15 million viewers, Will Young triumphed over Gareth Gates with 53.1% of a record 8.7 million votes. It wasn’t just the start of things for Young and Gates, it marked the birth of a cultural phenomenon: the television talent show. In 2004, one of the Pop Idol judges, Simon Cowell, launched The X Factor in the UK, a primetime weekend TV show to discover new singing talent. Right now, The X Factor is “resting”, believed permanently shelved, which counts as a mercy killing. After 15 series, it was a shadow of its former self: a formulaic karaoke-panto of nosediving ratings, hammy showboating, and forgettable contestants. The last UK winner – Dalton Harris in 2018 – stepped out into a swamp of indifference. Nor is Cowell the all-powerful starmaker, the primetime Barnum, he used to be: his recent ITV venture, Walk the Line, was axed after one series due to poor viewing figures. How different from when The X Factor was an unstoppable ratings juggernaut, syndicating to 80 countries, spawning an international franchise, including a US version. The sociocultural impact went yet further, changing the shape, ethos, the very DNA, of mainstream culture – music industry practice; television programming – and rezoning the aspirations of starstruck youth, making them want to be pop stars instead of teachers, nurses or shop assistants, in a way many thought to be irresponsible. In a broader sense, did talent show culture have a small but significant effect on how ordinary people thought, reacted, perhaps even voted for real? Is this part of the legacy of this form of television: as much as it entertained, did it also make us more stupid? At the start of the 21st century, talent shows already differed from each other. Pop Idol and, later that year, Popstars: The Rivals, which formed Girls Aloud, were different to Popstars (2001), which put together Hear’Say and was billed as a documentary series about the making of a pop group. None of them bore much resemblance to talent shows of the past, such as New Faces or, earlier, Opportunity Knocks. The X Factor turned out to be a different beast again: at once sentimental and cynical. It was lucky to emerge at a time when the music industry was wrongfooted by streaming and illegal file-sharing, and, just as crucially, when social media was on the rise. Cowell, with other judges Louis Walsh and Sharon Osbourne, positioned himself as a harsh-but-fair panto villain, bestowing lavish praise and acid putdowns. A music business executive, Cowell regarded himself as a talent-spotter, which raised eyebrows in music circles where he was known for dealing with acts such as Sinitta, Robson &amp; Jerome, and the Teletubbies. But Cowell didn’t care about “cool”. A defiant anti-snob, his affinity was with unfashionable but vast markets; his aim was to make money. The X Factor made huge global stars of the likes of One Direction, Leona Lewis and Little Mix, leading to swathes of the music industry becoming symbiotically linked with, and at times overly subservient to, talent show culture. The cultural pushback was immense. In 2009, in a move which seemed to be overwrought and a little spiteful, a song by Rage Against The Machine was pitted against The X Factor winner Joe McElderry’s version of Miley Cyrus’s The Climb, beating it to the Christmas No 1 spot. Many contestants, including the first winner in 2004, Steve Brookstein, have complained about being badly treated. Others have spoken of being left with mental health issues. Elsewhere, criticism focused variously on the product – lame karaoke, suffocating everything else in the music industry, sucking up valuable resources – and also the effect on youth. In 2016, the then-Conservative education secretary, Nicky Morgan, worried: “[They] will look at The X Factor winners, or they will look at reality TV shows, and they will think you can have instant success, fame, money, overnight”. Singer-songwriter Annie Lennox said: “You wouldn’t find a Joni Mitchell on X Factor … X Factor is a specific thing for people that want to go through that process – it’s a factory, you know, and it’s owned and stitched up by puppet masters.” In their long poem, Brand New Ancients, Kae Tempest wrote scathingly of Cowell as “the permatanned god of our age”, asking “Why is this interesting? Why are we watching?” Was there a strain of dark populism in shows like The X Factor, a coarsening of culture, and of public discourse? Certainly, television was changed for ever. Rival shows included Fame Academy (following Pop Idol), The Voice, which launched its spinning chairs in the UK in 2012, all the way to last year’s frankly risible I Can See Your Voice on BBC One. Another Cowell vehicle, the variety-based Britain’s Got Talent, launched singer Susan Boyle and dance troupe Diversity – who supplied the most exciting talent show moment of recent years with the controversial on-stage kneel in homage to Black Lives Matter in 2020. Elsewhere, there are celebrity-driven interactive-voting shows (Strictly Come Dancing; I’m A Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here!). And of course, the other gigantic phenomenon: reality television. Pop Idol and The X Factor were contemporaneous with Big Brother, and you can see The X Factor’s fingerprints all over shows such as The Only Way Is Essex. That sense of, one way or another, it was time for ordinary people to be stars. In this way, The X Factor grasped a huge emerging truth: that significant numbers of people were tired of rarefied celebrity; leastways, they were weary of being excluded from it. They didn’t want to look up to people any more, they wanted to look across. If it couldn’t be them, they wanted someone who looked, spoke and lived like them. In this way, class was hugely important to talent shows like The X Factor, which, significantly, focused on singing – no need to afford an instrument, or the lessons to learn one. Before long, there were two main types of contestant: those who were already grubbing about trying to make it in music, and those who came out of nowhere. Which suited Cowell and the television executives: members of the public are cheaper than entertainers, and more mouldable. What emerged was a personality-first culture, driven less by ability than by the concepts of the “journey” and “likeability”. Who had the most heart-rending upbringing? Who had the best “dead-gran” story? The result was soapy, farcical, but also, at times, powerful and moving: these were real people, after all. More recently, the dating show Love Island could be viewed as the endgame of the formula: contestants getting by on personality/likeability and no discernible talent other than looking good in a swimsuit. As ever, the voting public, the Roman emperors of the remote control, give the thumbs up or down. Considering such influence, why did The X Factor run aground? It would appear to be a combination of changing trends (mainstream music has become too hardcore for mainstream television), a flogged-to-death format, the growth of influencer culture and the likes of Kim Kardashian, and the rise of TikTok, where people can generate millions using only camera phones. What did it all mean in the end? In positive terms: some talented artists, a Saturday night giggle, a true sense of democratised culture, a window on to the UK. Negatively: regurgitated culture, flattening of music elsewhere, the lie that everyone is a star. In a wider sense, what has it done to us? Boris Johnson became prime minister, trading on his likability: ruffling his hair, dangling from a zip-wire. Did the cult of likability lumber us with a leader who couldn’t be trusted to obey his own lockdown rules? Maybe, maybe not. One thing’s for sure, the talent show will be back. They’re the knotweed of popular culture: they come, they go, then they return in a different form. You can never quite get rid of them.Schools that ended the requirement for pupils to wear face coverings this month, in line with government guidance, are reinstating it again because of surges in Covid cases. The government rescinded the requirement for masks in secondary school classrooms in England on 20 January and since 27 January they have no longer been compulsory in communal indoor spaces either. But a number of schools that complied with the change in the rules are having to reintroduce them a week later because of outbreaks in infections. In some areas, including Enfield in north London, Calderdale in West Yorkshire, and Hertfordshire, public health teams are now recommending that masks be temporarily reinstated in schools where there are significant outbreaks. At least nine education authorities are also advising that masks remain in place in the schools’ communal areas, despite the change in national guidance. In south-west London, a number of secondaries told parents on Friday that a rise in cases meant some year groups would have to resume wearing face coverings indoors and take daily lateral flow tests. Official figures published by the Department for Education last week show that Covid-related pupil absence in England has jumped by 100,000 in two weeks. A total of 415,000 children – just over 5% of the state school intake – were absent on 20 January, up from 3.9% on 6 January. More than three-quarters of absent pupils had tested positive for Covid. At nearly a quarter of state schools, more than 15% of teachers and leaders were off work. In total, 9% of heads and teachers – 47,000 – were absent on 20 January, up from 44,000 two weeks previously. A similar proportion of teaching assistants and other staff were also out of school. Kevin Courtney, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: “It is very likely that we are going to see increased disruption in schools across the next weeks, with cases rising among both primary and secondary pupils. The government has acted prematurely in removing face masks and has acted tardily in providing ventilation solutions.” The decision on masks in schools comes as new research underlines just how significantly reinfections are fuelling the pandemic. Before Omicron appeared, protection against symptomatic reinfection for previous variants – such as Delta – was above 90%. But this fell to 56% with Omicron, meaning those who have suffered once previously are much more likely to suffer again, according to a study by researchers at the Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar research centre. Scientists have been trying to establish how much of the Omicron wave has been driven by reinfections and on Monday the government’s Covid dashboard will begin publishing data about reinfections in the UK. “We know that reinfections are much more common with Omicron,” said Paul Hunter, professor of health protection at the University of East Anglia. “But there are a number of issues – are they less severe? The balance of evidence is that they are less severe than primary infections.” New research by scientists at the UK Health Security Agency conducted during the Alpha wave showed that reinfected people were much less likely to die, with 61% fewer deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Last week, the React study published its latest report which included data that nearly two thirds of 3,582 people who had been infected with Omicron said they had previously had Covid. The researchers from Imperial College London and Ipsos Mori cautioned that not all of those were necessarily reinfections – some may be people who had received a positive PCR test in its study who were still getting over a recent infection. Deciding what counts as a reinfection is part of the problem with attempts to measure it. When the Covid dashboard starts to include reinfection data, repeat positive cases will only be counted separately as a reinfection if there is a gap of at least 90 days. That means that an unknown proportion of people who were infected during the third wave this winter with Delta, and then subsequently contracted Omicron, will not be included as new infections. “Normally reinfections aren’t a problem, but it’s a becoming a problem because reinfections are occurring rather more frequently with Omicron than before,” Hunter said. “So when we’ve got the reinfection data, is that going to change what we understand about the direction of travel of this epidemic? Will adding reinfections make it look like, actually, it’s not levelled off and dipping again, but increasing still rapidly? “Or will it mean that, actually, a lot of those reinfections occurred at the peak, and they’re dropping even faster than we thought?”In 1990, Nessun Dorma, the aria from Puccini’s Turandot, sung by the Luciano Pavarotti, became the soundtrack to the World Cup in a marriage of high culture and the beautiful game. That union is to be revived for the 2022 World Cup with a new opera celebrating the world’s most popular sport and featuring a chorus of football fans who will undergo a crash course in operatic techniques. Gods of the Game: A Football Opera will be staged at Grange Park Opera in Surrey in October, and broadcast soon afterwards on Sky Arts. Directed by Kwame Kwei-Armah, the artistic director of the Young Vic, it tells the story of two childhood friends who become football stars. In the course of leading their country’s bid to host a World Cup tournament, they encounter bribery and corruption. The pair enlist the support of the “gods of the game” to ensure that righteousness prevails. Phil Porter, the work’s librettist, said: “The opera imagines a world in which the world’s greatest ever footballers – from Pelé and Maradona through to Messi and Ronaldo – exist as gods, watching over the global game. “The characters and events of the story are otherwise fictional, but very much inspired by the drama of international football. Famous on-field shenanigans like Maradona’s ‘hand of God’, Zidane’s extra-time head-butt, and Luis Suárez’s fondness for biting opposing players were rich sources of inspiration. And though our characters are invented, we have inevitably drawn from the many great characters that have played football at the top level – hardmen like Roy Keane and Stefan Effenberg, flawed geniuses from George Best to Maradona, modern icons like Megan Rapinoe and the famously self-assured Zlatan Ibrahimović.” More than 100 football fans will be recruited for the “footy fan chorus”. After intensive training, they will be filmed performing a specially composed chorus at a UK stadium. The footage will be projected as part of the opera. Wasfi Kani, the chief executive of Grange Park Opera, said: “There are various footballing fraternities for whom singing is an essential part of their fandom. We’re switched into those, and we’ll find a particular bunch and then expand.” Kani said she was not a football fan and had “no interest in any sport at all”. But with her second company, Pimlico Opera, she had worked with prisoners on productions of operas and musicals inside jails but open to the public. “Training nonprofessionals is quite doable, human beings are very creative creatures,” she said. Matching a game of football, the opera will last for 90 minutes. It will be sung in English and include snatches of famous arias amid original music by a team of five composers. Kwei-Armah said he was incredibly excited about the project. “Opera. Football. A marriage made in heaven. Both full of passion, drama and charismatic stars.” The 2022 World Cup is due to take place in Qatar from 21 November to 18 December. The tournament has been dogged by controversies, including allegations of secret payments to secure support for Qatar’s bid and human rights abuses suffered by the migrant workforce hired to build stadiums and infrastructure. About 1.5 million tourists are expected to visit the Gulf state during the month-long tournament, although only 130,000 rooms are available in hotels, on cruise ships and at desert “glamp” sites. Opera has increasingly tackled contemporary issues, including Between Worlds, about the events of 9/11, and CO2, about the climate crisis.Progressives frustrated by failures on domestic spending and voting rights should not target Joe Manchin, the veteran Democratic operative James Carville said, because “bitching about a Democratic senator in West Virginia is missing the damn plot”. But Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, Carville said in a wide-ranging interview with Vox, is fair game for a primary challenge. Manchin and Sinema are moderates with outsized power in a Senate split 50-50 and controlled by the vice-president’s casting vote. In December, Manchin sank Joe Biden’s Build Back Better domestic spending package, which among other goals seeks to boost child and healthcare and to combat the climate crisis. In January, Manchin and Sinema refused to back reform to the filibuster, the Senate rule by which most legislation must attract 60 votes, ending hopes of passing voting rights protections in answer to restrictive laws passed by Republicans in state government. Amid fury on the left, Bernie Sanders, the Vermont senator and progressive figurehead, promised to campaign against both his Senate colleagues. Carville is a colourful figure, widely known as the Ragin’ Cajun, who made his name in Bill Clinton’s run to the White House in 1992. He told Vox progressive anger should focus on Sinema. “Understand that Joe Manchin is a Roman Catholic Democrat in a state in which not a single county has voted Democrat [for president] since 2008,” Carville said. “Politics is about choices and he’s up for re-election in 2024. If Manchin runs for re-election, I’ll do everything I can to help him because it’s either going to be Joe Manchin or Marsha Blackburn. It ain’t Joe Manchin or Ed Markey.” Blackburn is a hard-right Republican from Tennessee, Markey a progressive Democrat from Massachusetts. “You got to understand that,” Carville said. “It’s really that damn simple. Now the situation with Sinema in Arizona is … entirely different.” Sinema presents herself as a “blue dog” Democrat, or moderate, in a state which has two Democratic senators for the first time since 1952. But her willingness to stand in the way of Joe Biden’s legislative programme led her own state party to issue a formal censure last week. “I can’t explain it,” Carville said, “and no one else can. The only explanation people have given is that she wants to be the next John McCain.” McCain, the 2008 Republican presidential nominee, won himself a reputation as a political maverick, for example, bringing down Donald Trump’s attempt to scrap the Affordable Care Act in a dramatic vote. Sinema, Carville said, was “not going to win a primary against [the Arizona congressman] Ruben Gallego, I’ll tell you that damn much. And I will personally volunteer to help him fundraise because I think we can keep that seat if he runs.” Echoing other observers, Carville said Manchin’s opposition to Biden measures like an expired child tax credit was “extraordinary”, given how people in his state have struggled under the coronavirus pandemic. But polling in West Virginia shows support for Manchin’s stand against Build Back Better. “I’ll just keep saying it,” Carville said. “If we don’t have Senator Manchin, we’re going to have somebody really, really, really extreme in his seat. “Some of these people bitching about Manchin can’t see political reality straight. Six per cent of adults in this country identify as ‘progressive’. Only 11% or 12% of Democrats identify as progressive. So let’s just meet in the middle and say something like 7% or 8% of the country agrees with the progressive left. “This ain’t a goddamn debate any more. Someone like Manchin is closer to the mainstream than a lot of these people think, and pretending like he isn’t won’t help the cause.” Carville also criticised Democrats for targeting unwinnable elections, such as a 2020 attempt to unseat Mitch McConnell, the Republican Senate leader, in Kentucky. “We’re addicted to hopeless causes,” he said, advocating a focus on state contests to decide who gets to pass laws like those restricting voting rights which Republicans have passed by the dozen. “What about the secretary of state in Wisconsin? Or the attorney general race in Michigan? How much money are Democrats and progressives sending to those candidates? “I’m telling you, if Democrats are worried about voting rights and election integrity, then these are the sorts of races they should support and volunteer for, because this is where the action is and this is where things will be decided. “You know who is paying attention to these races? The Republican party. Last I checked, Republicans raised $33m for secretary of state races around the country. The Democrats had until recently raised $1m. I think it’s now up to $4m. That’s the story, right there. That’s the difference, right there. “Bitching about a Democratic senator in West Virginia is missing the damn plot.”Plans for the weekend. Comments on the weather. Observations about a colleague’s new coat. With offices across England (and, from Monday, in Scotland) opening up to workers, casual conversation starters like this will once again become the norm. But after nearly two years of working predominantly from home, an absence of informal interaction with colleagues has left some employees so out of practice at watercooler chat that they are turning to small talk coaching to prepare. Georgie Nightingall, the founder of Trigger Conversations, says she has seen a sharp rise in uptake for her conversational training courses – in which she teaches people how to improve their small talk – with demand quadrupling within a year. “There is concern, partly due to the pandemic, that people are just losing these skills,” said Nightingall, 30. But she said any issues tend to be closely linked to confidence. Citing research that found that small talk plays a vital role in contributing to day-to-day happiness, helping to prevent loneliness and isolation, she said remote working does not allow it to occur in the same way in the “in-between moments” that come from physical proximity in between meetings, in corridors, at lunch or at coffee machines. “So suddenly there are no opportunities to have that serendipity that normally happens,” she said. Almuth McDowall, professor and assistant dean of organisational psychology at Birkbeck, University of London and associate fellow of the British Psychological Society, said small talk “humanises our work existence” and provides a space for idea exchange and creativity. The return to workplaces is an opportunity to re-evaluate its purpose, she said. “Let’s rethink what the office is for – a place to find meaning, connection and a shared purpose.” Nightingall said many people dread small talk because they do not know how to use it properly and fear getting “trapped in this circle of talking about the weather”. Instead, she teaches students to move away from key phrases like “I’m fine” or “what did you do at the weekend?” and use seemingly mundane subjects as a springboard to having a meaningful conversation. “Often in conversations we have this competing paradox of ‘Oh, I really want to be connected to somebody and have that lovely feeling of belonging and conversation’ but at the same time ‘Ah, I don’t really want to get into a conversation because it’s going to take a lot of energy and it’s going to drain me, I’m not going to be great at it’,” she said. In an online taster session for her six-week course, Transformational Conversations, she admitted that she is a “small talk convert” and that she used to hate it until she started working on how to transform her everyday conversations into the deeper kind she would have at a party at 2am. Her teaching includes group conversations, partner exercises in practicing using different techniques, breaking the scripts of conventional small talk and starting conversations with statements. The results, she claims, can be life-changing. “Every part of our lives starts to transform because we become better listeners, more curious, more interested, more aware and suddenly you’re having better conversations on dates, with your parents and with people on the street in your local community.” Sam Denny, a data scientist from London, signed up to Nightingall’s course after he found his world had shrunk living alone and working from home during the pandemic and he was feeling anxious about returning to the office and interacting with colleagues. “If you are entirely working from home it’s very easy to have all your conversations being completely purpose-driven,” said Denny, 33. Since doing the course he said his confidence has increased, he feels able to lead small talk and is looking forward to seeing colleagues. “Before I would be quite shy, quite quiet and I would let the conversation go wherever it would go and often maybe not to very interesting places.” How to do small talk 1. Move away from core phrases, advises conversations expert Georgie Nightingall. Instead of asking “how was your weekend?” try asking “what was the most surprising thing that happened on the weekend?” 2. Get out of your own head and be curious. Instead of assuming the conversation is going to be boring, listen to what people are saying and ask follow-up questions. 3. Take the lead and set the tone by sharing information. Like a dance, an enjoyable conversation does not come out of two followers. Make statements about yourself, others and the environment and ask questions.The Victorian justice department spent more than $250,000 on a religious chaplaincy program that prison staff feared would put volunteers at risk, an internal report has found. The report raised concerns that improperly trained volunteers were collecting inmates from prisons on their day of release and using the car trip to the prisoner’s accommodation to speak to them about Christianity. It also found the program seemingly breached the department’s own funding guidelines, which prevented it from employing faith-based chaplains. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “I wouldn’t put a volunteer in a car for four hours with some of these guys while they’re trying to torment them to join a faith,” one staff member from Beechworth prison said in the report. “That is a very dangerous move with some of them ... and, I must admit, I detect a degree of frustration and anger [from ex-prisoners about the program].” The review of the Transition 24 project is contained in 1,200 pages of Victorian justice department documents released late last year to a parliamentary inquiry. It found that the $264,000 provided by the department over three years to Prison Fellowship Victoria and Friends of Dismas, the Christian organisations that delivered the program, appeared to breach the commissioner of corrections guidelines on spirituality and religion in prisons. Those guidelines state that chaplains are to be employees of their faith communities, not the prison provider. But the report found that much of the work conducted under the publicly funded program was religiously based, and recommended the department ensure the guidelines and terms of the contract were not being breached. There was no indication Prison Fellowship Victoria had willingly breached the contract or that the organisation had committed any wrongdoing. All the “deliverables” under the contract were met, the review found. The July 2019 evaluation found that the project was designed to provide specialist transitional support to older prisoners immediately before and after their release from prison. The number of elderly prisoners (defined as aged 50 and older) had increased from 479 prisoners in 2007 to 1,027 in 2017, the report found. Under the program, the most common support provided was volunteers who would pick up prisoners on their day of release, often from prisons in regional Victoria, and transport them to accommodation. Further support could be provided in terms of counselling and release packages, the report found, though it had not been clear to prison staff that much of this would be religiously based. “If it was something like social support, social contact, that is great,” a worker at the Marngoneet women’s prison said in the report. “If it’s about, ‘hey, come along to church with me’... that’s not so great.” A worker from the same prison also said: “With the recent royal commission into institutional child sexual abuse, we have a lot of victims of religious-based organisations here. “So … that [could] be quite traumatic, someone here not aware that that’s actually where their counselling and mentoring is coming from.” The report, which was completed by the department, also found that the program had planned to give participants a book called Out!: You’ll Get Through – I’ve Been There, which contained a “collection of stories from ex-prisoners describing their journey in ‘staying out of prison’”. “A closer look [at] the stories found that the majority of the stories in this book credited their faith in God as being important to them staying out of prison,” the report found. Richard Boonstra, the Victorian state manager for Prison Fellowship Australia, confirmed that the state government was no longer funding the program. But he told Guardian Australia that volunteers still collected inmates from Victorian prisons on their day of release, though he estimated it was fewer than 20 a year. Although Boonstra was not employed in the position at the time of the review or at any time while the program was funded by the state government, he said he was confident volunteers were properly trained in how to protect themselves and to respect ex-prisoners. “It’s not that ‘you have a captive audience now, it’s an opportunity to catch them’,” he said. “[In volunteer training] we talk about boundaries and developing a mentor rather than a friendship relationship. “There’s no pushing or proselytising or anything … Our volunteers are very careful about things like that.” The justice department confirmed the program was not funded again after the completion of the review but declined to comment further.The Vietnamese New Year, Tet Nguyen Dan, is a time of family reunion and feasting, of wishes of good fortune and health. For three years now, Quynh Trang Truong has spent the Tet festival without her husband, Chau Van Kham, who languishes in a Vietnamese prison on terrorism charges, described by human rights groups as a “travesty of justice”. In that time, Quynh has never been allowed direct contact, nor a single phone call – she has not seen her husband nor heard his voice. “I’m very sad and I miss my husband very much,” she said this week from the Sydney home she has shared with him for decades. “It has been three years, I worry he may die in jail.” A Vietnamese-born Australian citizen, Chau was arrested in January 2019 and sentenced to 12 years imprisonment on “financing terrorism” charges over his membership of pro-democracy group Viet Tan. Human rights advocates, lawyers and Chau’s family said the charges against him were baseless and politically motivated, his single-day multiple-defendant trial was grossly unfair and his failing health means his 12-year prison sentence is “effectively a death sentence”. He has not had a face-to-face consular visit with Australian officials since April last year and there are concerns his health – the 72-year-old has a number of chronic conditions – is failing in prison. He shares a cell with 11 other prisoners and is allowed a single five-minute domestic phone call once a month, to a family member in Vietnam. This month – three years since her husband was arrested – Quynh wrote to the Australian foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, pleading for greater government intervention in his case. “The Covid-19 pandemic has aggravated our stress and fear that our family and I will not be able to see him again. Therefore, I am writing this letter to seek your urgent support and interventions to facilitate my husband’s immediate release and deportation to Australia,” she wrote. “Please help to save my beloved husband, as he is a friendly person who always wants to help and do better things for other people. “My family and I miss him so much, as it has been three years since he was away and endures a prisoner’s life.” Payne visited Hanoi in November to discuss Australia and Vietnam’s “strategic partnership”: her office confirmed the minister has raised Chau’s case in ministerial meetings. A spokesperson for Payne’s department said it was providing consular assistance to Chau and was concerned for his health and welfare “given his age and the length of his sentence”. His last consular visit was in April last year, before visits were suspended under Covid-19 control measures. Those restrictions were lifted earlier this month. “Our embassy is seeking a consular visit as soon as possible,” the spokesperson said. “We continue to seek regular updates from Vietnamese authorities on Mr Kham’s welfare and request regular consular access.” Australian lawyer Dan Phuong Nguyen, who is acting pro bono for Chau’s family, told the Guardian his wife was “very afraid for her husband”. “At this time of year, too, Vietnamese New Year, it is really hitting home to her. She’s very afraid he might die in jail, that she might never see him again.” Elaine Pearson, the Australia director of Human Rights Watch, said Chau’s conviction on terrorism charges was “a travesty of justice”. “The Vietnamese government should pardon Chau and let him return to his family in Australia. Chau has suffered a lot in the last few years. We are very worried about inadequate medical treatment and he hasn’t even seen an Australian consular officer face-to-face since April 2021.” Pearson said the Vietnamese government had a track record of releasing prisoners convicted of crimes into exile outside the country, following concerted political pressure. Chau, an Australian citizen, was born in Vietnam and served in the South Vietnamese army before 1975. After the war, he was sent to a re-education camp for three years before he fled Vietnam by boat, arriving in Australia in 1983. In Sydney, he worked as a baker for decades, rising before dawn to work at a modest suburban bakery. In 2010, he joined Viet Tan, becoming a key Australian organiser of pro-reform rallies and an outspoken advocate for democratisation in Vietnam. The UN describes Viet Tan as “a peaceful organisation advocating for democratic reform”, but it was formally proscribed as a terrorist organisation in 2016 by the Vietnamese government, which said it was “a reactionary and terrorist organisation, always silently carrying out activities against Vietnam”. Chau sought to return to Vietnam in 2019 to meet fellow pro-democracy advocates but was refused a visa. He crossed into Vietnam via a land border with Cambodia in January that year, carrying a false identity document. He was arrested after meeting a democracy activist who, it is believed, was under surveillance, along with two Vietnamese nationals who were later sentenced to 11 and 10 years in prison respectively. Chau was convicted and sentenced at his first appearance in the people’s court of Ho Chi Minh City after more than 10 months in detention. The single-day judge-only trial, held simultaneously with four other people, saw him tried and convicted on charges of “financing terrorism” and sentenced to 12 years in jail, all within four hours. The court was effectively closed – open only to approved people – for the entirety of the trial. His family was excluded. Viet Tan condemned Chau’s hearing as a “sham trial” and said it would “continue to support human rights defenders on the ground”. Kylie Moore-Gilbert, the Australian academic who was detained in Iran for more than two years before being released in an Australian-government-engineered prisoner swap, said the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade “must do more to ensure his health doesn’t deteriorate further and demand his immediate release”.The Ulysses butterfly brings us to a halt. We are on the Atherton Tablelands, south-west of Cairns, to look for the rare and elusive Lumholtz’s tree-kangaroo, but the incandescent blue, sparking with each wing beat, is impossible to ignore. The butterfly dances along the rainforest edge, azure iridescence alternating with the dead-leaf dullness of the underwing. Then it flies up high, as if pulled on a string. One more flash and it is gone. We get back to our search. The Wet Tropics region of Far North Queensland is home to two species of tree-kangaroo. All kangaroos and wallabies are descended from a climbing possum-like ancestor, but these far northern wonders of evolution have abandoned that ground-level hopping life and returned back to the canopy. Bennett’s tree-kangaroo lives in the lowland rainforests of the Daintree area, between Port Douglas and Cooktown. Finding it requires a long slog through dense scrub. Lumholtz’s tree-kangaroo lives on the Atherton Tablelands, where sightings are close to coffee and scones. We start at Curtain Fig national park, near the town of Yungaburra. The centrepiece of this pint-sized national park is a giant strangler fig thought to be about 500 years old. The dramatic curtains of roots are 15 metres tall and prop up a massive trunk, topped with branches draped in ferns and orchids. A flat boardwalk loops around the fig, protecting the forest from visitors, and the visitors from stinging trees, which grow wherever sunlight breaks through. The rainforest here is mabi forest, named after the Ngadjon word for tree-kangaroo. Once widespread on the Atherton Tablelands, much of the mabi forest was cleared by settlers. They took tall trees for timber and turned over the land to dairy herds. This endangered ecosystem is now restricted to patches and splinters in national parks and on private land. The tourist potential of the rainforest has long been recognised. In the 1920s, trains brought people on excursions from the sultry coast, and taxis and coaches carried sightseers up the winding roads from Cairns to the “jungles” of the Tablelands. A century later, the train line is now a walking track, and the vehicles have air-conditioning and comfortable suspension, but the patches of rainforest remain the same. Curtain Fig National Park is bustling with birds. Pied monarchs with impeccable black and white plumage and powder-blue rings around their eyes search tree trunks for insects. A brush-turkey rakes through leaf litter. Somewhere in the forest, a wompoo fruit-dove recites its name. We look up into the canopy. There are small movements – birds and butterflies – but nothing that looks like a tree-kangaroo. No commotion of shaking leaves. No long tail dangling like a rainforest vine. No rounded shape that appears both out of place and completely at home. This park is a good location for these unusual marsupials, but this morning they must be elsewhere. We head back to town for breakfast. There are other spots to try. Our next destination is a 15-minute drive from Yungaburra. We take the back roads past cattle paddocks and avocado orchards to the busy dairy town of Malanda with its vast two-storey wooden hotel and picture theatre that has been showing movies since 1929. At the edge of town, the North Johnstone River cuts through the rainforest and cascades down basalt steps into a swimming pool. Malanda Falls conservation park is another block of rainforest saved from clearing. Like Curtain Fig, it is a reliable place for tree-kangaroos. The visitors’ centre keeps a record of sightings. We follow the dirt track through the rainforest, checking for tell-tale claw marks on tree bark, looking up for tails and furry forms. The river is now far below, tumbling over rocks. Two whipbirds duet, the male’s whipcrack followed by the female’s tuneful whistle. A red-legged pademelon, a miniature rainforest kangaroo, bounds away. Its hind feet stamp out a warning. When Norwegian explorer Carl Lumholtz encountered a tree-kangaroo on his 1882 expedition to Queensland, he described it as “the most beautiful mammal” he had seen in Australia – so much better proportioned than the ungainly ground-dwelling kangaroos and wallabies. I’d argue the tiny pademelon whose solid backside and long, white-tipped tail just disappeared among the trees still manages to do all right for itself, despite its apparently dodgy dimensions. I do worry that it might be the only marsupial we see today, but that’s the way it is with nature. You see what you see. There are two more possibilities on my list: Nerada Tea Plantation at Glen Allyn, and Peterson Creek, back at Yungaburra, both are easily accessible by car, with well-made walking tracks. But as we stand in the carpark considering our next move, I glance across to the wall of trees. And there, just above the start of the rainforest track, is a commotion of shaking leaves. We get closer and see a long tail that is, indeed, dangling like a rainforest vine. Then a fuzzy face peers down, curious at the gawkers below. The dark eyes are contemplative and there is a calmness about this tree-dweller, even though the branch it sits on dips alarmingly under its weight. It is big and solid with warm grey fur on its back, and black on face, paws and hind feet. Still watching us, the tree-roo reaches back and scratches its side with massive claws. With its long feet, round ears and short muzzle, it looks like a cross between a wallaby and a sun-bear. It might not be the most beautiful mammal – who’s to judge, anyway? – but it is one of the most remarkable. Feeling elated, privileged and a little bit emotional, we leave the tree-roo to finish its meal in peace. Sightings are rare. No one knows how many Lumholtz’s tree-kangaroos live on the Atherton Tablelands, and even in the locations where they are reported most frequently, luck plays a major part in spotting one. Malanda Falls conservation park receives about 40,000 visitors a year. In the breeding season, when tree-kangaroos are more active and less wary, one to two sightings a week are reported to the visitors centre. At other times, weeks pass without a notification. Back at Yungaburra, we set out for a walk along Peterson Creek, where another sighting could be possible, with a good chance of seeing a platypus in the slow-flowing waters too. But as we pass the rambling, Federation-era Yungaburra hotel, which is almost as big as the pub in Malanda, we have another idea. Parking on a road lined with hanging baskets of pink and white impatiens, we duck inside. There we raise a glass to the elusive Lumholtz’s tree-kangaroo, still hanging on. Getting there Driving is the easiest way around this area. The closest airport to Yungaburra is Cairns, about 70 minutes drive via Gordonvale on the Gillies Range Road or 90 minutes by car via Kuranda on the Kennedy Highway. Yungaburra, Malanda and surrounds offer a variety of accommodation, and places to buy coffee and scones. Wildlife tours are also available from guides on the Atherton Tablelands and in Cairns.The 2022 Australian federal election will be a de facto referendum on the handling of the pandemic. Like a novice outplayed by a grand master, policymakers have conceded to the forever virus. But on economic matters, platitudes about “building back better” notwithstanding, the fault lines exposed by Covid-19 do not seem to have registered. First is the abject lack of preparedness. The pandemic was predictable. Recent outbreaks (Sars, Mers and bird flu) were ignored. Governments failed to take the threat seriously. The focus on immediate savings ignoring later costs has meant chronic underinvestment in public health, preventive healthcare and related services, all central to the problems of managing Covid-19. Strategies, including the current “learning to live with the virus” formula, have been haphazard, rarely surviving the briefest contact with reality. While a vaccine was developed quickly, vaccination programs, testing and supplies, such as PPE, doses or rapid antigen tests, have been blighted by repeated failures. It is not a shortage of funds but the lack of competence in building capacity, acquiring and training staff and procuring essentials. Second, Australia’s dependence on personal mobility is evident. Travel restrictions exposed reliance on immigration, foreign workers, educational services and tourism. In recent years, growth has been driven by immigration (at around 1.5% annually among the highest in developed countries). Net arrivals have predictably fallen sharply. Loss of international students and inbound tourists has reduced demand and export revenues, especially affecting some regional economies. Loss of skilled foreign workers and low cost itinerant labour have impacted many sectors, including hospitality and agriculture. A rapid reversion to the pre-Covid status quo remains unlikely. Third, Australia’s service-based economy, focused around health, wellbeing, hospitality, entertainment and leisure, is problematic. This sector, which provides over 80% of all jobs, is vulnerable to social distancing and limits on movement. Even without formal prohibitions, uncertainty, caution and isolation requirements can cripple demand and workforce availability. Few personal services can be delivered virtually. They are also non-storable, perishable products. A hairdresser who has to close for a month may find it difficult to make up the entire lost revenue. In contrast, a manufacturer can meet demand for physical goods where the buyers are willing to wait. This permanent reduction of income makes services more exposed to disruptions of operations. Fourth, the pandemic re-emphasised Australia’s dependence on global supply chains. Decades of outsourcing and offshoring have lowered costs of products, but even essential supplies (food and medical) and strategic products (defence equipment and refined fuel products) must now be imported. As empty shelves and the scramble to secure anything and everything during the pandemic showed, limited onshore manufacturing diminishes policy choices and sovereignty. Fifth, there is little acknowledgment of the accelerant role of inequality in the pandemic. Today, over 40% of the “uber-ised” Australian workforce are casuals or contractors, effectively piece workers. Most small businesses are sole proprietorships or familial concerns, effectively a form of self-employment. Lacking paid leave, continuity of income and adequate financial resources to weather a downturn, they are unable to stop working and act as vectors for transmissible diseases. Health, aged care, food production and many essential services rely on marginalised workers. Low incomes condemn them to sub-standard, often crowded accommodation and long commutes on public or shared transport making infection control and avoiding economic interruptions difficult. Reduction of financial support measures increases vulnerability. Sixth, the pandemic showed that Australia is actually eight municipalities – the states and territories . Differences in economic structure and cultures led to inconsistent health responses and border rules. The constitution and division of powers is not fit for purpose and a barrier to dealing with national issues in a coordinated manner. Finally, the pandemic highlighted the deficit in international cooperation. As of late 2021, around 54% of the global population had received at least one Covid-19 vaccine dose. The rate for low-income countries was around 6% due to developed country vaccine nationalism and hoarding. Compounding the problems, Australia is now seeking to poach medical professionals from developing countries denuding them of vital trained resources. Australia, alongside high-income nations, faces human and economic backdrafts from their choices. The continued circulation of Covid-19 increases the risk of further mutations, new waves and disruptions. Poor countries may incubate future public health crises, like new viruses or antibiotic resistant infections. All sides of politics, wary of becoming wedged into electorally damaging positions, avoid confronting these challenges. Emollient slogans – ‘we are in good place’ or ‘push through’ – cannot address these problems. These issues vital to Australia’s future may not even make it onto the election policy agenda. Satyajit Das is a financier and author whose latest books include A Banquet of Consequences – Reloaded (March 2021) and Fortune’s Fool: Australia’s Choices (forthcoming March 2022).Wayne Phillips has both feet firmly on dry land as he acts out cutting a whale loose from fishing gear. The 51-year-old head of marine sciences at SeaWorld in Queensland oversees the park’s marine rescue team – four cutters, a coordinator, a captain and a videographer – who untangle humpback whales that have become bound up in rope and net. The cutters, he explains, are armed with a gaff – a graphite pole similar to a fishing rod but topped with a reverse knife that doesn’t cut into the whale if it connects – and work in pairs to combat muscle fatigue. Out on the water, with a 27-tonne giant in distress, the purpose-built rubber boat used by the team pitches and rocks on the waves. The goal for the cutters is to aim the gaff to hook the correct rope before pulling it back hard to sever it clean. “You reach out, lunge out and pull back – and all that’s based on where the tail is,” Phillips says. “You might get one or two shots at it, then the whale might divert or dive. “It’s an exhausting process. By the end of the day, you’re buggered.” Phillips has worked in marine rescue for the better part of 28 years, helping dolphins, seals, turtles and other animals when entangled, stranded or sick. Now a growing part of the work involves disentangling humpback whales. Humpback numbers have bounced back from near extinction to about 30,000 in what is widely considered a triumph of conservation. But now the species faces a new human threat: climate change. As the world’s oceans warm and acidify, humpback whales – like other marine species – are altering their ancient migration patterns in search of food and shelter. And as they are wander into new areas along Australia’s coast, the growing overlap with the human world can be lethal. An invisible problem Globally it is estimated 300,000 large whales and dolphins die in entanglements each year, though only a fraction are ever recorded. As definitions vary by jurisdiction, what counts as an entanglement and what gets included in official reports often masks the scale of the problem. According to records collected by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and the International Whaling Commission, Australia recorded just 436 whale entanglements between 1887 and 2016. However these records do not include sightings of whales towing gear reported by the public, or whales that have become tangled in crab pot lines. By contrast, Queensland’s shark control program alone recorded 80 humpback whales snagged in its nets between 1992 and 2020. Phillips says there were 28 reports of entangled whales along Australia’s east coast last year, of which his team was able to assist in two. He estimates that despite the best efforts of marine rescue outfits around the coast, only one in five reports are acted upon. Across the country a mix of government agencies and private organisations operate marine rescue teams, each with responsibility for a different area. SeaWorld’s team covers an area that spans south-east Queensland and the northern New South Wales coast as far as Evans Head. Their work generally begins from June, a few months after the first humpback whales are spotted off Sydney on their annual migration north, when the first reports trickle in of whales towing gear – sometimes many metres in length. They will continue until November when the animals leave on their long journey back south, travelling 10,000km to the Antarctic. Phillips says the worst material he has come across is nets that include chain, as it is impossible to cut away the material – though these are rare. By far the most common entanglement are those from crab pots and the ropes that connect the cage on the seafloor to a float on the surface. As whales don’t navigate by echolocation, they will pass through the area and catch rope as they go. Many will try to wriggle free by thrashing or rolling, but often this only binds the ropes tighter. With time the material collects around the whale’s fluke – its tail – stopping it from hunting effectively as it drags the rope material over thousands of kilometres. One juvenile whale was spotted in Antarctic waters trailing gear in early January, having travelled down the South American coast. “It’s like a ball and a chain,” Phillips says. “Imagine dragging that around while you’re swimming. “And then imagine somebody continuously pulling at it because of the drag the water places on that equipment. These animals are so streamlined, they’re built to cut right through the water. Any drag makes it so much harder for them. “It really is a slow death for the animals.” ‘They see us as part of the problem’ The first step in removing gear is counterintuitive. To cut it off, the team needs to slow the whale down by attaching floats or buoys to the netting it is trailing. It is a tactic that echoes those used by whalers, and from the perspective of the whale the sound of an approaching engine is still cause for alarm. “They’re not always happy we’re trying to help them, that’s for sure,” Phillips says. “They see us as part of the problem initially. And at times we have a very predator-prey relationship with the whale. “He thinks we’re trying to hurt him, so he thinks we’re the predator.” This relationship makes each rescue extremely dangerous. A spooked whale may attempt to roll, dive, thrash or smack its tail, and escort animals, such as adult whales protecting a calf, may attempt to fend off the approaching boats. At least three deaths have been documented among whale rescuers worldwide. Among the earliest was Tom Smith, who died in 2003 while attempting to free a humpback whale in waters off Kaikoura in New Zealand. His body was never recovered. Canadian whale rescue veteran Joe Howlett, 59, was killed in 2017 moments after successfully freeing an endangered northern right whale in the Gulf of St Lawrence. Phillips says members of the public should never attempt their own rescue. Even if it does not end in tragedy, it often only makes things worse for the animal. “Their hearts are in the right place, but if they don’t cut it all off it actually makes our job harder,” he says. “When they cut off some of the net, the whale will swim off quite nicely but unfortunately it’s still a death sentence. “Any material around that fluke means the whale will end up succumbing.” The effect of climate change Dr Olaf Meynecke, a whale researcher at Griffith University and the Whales &amp; Climate program – a collaborative research project between six universities – says climate change is already having an indirect impact on the number of entanglements. “It’s the food source that drives everything in the whales’ lives, and they’re migrating for six months at a time each year. That requires a lot of energy,” Meynecke says. “Their advantage is they can store energy in their blubber as fat, but that also means there’s a short amount of time to eat.” Climate change is affecting the location and amount of available food. Meynecke says other whale species have been pushing into waters close to humans, and it is expected the same is happening with humpbacks in Australia. The most at-risk of entanglement are “overwintering” whales – usually young, non-breeding females that stay in Australian coastal waters through summer and end up trying to opportunistically feed near commercial fishing grounds. Meynecke’s research aims to forecast how these changes will occur until 2050 by comparing whale movements today with those from hundreds of years ago. He says there are signs whale populations are already starting to arrive earlier than expected and are not always travelling as far north as they used to. If confirmed, there may be steps that can be taken to prevent more animals being lost. But that would require coordination between governments, science, industry and the whale-watching public to create more centralised reporting systems, change fishing practices, introduce ropeless fishing gear and ban the use of material such as chain in nets. This might seem a tall order, but Meynecke says the legacy of anti-whaling efforts in the past is a generational shift that has made humpback whales a sacrosanct part of Australian culture. “It’s been a complete shift in society,” he says. “Our society has gone from ‘I appreciate whaling’ to ‘I appreciate taking photos of whales and paying for it’. “No one in Australia – not one politician – would ever today come and say let’s kill the whales. This gives me great hope. It shows a capacity for change.”It was once a rule as sure as gravity: buy a 2012 Toyota in January and it would be worth significantly less by December. But if you’ve bought a secondhand car anytime over the last two years, it should be pretty obvious that rule hasn’t held true during the pandemic as prices have been driven up by 50% on some models in Australia and overseas. So as some people struggle in the booming secondhand car market and others cash in, how did this happen? And what does the future hold? Why did this happen? Details may differ by model and manufacturer but the average car has about 30,000 components, and with modern carmaking having evolved to be an intricate global dance – with parts made in one country and shipped to another for assembly – the industry depends on its ability to move things around. Since the start of the pandemic global supply chains have taken a hit, making tight carmaking logistics shaky. Competition for cargo space and a shortage of shipping containers has led to long delivery times for people who have bought a new car. A global computer chip shortage – sometimes referred to as “chippaggedon” – means carmakers are competing with other industries for chips. Modern cars can have more than 1,000 chips – for control of everything from mirrors to airbags and tyre pressure gauges. Faced with long delivery times and a perceived risk of taking public transport due to Covid, many people have turned to the secondhand car market. With fewer cars and more people wanting them, a seller’s market has developed. How long has this been going on? From the moment the pandemic began – and certainly long enough for insurance company Allianz to run and publish the results of a survey in November 2021 showing Australians were confused and overwhelmed as they navigated the market. What are some examples? It depends what you are in the market for, as there are many variables. According to CarsGuide, those shopping for an early 2011 Ford Ranger would be paying $24,000, up from $18,000 in June 2020 – a 40% increase. In the small car market, a $10,000 2011 Mazda3 now costs about $12,000, which is more modest but still large, particularly for families looking to buy a new driver their first car. While a Mazda3 that cost $26,000 when new in mid-2020 can be bought secondhand for about $34,000. Another classic example is the Land Cruiser. At the start of the pandemic those who couldn’t fly overseas decided it might be worth buying a 4WD and driving around Australia. Unfortunately, many people had the same thought at the same time and the price jumped as there weren’t that many around. That has had a flow-on effect for work vehicles for tradies, farmers and mining companies. For example, dual-cab 79 series GXL Land Cruisers, which usually retail for about $80,000 new are now being sold secondhand for more than $100,000. How long will it continue? “That’s the million-dollar question and it keeps getting pushed out,” says James Voortman, chief executive of the Australian Automotive Dealers Association. “At the moment we’re getting told by manufacturers around the world, we’re hopeful the semiconductor shortage will start to improve by the middle of this year.” As global supply chains sort out their kinks, prices are expected to fall over 2022 – though there are conflicting views on how far. One school of thought says that because people buy cars when they need them, they are slow to buy new ones, meaning the supply of available cars is likely to grow quickly. This will lead to a slow fall in prices. Global consultancy firm KPMG is however forecasting a 30% reduction in current prices in the US by the end of 2022 as carmakers begin delivering new cars to market. Though the analysis may be focused on the US, as the problems are global they can be generalised to Australia. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Is there any downside? Any correction is not without risk. KPMG’s report says that any drop in prices is good for those looking to buy but those who bought over the last two years will be left with a vehicle worth less than they paid for. While this may make it harder for them to make their next vehicle purchase, others who relied on a loan may find themselves underwater. However until prices actually begin to drop, this is an issue on the distant horizon. I’m thinking about buying a secondhand car. What should I do? Wait six months, and see where things land – though if you can wait longer, maybe give it a year. If you absolutely have to buy now, remember that you don’t need to just accept the sticker price and it is OK to haggle. Depending on the circumstances and your approach it might be possible to bring down the price by 20%. • This article was amended on 1 February 2022. A 2011 Mazda3 now costs about $12,000, not a 2021 Mazda3 as an earlier version said.Boris Johnson is facing damaging new revelations about his relationship with the US businesswoman Jennifer Arcuri after hundreds of page of notes and documents were handed to officials at the Greater London Authority (GLA) overseeing two separate investigations into their affair. Last month the GLA oversight committee summonsed and received a significant number of documents – including emails to and from Arcuri – from a London tourism and promotional agency as part of an inquiry into whether Johnson abused his position as London mayor to “benefit and reward” the American businesswoman. Arcuri was given access to foreign trade missions led by the future prime minister and sponsorship for her events business, raising questions about conflicts of interest. Arcuri is also said to be cooperating fully with a separate investigation by the GLA’s ethics watchdog that raises the prospect of Johnson facing an investigation for a potential criminal offence of misconduct in public office. City Hall sources said that Arcuri was “in current dialogue” with the GLA monitoring officer and is understood to have offered hundreds of fresh pages of notes and text messages chronicling her affair with Johnson when he was London mayor. A spokesperson for the GLA confirmed the officer was “continuing to gather information in order to assess the complaint” regarding Johnson’s dealings with Arcuri and would report “in due course”. The Observer revealed last year that Johnson had allegedly overruled the advice of staff to promote the business interests of Arcuri and win her affections. Arcuri’s contemporaneous diary excerpts, which she passed on to the journalist John Ware, prompted the GLA to restart its investigation. A previous investigation into Johnson’s business relationship with the then 27-year-old Arcuri saw the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) decide not to open a criminal inquiry into his relationship with her. However, that inquiry did not have access to Arcuri’s handwritten diary entries in which the Californian entrepreneur made “verbatim” notes about her relationship with Johnson. Her previously undisclosed evidence is potentially even more critical because the original IOPC inquiry was hampered by the deletion of key email and phone records at City Hall that prevented the watchdog from “reviewing relevant evidence”. Arcuri’s continuing cooperation with the GLA monitoring officer paves the way for a possible referral to the IOPC to potentially launch an investigation into misconduct in public office, which Johnson has denied. Meanwhile, it has also emerged that the GLA oversight committee has asked and received unredacted documents from London &amp; Partners (L&amp;P), the tourism and promotional agency that organised the foreign trade trips led by Johnson that Arcuri was given places on. The investigation is focused on “the payment of sponsorship monies and the access afforded to those who participated in mayoral trade missions”. Arcuri received £126,000 of public money in the form of grants for her technology business and event sponsorship and received access to three foreign trade missions led by Johnson. Arcuri has stated that the grants and access to L&amp;P trips between 2013 and 2014 had no connection to her relationship with the mayor. Johnson made no mention of Arcuri in his declaration of interest as mayor, but has denied any wrongdoing. Caroline Pidgeon, chair of the GLA oversight committee, said: “We asked for unredacted copies of these documents because we need to know the full details of the evidence for our investigation into overseas visits and sponsorship monies. “We need clarification around the specific people involved to ensure our investigation is complete.” When the inquiry is completed, the committee will publish a report and series of recommendations. A government spokesperson has previously stated that “as mayor, Boris Johnson followed all the legal requirements in the Greater London Assembly’s [sic] code of conduct at the time”.I hate meditation. Well, I used to hate it. As someone who can barely sit still, the thought of sitting there doing absolutely nothing, thinking about nothing – well, that sounds like torture. Usually, when people say meditation, they are referring to sitting meditation. Where you sit with your legs crossed, focus on your breathing and empty your mind. Growing up around Buddhist temples, meditation always seemed like a bit of a punishment to me. Time out. But as I got older and started listening to the nuns that watched me grow up, I learned that meditation is so much more than doing nothing. “Meditation is hard work,” says Venerable Dr Juewei, a Buddhist nun at the Nan Tien Temple in Wollongong, but she believes her 20 years of experience in meditation have helped her keep “calm in spite of disappointments, and steady in executing [her] tasks”. But in our busy lives, between work or class, raising kids or maintaining a social life, how can we find time to stay mindful, aware and calm? When I was a Buddhist scripture teacher, I always began and ended my classes with a minute of pause to “check in” and “check out”, which helped students reset their minds for the next activity. Juewei says this helps people “transit from one activity to the next” and “pausing allows us to wrap up the previous activity and recalibrate for the new one”. The process is very straightforward. You can choose how long you want to do it for, though I recommend around two to five minutes. All you need to do is find a safe and comfortable space, sit with your feet grounded and flat and breathe slowly. Your eyes can be open or closed. Once you’re in position, bring your attention to all the sensations of your body. Are you sore? Does your head feel heavy? Then bring your attention to the events that have brought you to this moment. How do they make you feel? Throughout this process of observation. Don’t linger on any one sensation or thought, you are just making note of them and moving on. If stillness isn’t for you, you can meditate while eating, writing, gardening or drawing. The key, however, is concentration. When you give something the awareness and concentration to realise its causes and effects, that is meditation. Juewei’s favourite form of meditation is sky meditation. “When I look into the sky, it reminds me of boundless creativity and possibilities, so that I do not get too attached to any circumstance, and that we are all connected under the same sky. Clouds changing shape and location teaches me impermanence.” She says it’s also “great for my eyes which are often tired from computer overuse”, and most of us can relate to that.It would be easy to look at the vivid array of colour contained in the paintings of artist Concetta Antico and assume she is using artistic licence. The trunks of her eucalyptus trees are hued with violet and mauve; the yellow crest on her cockatoo has hints of green and blue; the hypercolour of a garden landscape looks almost psychedelic. “It’s not just an affectation and it’s not artistic licence,” says Antico. “I’m actually painting exactly what I see. If it’s a pink flower and then all of a sudden you see a bit of lilac or blue, I actually saw that.” Antico is a tetrachromat, which means she has a fourth colour receptor in her retina compared with the standard three which most people have. While those of us with three of these receptors – called cone cells – have the ability to distinguish around one million different colours, tetrachromats see an estimated 100 million. Until 10 years ago, Antico says, “I didn’t know I was not experiencing the world like other people were. For me, the world was just really very colourful. It’s kind of like, you don’t know you’re a zebra unless you’re not a zebra.” As a child growing up in Sydney, Antico says she was always “a little bit out of the box” – dying her hair with bright colours and choosing emerald-green carpet and black and lime green curtains for her bedroom. Fascinated with nature, she’d often disappear for an entire day into the land around a nearby golf course. “I always felt like I was living in a very magical world. I know children say that, but for me, it was like everything was hyper-wonderful, hyper-different. I was always exploring into nature, delving and trying to see the intricacies, because I’d see so much more detail in everything. Someone else might look at a leaf or a petal on a flower, but for me, it was like a compulsion to really understand it, really see it, and sometimes spend a lot of time on it. And I just wanted to paint and portray everything that I was seeing.” After finishing university, Antico moved to the United States, where she became an artist and art teacher in San Diego, developing her unique style of colourful landscapes and flora and fauna. Her diagnosis didn’t come until 2012, when one of her students, a neurologist, emailed her a scientific paper about tetrachromacy, speculating that this could be what Antico had. A few months earlier, Antico had discovered her daughter was colour-blind (“I told her she was fine, she was just different and special and amazing and I’d teach her how to see colour anyway”) and when she opened the article one of the first things she read was that women who have potential for tetrachromacy also have potential to create a colour-blind female offspring. Antico emailed the scientists who wrote the paper and “within 24 hours, I was sending my saliva up to Washington” where testing confirmed she had the genetic mutation responsible for tetrachromacy. According to Dr Kimberly Jameson, a University of California scientist who has studied Antico, just having the gene – which around 15% of women have – is not alone sufficient to be a tetrachromat, but it’s a necessary condition. “In Concetta’s case … one thing we believe is that because she’s been painting sort of continuously since the age of seven years old, she has really enlisted this extra potential and used it. This is how genetics works: it gives you the potential to do things and if the environment demands that you do that thing, then the genes kick in.” Discovering she saw the world differently to others changed the way Antico taught her students. “I became a lot more patient,” she says. “Say we were down painting a beach, I’d do a lot more of, ‘OK, let’s look at this together. Can you see that?’ And if they’d say no, I’d be like, ‘Well, let’s look a little closer’ … When they see it, they will paint it, so my students’ paintings became much richer.” Through family genetic testing, Antico learned that her mother, who died when she was 12, was also likely to be a tetrachromat – a discovery that helped Antico make sense of her childhood home. “Like, she had a red and blue light in the swimming pool in the 60s, just to make it violet. Stuff that nobody was doing, really bizarre stuff, and her house was unusual colours.” Having super vision, Antico says, brings her enormous happiness. “I’m so anti-drugs, and I’m sure people just think I’m high on something all the time, but I’m really just high on life and the beauty that’s around us. I often think to myself, how could you be unhappy in this world? Just go sit in a park. Just go look at a bush or a tree. You can’t not appreciate how magnificent it is.” While the natural world is a positive stimulant for Antico, many man-made environments, such as a large shopping centre with fluorescent lighting, have the opposite effect. “I feel very uneasy. I actually avoid going into those kinds of buildings unless I absolutely have to,” she says. “I don’t enjoy the barrage, the massive onslaught of bits of unattractive colour. I mean, there’s a difference between looking at a row of stuff in a grocery store and looking at a row of trees. It’s like, it’s ugly, and the lights are garish. It makes me not happy.” Now settled in Byron Bay, Antico is teaching less and painting more, wanting to produce “even more work than I did before, in these final decades of my life”. “I’m going to keep painting my birds, my animals, my trees. I want to describe what I’m seeing in nature because that’s a window, in a way, to things that other people aren’t really seeing.”Balgo is Country for all of us now. We were all born here, these generations here today. We are Wirrimanu kids. We belong to Balgo. That’s what we paint. That’s why we paint. This is our story.” – Warlayirti artist Eva Nagomarra John Carty opened his email and downloaded the images. They were photos of paintings, found in a shipping container somewhere in the Kimberley. They were muddy and water damaged, but recognisable. Carty admits he cried on that day in 2019. He had been looking for those paintings for 20 years. The story of how the Balgo paintings were found is vague, as is the story of how they were lost. A guy (unnamed) started unpacking a container he’d had for a while, to see what damage recent flooding had done. There were paintings inside. He called a couple of mates, people who knew something about art, to take a look at them. Those mates had a glimmer of recognition. Then there was a phone call to the authorities, and an email with pictures of the paintings was sent to the city, to Carty, the Balgo expert. It was the lost Balgo exhibition. The paintings representing what would become one of Australian art’s most important movements had been stored in the early 80s, with the intention of putting them on display for the first time. But opportunities for relatively unknown artists were scarce. The art got packed away, forgotten in a corner of the Kimberley – until about 40 years later, when it emerged, muddy and mouldy, but intact. Balgo (Wirrimanu) is a remote Aboriginal community on the edge of the Great Sandy Desert in Western Australia. Population: about 400. The art movement born in Balgo has rippled across Australia, so even if you haven’t seen Balgo art, you’ve probably seen its influence. Carty is now head of humanities at the South Australian Museum. But at the turn of the century he was trying to work out what to do his PhD on. He was studying anthropology at the University of Melbourne, but on his way to Canberra he picked up an in-flight magazine. “I was just looking at these unbelievable paintings … these paintings from Balgo that just had this incredible presence. It was a moment of revelation, some kind of shift in my thinking about Australia, and I really wanted to go there and understand those artists,” he says. So he wrote to the Balgo artists, and asked if he could volunteer at the art centre. He ended up staying for three years in the tiny community. He has a photo from Balgo. It was taken in 1982, a couple of decades before he got there. A couple of camp dogs look on as men sit among the spinifex, painting for that first, fated exhibition of Balgo art. The faded colours of the photo belie the vibrancy of the desert ground, and the paintings themselves, propped up in the sunshine. These are the 1982 paintings that went missing, and the photo is how Carty knew what he was looking at when he saw them again in 2019. In between lies the story of the Balgo artists. ‘Keeping our culture strong’ In his book Balgo: Creating Country, Carty relays how the first Catholic missionaries came to the area and asked what the place was called. “[Community elder] George Lee Tjungurrayi said: ‘The old people thought they were pointing at the grass! That grass was called parlku. So they said to Father, parlku. And Father went and called the place Balgo.’” In the 1960s, the mission was moved to a more hospitable spot nearby, but kept the name. In the late 1970s, following their families who lived at Papunya, Balgo people became interested in painting. In the mid-1980s, the Warlayirti Artists Aboriginal Corporation was founded, and the movement’s influence grew. Warlayirti artist Eva Nagomarra says people came from all around to paint at Balgo. “In the early days we did painting. Cultural way. For ourselves ... we did a lot of landscapes at the start. Then after that people did a lot of paintings for the church. Then we decided we gotta do our own painting now. About ngurra and tjukurrpa. Ngurra are the places we came from, our Country. We came to the mission from Kiwirrkurra, from Canning Stock Route, from Mulan Lake Country. All the different families. All now to this Country we call Balgo. “And we have always enjoyed our culture. We never stopped. Always dancing and singing, teaching our kids and keeping our culture strong. Here in Balgo. We keep our ceremonies, we visit our Country. That’s why we still live here. That’s why we paint. That story from our Tjamu and Tjatja [grandfather and grandmother]. Our rockholes and waters where we used to live. We paint that. Our bush tucker and lovely bush potatoes! We paint that. Balgo is Country for all of us now.” But when Carty arrived, he knew there were pages missing from the Balgo origin story. “The story was always unsatisfying, vague,” Carty says. “And that photo … we knew those paintings were out there somewhere.” Had they been thrown out? Picked up on the cheap? Tucked away somewhere? “They weren’t in public collections … I searched for them, and I never gave up hope, I felt like they were out there somewhere,” he says. “But it felt like those early pages of the Balgo story had been kind of ripped out and [there was] this vague mythology of how the painting started.” The Balgo artists went on, creating ever more vivid and colourful works, building on the famous movement. Carty went on to work in museums. And then the shipping container turned up. “I clicked on these thumbnails in my inbox, and the images came up, and they were the images of those paintings that were in the spinifex surrounded by the men. I knew all of them. They were all burned into my mind because I’d been hoping to find them one day, and so I just had to cross-reference that photo,” he says. “They’d been in this time warp, this shipping container for 40 years. In a black hole. Then they’ve been spat back out by the universe.” The works were smeared with mud, mouldy shadows across the dots and curved lines, the stories the paintings tell. Carty gathered them up, wrapped them “in his socks and jocks”, he says, and brought them to the SA Museum. Cultural conservators from Artlab Australia went to work, doing their best to restore the artworks. There was one of the paintings Sunfly Tjampitjin had done in 1982, a curl of dark around the bottom. Gary Njamme’s work of bright clear colours, just clouded down one side. Alan Winderoo’s work, with just a hint of a vague shadow. “They did a really beautiful and extraordinary thing in restoring those paintings, as close as can be to the original state,” Carty says. And while he thinks origin stories are important, he says there’s a danger in fetishising the past. So he went back to Balgo, to the children and grandchildren of the original artists, and asked if they wanted to paint in response to those first paintings. In the exhibition Balgo Beginnings, the found paintings hang alongside the new. Pauline Sunfly hangs alongside her famous father Sunfly Tjamptitjin; Jimmy Tchooga alongside his grandfather Alan Winderoo. Carty’s book traces the evolution of the art as the people are buffeted by colonisation, the cattlemen, the missionaries and the political, cultural and economic upheaval they brought. And it has all those missing pages, back where they belong. “[People] don’t know that story, they only know the new paintings. Our beginnings got lost,” senior Balgo artist Jimmy Tchooga says. “Now everyone can see where the Balgo story started. “I was happy to see my tjamu [grandfather] Winderoo’s first painting. I know that place, but never seen painting like that. So it gave me [the] idea to paint. I painted a new way, old way, but new again.” • Balgo Beginnings is at the South Australian Museum until 6 FebruaryStephanie Oatley recalls a day in late December when she needed to get a whole unit of young people experiencing homelessness tested for Covid. “We had a young person who started showing symptoms, and a second young person got an itchy throat,” says Oatley. “In the van they hopped. There was only one place open … They got there at 9am, and waited for nine hours.” Oatley is the chief executive of Platform Youth Services, which provides crisis accommodation to people as young as 12 in Sydney’s west, Blue Mountains and Hawkesbury regions. Like most sectors of the east coast economy, homelessness services have been ravaged by Omicron, leaving them without enough staff, forcing them to reduce services and to lock down their crisis accommodation. Some have been scrambling to find – and then fork out thousands of dollars on – rapid tests. “Services feel that they have been stranded,” says Katherine McKernan, the chief executive of Homelessness New South Wales. She notes the government had acted quickly to provide hotel accommodation for the homeless during previous outbreaks. But the Omicron response has been lacking. “The processes in place for the previous lockdown have not been able to be implemented due the high number of cases and the overwhelmed health system,” she says, “and none of the arrangements for hotel accommodation provided to rough sleepers has been reinstated this time around.” In Platform’s case the situation has been particularly complex. Those staying in its crisis accommodation are aged between 12 and 17. As a result, Oatley says Covid-positive clients couldn’t move to a health hotel. Due to severe staff shortages, some employees were essentially forced to move into the crisis units during outbreaks “just to get us through”. “The big thing is staff shortages,” says Oatley. “We’d have one staff member that would come down with Covid and then nine staff would get Covid from that one case. The clients would have Covid. We’re a small service of 45 staff, we’ve had 16 key staff get Covid. “One of our houses has just been constant for three weeks,” she adds. Guardian Australia this week reported the findings of a Productivity Commission report that found that, pre-Omicron, nearly half of all people who seek help with homelessness in NSW were unable to get it. McKernan says the “unprecedented number of cases in services” meant some services have been forced to “make really difficult decisions around reducing intake, reducing the number of clients in accommodation in order to enable clients to isolate”. She notes it’s already “unfortunately already a hugely busy time for homelessness services”. In Melbourne, Launch Housing, which runs four crisis accommodation services across the city, has been forced to twice lock down its facilities due to an Omicron outbreak. “What that effectively means is that every time we have a Covid outbreak on site we don’t take new referrals,” says Andrew Hollows, a general manager at Launch Housing. In simple terms, an outbreak means for a short period some people who need crisis accommodation will not be able to receive it. These are, as McKernan says, “really difficult decisions”. Hollows says in these lockdown periods, Launch has been able to assist clients in other ways. “Even if they couldn’t go to crisis accommodation, they would still go to other accommodation options, or help them with financial assistance,” he says. “It wasn’t like we weren’t providing any response.” Peter Valpiani, chief executive of The Haymarket Foundation, which provides crisis accommodation and drug and alcohol services in Sydney, has done overnight shifts at its crisis accommodation as a result of the staff shortages. He says the Omicron crisis has flow-on effects for people the service assists. “We had a gentleman that was a close contact because he lived in the same house as somebody who tested positive, and he had just gotten a job,” says Valpiani. “You can imagine someone who is putting their life together, just returned to employment, and as a close contact you can’t work.” Valpiani says the man had tested positive via a rapid test and was therefore denied access to the Centrelink pandemic payment, which at the time required a PCR test result. “He was in this position where he needed the money in order to pay his rent, to not become homeless again,” he says, adding that Haymarket offered the man financial support. Then there has been the RAT race. McKernan says Homelessness NSW and the sector had first requested access to and use of RATs as a way of supporting clients in August 2021. The NSW government is now in the process of providing services with free access to rapid tests and has indicated it will reimburse them for past purchases. But the past month has been tough, even more so for clients. Another challenge is that for some people experiencing homelessness, seven days of isolation can bring back trauma. “You’ve got people with, say, an incarceration history, so as soon as you say ‘hey, you’re locked up and you can’t leave’, that can cause sort of emotional triggers with people,” says Valpiani. “We have to do it in a really trauma-informed, sensitive way and look at ways in which we can provide bits of entertainment for people. Just to kind of get their mind off things, or to reduce anxiety.” Importantly, all homelessness services Guardian Australia spoke to say that while they have battled outbreaks in crisis accommodation, no clients have become seriously ill or required hospitalisation. But Oatley says several rounds of isolation due to cases in the services have been tough on the young people who rely on her organisation. “Young people don’t like being contained in a bedroom,” she says. “We were lucky we had access to … Netflix, Xboxes, and we got a big donation of really good art supplies.” Oatley acknowledges that Omicron was always bound to cause havoc. But she insists the chaos that was wrought on homelessness services could have been avoided. “I think the government was just really irresponsible when they opened everything back up without the resources,” says Oatley. “That’s the sort of stuff that I got a bit frustrated with. The government has made all these decisions but without the resources to implement them.” Asked if, things have improved after a horror month, Oatley replies: “No, but we can see the light at the end of the tunnel. “School’s coming back. Our staff is coming back to work. We’ve got RAT tests. We can see the light at the end of the tunnel now. So can our young people.”At least 60% of Australians eligible for a Covid booster have received one, according to new government data. However, an analysis of government figures by Guardian Australia shows the booster rate could be as low as 50% once new, expanded eligibility criteria are taken into account. And, despite new record highs in daily vaccinations, the rollout is still lagging at least a month behind the “ideal” schedule. This is likely due to the continued expansion of eligibility criteria by federal and state governments. Here is everything we know about the progress of the booster vaccination rollout. Where is the booster rollout currently at, and are we prioritising older people? Data from the health department, released in response to questions from Guardian Australia, shows 60% of eligible Australians aged 18 and over have received a booster, with the rate rising for those in older age groups: The government has not been publishing booster numbers by age in its regular vaccination updates. Tracking the rollout of boosters in the older population is important as older people are more likely to die, or require treatment in an intensive care unit than younger people. Questions have also been raised as to whether the booster rollout in aged care has been fast enough, with a large number of age care homes reporting fresh Covid outbreaks in the past week. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning For their estimate, the federal government considered anyone over 18 who had received a second dose at least four months ago to be eligible for a booster. But last week New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria and the ACT cut the gap to three months, making millions more eligible overnight. With the newer three month eligibility criteria in some states, Guardian Australia estimates that closer to 50% of the eligible population have had a booster shot so far. The latest was the third change to booster eligibility, after the gap was reduced to five months at the beginning of December and again to four months from the beginning of January. The gap was set to drop again to three months from 31 January. How fast has the booster rollout been going? The drop to five months eligibility at the beginning of December and again in January led to significant increases in the number of boosters being administered. This is likely due to how many only got their second doses in the second half of 2021. But the record numbers of vaccinations per day hasn’t been enough to close the gap between eligible and administered doses. Another measure of rollout progress is the actual delay between when the equivalent number of booster and second doses were administered. Despite the official three and four month gaps for booster eligibility, Australia has only administered as many boosters as it had second doses five months ago. The gap has been closing over time – down from six months in December. But at the current rate Australia won’t hit 80 or 90% booster coverage until the second half of the year. How does Australia compare with other countries? Israel and seven other countries have already given booster doses to more than 70% of those who have received two doses. Australia has given boosters to just over 30% of those who have received a second dose. Several countries experiencing large outbreaks last year already reduced the dosing gap to three months. But experts then told Guardian Australia that this wasn’t necessarily advisable, as there is a tradeoff between longer lasting protection and a quick antibody hit. “We do know from evidence from the first two doses that a longer interval between the first dose and second dose gives you higher antibodies, higher protection,” says Cyra Patel, a PhD candidate at the Australian National University. Australia has since reduced the dosing interval several times, but it has yet to expand booster eligibility to those under 18 years old. Israel started administering the booster to 12-year-olds in August last year. The US expanded eligibility to 12 to 17-year-olds in early January. Are booster appointments available? More than half of all second doses were administered in the final four months of 2021, so many Australians are only newly eligible for boosters. But vaccine rollout was also expanded to the five to 11 age group in early December and 12-15 years in August. This means that those looking for boosters are competing for vaccine slots with children who are newly eligible and trying to get their second or even first dose of a Covid vaccine. Ken Tsang, who created a website to help find vaccine slots says there was a significant increase in traffic when the booster interval was first dropped to five months in December. “This was pretty sustained throughout the Christmas and New Year period with fewer bookings being available due to the holiday period and demand for the five to 11 year group. This demand has come down a fair bit in recent weeks.” Getting data on booster availability can be tricky due to the myriad systems, private and public for booking vaccines. Ken Tsang provided Guardian Australia with more than a month of availability data from his vaccine clinic finder. It contains thousands of individual clinics from across the country, but is not comprehensive. “Some clinics, especially state or territory-run clinics, require invitations, registration, logins and email verifications to access the booking system and see the booking slots. These are particularly challenging to get accurate and reliable availability information for,” Tsang says. Analysis of the data shows a jump in early December in clinics that have no availability within the next week right after booster eligibility was expanded and five to 11-year-olds given provision approval. Since then the number of clinics with no availability for the next week has remained steady at around 80%. The booster rate has increased and states have launched more walk-in centres, pop-up clinics and even vaccination programs at home. But the stability of vaccine slot availability suggests we may be at capacity for the clinics that Ken Tsang is tracking. Notes and methods: Estimated eligibility calculated by summing the total number of second doses administered six, five, four or three months previously. Vaccines administered to five to 11 and 12-15 age groups have been removed from the analysis. Seven-day rolling average of booster doses only shows doses to 18+ age group. In order to get a sufficient backlog of second doses by state to calculate up to six months previously, a mixture of Air and non-Air second dose data were used.Australian universities are hoping the return of international students and face-to-face learning will help the decimated sector “snap back” from Covid restrictions, but some teachers are warning the industry is in a perilous position. Since the pandemic, the number of international student visa holders has fallen by 205,854 – or 33.5% – with the sector losing at least $1.8bn in revenue in the first year alone, according to Universities Australia. The flow-on effects have been massive. By last September, 20% of tertiary workers – approximately 40,000 – had lost their jobs, according to research from the Australia Institute. Across 2021, at least 2,100 courses were cut around the country, figures from the National Tertiary Education Union show. Alison Barnes, the president of the NTEU, said the number of lost courses could be much larger as there is no national database showing what is on offer. “It might be a drop in the ocean in regards to what’s been cut,” Barnes said. “None of this stuff is particularly transparent and that’s not a good thing. “When they closed the border, universities felt that impact very swiftly and very hard.” The sector is bracing for more cuts over the next two years after last year’s federal budget reduced funding for universities by nearly 10% over three years and the $1bn emergency research grant was discontinued. Barnes said this will not only impact the quality of education students receive but also Australia’s research capabilities. “Pulling resources from our institutions and universities, you can look at the impact now, but what worries me is what it means for society five years from now, 10 years from now,” she said. “It doesn’t end for universities. The problems created by Covid-19 and the federal government’s neglect of the sector will carry on for many years to come.” With the borders now open, universities are hoping the 131,000 international students who have been stuck overseas will return to complete their studies and Australia will resume its place as a world leader in tertiary education. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The full picture for enrolment and commencement numbers for both international and domestic students will not be known until March, but the minister for immigration, Alex Hawke, announced on 18 January that 43,300 international students had already returned to Australia. Peter Hurley, an education policy expert at Victoria University’s Mitchell Institute, said all eyes would be on the number of international students. “Are they coming back? That’s the question everyone wants to know, at what rate they come is really important. We’ll get the first indication in a month or two,” Hurley said. He said international students have been the cornerstone of Australia’s higher education policy for the last 30 years, used to supplement the sector’s income. “When it comes to international students, the reason people focus on them so much is they are so important to the university sector and the way it resources itself. “There’s no other way to fill the gap.” Hurley said the quality of education on offer at Australian universities had deteriorated during the pandemic, according to domestic students. This sentiment was echoed by one arts student from Victoria who said the inability to discuss and debate in groups had impacted their Masters degree. “It’s become a very individualised experience,” they said. Julie Kimber, a historian and union delegate at Swinburne University, likens working in academia right now to being at the Ford factory during the last days of car manufacturing in Australia. “I sometimes think we’re looking down the barrel,” she said. “If we’re going to online learning, what differentiates Australian unis from others around the world? “If I could do a course at the London School of Economics for the same or less money, I know where I would go.” She personally knows 12 people who have lost their jobs in the last year and said that while academics cared deeply about their students and research, morale was low across the workforce. “Universities are nothing like they were when it started. They’ve been corporatising for decades but we’re now reaching a stage where the sector bears little relationship to its purpose,” she said. In August last year a report produced by EY after interviewing senior industry figures predicted the number of international students in Australia would never return to its 2019 levels. Instead, it predicted a total revenue loss of $6bn by 2030. The shortfall could force the closure or merger of smaller institutions and would mean 50% of non-research staff would be out of work, the report said. EY’s global head of education, Catherine Friday, said the pandemic had “exposed the overreliance on on-campus learning and international students in Australia’s higher education system”. “There is so much financial strain in the sector right now and such uncertainty about ongoing income and revenue streams that it’s reasonable to suspect that there might be university closures or some sort of merger activity in the market,” she said. Not all of the sector agrees with this outlook. Catriona Jackson, the chief executive of Universities Australia, said Australian universities still offer a world-class experience and were ready to bounce back from the challenges. “Universities are preparing, with optimism, for a safe return to lively campus life, especially as we welcome back considerable numbers of local but also international students – many of whom have been waiting for up to two years to return,” she said. While it would take time, Australian universities offered a world-class experience – one that would continue to lure back students from overseas, she said. “We have reached a milestone with the reopening of our borders, but the sector will take time to recover. “We attract scholars from more than 140 countries,” Jackson said, “and the fundamental appeal of an Australian education remain as strong as ever: excellent universities, high vaccination rates and an enviable lifestyle.”Without a doubt, Besart Berisha will go down as an A-Leagues legend. Last week, just over six months on from departing Australia in pursuit of one final European run, the ALM’s all-time leading goalscorer announced his retirement, ending a journey that started at Tennis Borussia Berlin and ended at FC Prishtina, having along the way become intrinsically tied to Australian football. As befitting his time on these shores, tributes for Berisha were quick to flow, celebrating the 36-year-old as one of the greatest ALM players of all time thanks to his exploits at Brisbane Roar, Melbourne Victory and Western United. Yet, especially when contrasted with the reaction to another ALM milestone set this weekend, Berisha’s retirement does raise the question of how A-Leagues’ greatness can be measured. Though undoubtedly in its upper tier, Berisha is probably not the most talented forward in ALM history. Ola Toivonen, Emile Heskey and Robbie Fowler have also had time in the competition while Alessandro Del Piero spent some games up top for Sydney FC. David Villa played four games for Melbourne City in 2014–15 and at some point, Perth Glory will be hoping that they actually get a chance to start Daniel Sturridge. But talent does not equal greatness. And while Berisha’s resume comes nowhere close to that of Heskey or Villa in a global context, his legacy in ALM – whose story cannot be told without him – is what makes him stand out. A player possessing both talent and success in equal measure makes identification of greatness relatively simple. Berisha, Thomas Broich, and Miloš Ninković – the “big three” in the ALM pantheon – will all be remembered not just for their ability to impact games of football as individuals, but also for the trophies and success that seemed to follow them wherever they went. But beyond that, things get a little more nebulous. Despite spending only two seasons in what was a middling Sydney team, does Del Piero rank as an ALM great? Certainly, the talent is there to justify it and moments such as his debut against Newcastle Jets are established league lore, but is that enough? Do off-field factors such as the surge of excitement around his signing, the mainstream press that followed and the heady heights the league was experiencing at that time confer it? And then there are other, even murkier cases. This weekend, Nikolai Topor-Stanley became just the second player to reach 350 ALM games with remarkably little fanfare and, when he retires, he will likely have supplanted Andrew Durante as the all-time appearances leader. Held in high regard for his professionalism, the 36-year-old was also a part of the Wanderers side that won an ALM premiership in their first year and became champions of Asia in 2014. But is Topor-Stanley – his legacy largely built on historic consistency and longevity – an ALM great? Is Durante, for that matter? What of Leigh Broxham? The finest embodiment of a one-club player in league history thanks to his 342 league games with Victory, his trophy cabinet is bulging with team accolades. He and Kevin Muscat are the only players to have won back-to-back Victory medals. Despite never having been the most talented or important player in his team, is his intrinsic connection to the competition’s history and what he has come to mean to Victory fans a claim to ALM greatness? Or just Victory greatness? In an ALW context, the concept has often become intertwined with the exploits of the Matildas’ “golden generation” and the transformative effect that players have had on the game; the likes of Lisa De Vanna, Sam Kerr, Michelle Heyman and Clare Polkinghorne, who have dragged the competition to higher standards and ambitions. Other arguments come for figures like Kate Gill, Sarah Walsh, Sally Shipard, and Heather Garriock – foundational players who continue to contribute as coaches and administrators. Or for players such as Jess Fishlock, international arrivals who dominated the competition before leaving with numerous trophies. Yet there are others. Teresa Polias’s brand, for example, is almost exclusively tied to Sydney FC rather than the national team, but as the league’s appearances record holder and heart and soul of its most successful club, it would be a brave individual that argues against her being ALW great. What about someone like Gema Simon, who has played 138 ALW games – a feat magnified by its relatively short length – but has done so while playing for the perennially trophy-less Newcastle Jets? Club great or league great? Inevitably, it’s a fierce debate. For greatness to mean anything, it has to be an exclusive club. But where the line is drawn, and why, will likely be in the eye of the beholder.In a barbed intervention on Saturday, the White House said it hoped a Republican senator who complained that Joe Biden’s supreme court pick would be the beneficiary of race-based affirmative action, would give the nominee the same consideration he gave Amy Coney Barrett. Barrett was nominated and confirmed shortly before the 2020 election, after Donald Trump pledged to pick a woman to replace Ruth Bader Ginsburg. The hardline Catholic duly succeeded the liberal lion, establishing a 6-3 conservative majority. Biden has pledged to put the first Black woman on the court as a replacement for Stephen Breyer, the 83-year-old liberal who this week announced his retirement. On Friday, Roger Wicker of Mississippi complained that Biden’s pick would therefore be a beneficiary of race-based affirmative action, which the court seems poised to declare unconstitutional, having said it will consider a challenge concerning college admissions. Wicker told a radio station in his state: “The irony is that the supreme court is at the very time hearing cases about this sort of affirmative racial discrimination while adding someone who is the beneficiary of this sort of quota. “The majority of the court may be saying writ large that it’s unconstitutional. We’ll see how that irony works out.” On Saturday, a White House spokesperson noted that after Trump promised to pick a woman, Wicker merely said he hoped Barrett would be “an inspiration” to his granddaughters. “We hope Senator Wicker will give President Biden’s nominee the same consideration he gave to then-Judge Barrett,” the spokesperson said. Breyer has protested that the court is not political, but though his retirement will not give Biden a chance to change the ideological balance of the panel, the president will be able to install a younger liberal before Democrats defend control of the Senate. Many have seen rich historic irony in conservative complaints about Biden’s pledge to nominate based on race and gender. The historian Rick Perlstein was among those to point out that Ronald Reagan, the hero of the modern Republican party, chose a justice entirely because she was a woman. Before his victory over Jimmy Carter in 1980, Reagan announced that “one of the first supreme court vacancies in my administration will be filled by the most qualified woman I can possibly find”. He duly nominated Sandra Day O’Connor, a political moderate and the first woman to sit on the court. “She was totally unqualified on paper,” Perlstein said, on Twitter. “[Zero] con[stitutional] law experience. Reagan lucked out.” Wicker also told SuperTalk Mississippi Radio he feared Biden’s pick would be more progressive than Breyer. “We’re going to go from a nice, stately liberal to someone who’s probably more in the style of Sonia Sotomayor,” the senator said, adding: “I hope it’s at least someone who will at least not misrepresent the facts. I think they will misinterpret the law.” Many observers made Ketanji Brown Jackson, 51, and a member of the US court of appeals for the DC circuit, favourite to be Biden’s pick. Jackson replaced Merrick Garland, now attorney general but in 2016, the nominee Republicans refused to give even a hearing when Barack Obama picked him to replace Antonin Scalia. An era of bitter partisan warfare ensued. This time, Democrats will court Republican moderates such as Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Susan Collins of Maine and Mitt Romney of Utah. But Wicker said Biden’s pick would in all likelihood “not get a single Republican vote”. “But we will not treat her like the Democrats did Brett Kavanaugh,” he said, in reference to the bitter fight over Trump’s second nominee, who denied accusations of sexual assault. Democrats need only stick together to succeed. Thanks to a Republican rule change, nominees require only a simple majority. The Senate is split 50-50 but controlled by the casting vote of the vice-president, Kamala Harris. Wicker pointed to a wish for at least symbolic vengeance, saying the Kavanaugh fight “was one of the most disgraceful, shameful things and completely untruthful things that [Democrats on the Senate judiciary committee have] ever, ever done”.I am sitting at my desk in a Covid-secured Observer newsroom trying to achieve a feat that may be beyond my journalistic skill: to make you care about the vile state of our prisons. A generation ago, liberal newspapers and the BBC competed to break stories about the degradation inflicted in the public’s name. Now the web has given editors too much information. In the 20th century, they could kid themselves that readers cared. But the click-counters don’t lie and the 21st century has shown that, although readers say they care, as a matter of observable fact they don’t. Prison reform has all but vanished from public debate. How to break the indifference? Let’s try a statistic. A punch to the gut with a killer fact. Last week, the Ministry of Justice revealed the number of jail suicides was up by 28%. When Covid hit, it ordered most of its 80,000 inmates to stay in their cells for 23 hours a day. Near perpetual confinement slowed the spread of the virus and cut assaults on prisoners and prison officers, which is why ministers are thinking of keeping lockdown going after Covid has gone. But it has been a mental health disaster. The authorities don’t keep decent records because they know that the public doesn’t care. The Commons justice committee said the best guess it could make was that 70% of inmates have two or more mental health conditions. Locking them in cells for 23 hours a day, week after week, month after month, has pushed many to the edge and over it. The stats not doing it for you? How about a bit of human life or, rather, a needless death? My editors always told me to grab the readers with a case study and save the boring stuff for later. Prison officers found Charlie Todd hanging in a segregation unit at Durham Prison. Once they might have been saved his life. But as well as defunding the police, the Conservatives have defunded the prison service. Four staff were meant to have been on duty at the unit, but weren’t. Officers said budget cuts meant “on a day to day basis, no one [was] in charge”. Charlie was awaiting trial for burglary and a more serious wounding charge. Prosecutors later dropped the wounding allegation against his associates, so the odds were they wouldn’t have charged him and he would not even have received a custodial sentence. His mother, Emma, described “a handsome, loving boy who loved to tell a story and would put a smile on the face of anyone who met him. He was a cheeky chappie, happy go lucky and loyal.” Her son was just 18. The prisons are stuffed with inmates like him on remand or serving pointless and dangerous short sentences. There’s no time to offer them treatment or rehabilitation. The state holds on to them just long enough to lose them their jobs or the partner who might have persuaded them to go straight. Unsurprisingly, they go out and reoffend. Predictably, Boris Johnson is making a bad situation worse. As part of his despairing efforts to save his worthless backside, the prime minister is inventing policies that might deter Tory MPs from chucking him into history’s dustbin. To prove he’s a tough guy, he announced he would increase the power of magistrates to jail defendants without any of that old-fashioned nonsense about the right to trial by jury. Soon, there will be yet more people sent to prison for short terms. In they will go, out they will come, and back in they will go again. Still not with me? We are talking about criminals, after all. I accept it’s one thing to lament that we send the most vulnerable to the places we care about least. But prisoners are not the same as autistic kids abused in mental health wards or innocent refugees imprisoned in detention centres. For all that, even when you’ve acknowledged there are inmates who should never be let out, you are still left with tens of thousands of ill and addicted people with trivial criminal records. Rory Stewart told me that nothing he had seen in Afghanistan or Iraq was “so screwed” as the system he encountered when he became prisons minister in 2018. “Violence had tripled to 30,000 assaults a year, every institution was overcrowded, filthy and rat and drug-infested.” In the poor world, prisons were relatively open. Inmates could leave cells. Their families could bring food. Here, he found only neglect. Stewart and his then boss, David Gauke, tried to limit the abuse. Johnson has a reverse Midas touch, however: everything he touches turns to dirt. He drove them out of parliament for opposing his extreme version of EU withdrawal and prison reform became just another opportunity to build a better country Brexit destroyed. The prison service remains Whitehall’s equivalent of a posting to Siberia – an assignment the ambitious and talented run from. When the job of chief executive came up, officials tried to change that. They approached Nils Öberg from the Swedish ministry of justice, which had cut prison numbers and reduced crime. They asked what he would do if ministers and the courts sent him an extra 10,000 prisoners. He replied that he would refuse to cram them into overcrowded jails. The negotiations stopped and you can see why. It’s all very well for Scandinavia to insist on civilised standards but the Brits would never accept them. Can you imagine the rage in the media if the jails closed their doors just because they were full? They gave the job to one Jo Farrar. Instead of having experience of working in the criminal justice system, she had run Bath and North East Somerset council. She’s presided over a humanitarian scandal, but at least she hasn’t provoked angry headlines in the tabloids. If you still don’t care, reflect that bad government kills and maims the law-abiding as well as the convicted. Everyone knows that to reduce crime and the suffering it brings to the innocent, you must boost mental health and drug and alcohol treatment services, tackle homelessness and give teenagers after-school sport clubs and summer jobs to absorb their energy. This government hasn’t done it and will never do it and if you are unlucky perhaps one day you will pay the price for its carelessness. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistFamilies hit by the cost-of-living crisis are being targeted by credit firms offering “buy now, pay later” deals on weekly groceries, pet food and hot drinks. Shoppers are urged to spread their payments for staple foods and treats to help cope with “these difficult times”. One promotion states: “Regardless of your credit rating, we will offer you a tonne of credit to do your shopping with.” The sector faces new regulation, but welfare groups warn the new form of credit is “like a runaway train”. The products typically offer interest-free credit with the money paid in three or four instalments over a month or longer. Klarna, the biggest player in the buy now, pay later sector, has focused on partnership deals with retailers selling fashion and household items, but some operators are promoting credit on groceries, fast food and hot drinks. An investigation by the Observer has found: • The tech finance firm Zilch, valued at £1.5bn, is advertising a buy now, pay later deal with superstore Iceland, with ready meals, pet food and fizzy drinks on offer with a first payment of 25% of the shelf price, and the balance paid interest-free over six weeks. The firm also promotes home-delivered food and coffees on interest-free credit. • An online grocery store called Flava is offering buy now, pay later credit to struggling families without credit checks for products from Kellogg’s Coco Pops to Pot Noodle. Its website states: “Stop worrying about how you are going to survive the lockdown.” • Clearpay, one of the biggest buy now, pay later operators, promotes vodka and gin retailers and online sweets stores on its website, where the products can be bought on interest-free credit over six weeks. Mehmet Sezgin, a former board member of MasterCard Europe, and a global retail banking expert, said: “No one should buy perishable items like food on credit. It’s an invitation to indebtedness and bankruptcy.” A report by Bain &amp; Company, a consultancy firm, has estimated the market is worth about £6.4bn a year in the UK, based on industry data, and is used by about 10 million shoppers. The Treasury is to publish proposals later this year on regulating the sector, which is not covered by consumer credit laws because no interest is charged on the debt. Some of the firms do charge transaction fees and penalties for late payments. One in three buy now, pay later users have missed a payment or made a late one, according to a report published last year by the welfare charity Citizens Advice. The report found consumers using the credit products had also been charged £39m in late fees over one year. Rachel Beddow, principal policy manager at Citizens Advice, said: “It is like a runaway train. You can shop 24 hours a day and easily lose track of how much you owe, and there’s not enough protection for people who end up slipping into debt.” The UK firm Zilch, which describes itself as the “fintech darling of the UK”, is one of the first buy now, pay later providers to be operating with consumer credit authorisation from the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), but faces scrutiny over its promotion of its product for groceries, beverages and home-delivered food. Zilch has advertised on Facebook that consumers can “pay back over six weeks” for Domino’s Pizza and Uber Eats. It also advertised that consumers can pay in four interest-free instalments for their coffees. The firm was last week advertising buy now, pay later at Iceland. Two large salmon fillets were promoted for a “1st payment” of £1.50; a box of 40 pouches of Winalot dog food was promoted for a “1st payment” of £2.25; and a carton of 24 cans of Whites fizzy lemonade was promoted for a “1st payment” of £1.75. The remaining balance of the shelf price is paid over six weeks. Online food store Flava has pioneered buy now, pay later for groceries, offering “£100 credit guaranteed”. The website, which says it offers a “tonne of credit”, says: “If you’ve struggled with credit in the past, a needless search on your credit file will only damage it further, which is why we don’t do it.” The repayments can be made over four weeks and are interest-free. Many of the Flava promotions are for products high in sugar and fat. Its special offers last week included 2.7kg jar of Original Choc Nibbles for £18.99 and a Dobsons Cream Soda Mega Lollies jar for £18. Clearpay also promotes buy now, pay later for food and drink. The businesses promoted on its website include Drink Supermarket, Beerhunter, Bottle Bling, the Sweet Shack and Happy Candy UK. A review by the FCA’s former interim chief executive, Christopher Woolard, into the unsecured credit market, published in February last year, said buy now, pay later could be a useful tool, but a shopper could quickly amass £1,000 of credit using multiple lenders and it could cause consumer harm. Michael Donald, a former director of Visa UK and founder of the UK digital payment app ImageNPay, said: “There needs to be tighter controls to block certain categories which are a fast track for the less fortunate in society to spiral into debt.” Zilch says it offers a better, more affordable option for consumers than credit cards and does not permit any instalment payments on items costing less than £5. It also offers its customers to pay by debit in one payment and earn cashback. Philip Belamant, founder and chief executive, said: “Customers can choose to pay in four instalments, which tend to be £45-£65 purchases, or pay in one with debit. We’re educating consumers. Zilch can be used as a traditional credit card alternative without the interest or any fees for late payments.” The company said it had safeguards for customers, which included freezing further spending when an instalment has not been paid. Clearpay said: “We enable customers to make interest-free purchases without the risk of falling into a revolving debt trap.” Flava did not respond to a request for comment. Alex Marsh, head of Klarna UK, said: “Unlike credit card providers, who for decades have kept people in debt with sky-high credit limits, minimum payments and rip-off interest rates, our BNPL products are interest and fee free and provide consumers with a clear repayment schedule.” Laybuy, another leading buy now, pay later provider, said its credit is not intended to be used for groceries, alcohol or fast food. A FCA spokesperson said:“Buy now, pay later products need to come into regulation. It is vital the law, which sets our remit, adapts as the market innovates, so new products and services develop in a way that benefits consumers and that action can be taken to prevent harm.”By Fulham’s recent standards, this was a meagre result. Just when it seemed Marco Silva had the Championship sussed, promotion inevitable, the division threw up another one those oddities, a plot twist to remind us that nothing is a formality in this league. Aleksandar Mitrovic made it 28 goals for the season, three off Ivan Toney’s record-breaking tally last season, but the runaway leaders were ultimately held by Blackpool, for whom this point will provide encouragement that they could again make a run for the play-offs, this time from 14th, after winning promotion from League One via Wembley last season. Fulham could have feasibly been four goals up in the first seven minutes such was their early domination but Blackpool turned the tide after a medical emergency in the stands, which delayed play for 40 minutes and disrupted Fulham’s rhythm. The game was paused on 13 minutes and, after the referee Peter Bankes directed both teams off the pitch, a man was taken to hospital in an ambulance after suffering a cardiac arrest in the Hammersmith End. Sadly, the club announced in the evening that the supporter had died. Before leaving the field for the stoppage, both sets of players tried to keep warm, zipping passes around and the Blackpool defender Richard Keogh and goalkeeper Daniel Grimshaw were embroiled in conversation, presumably plotting a route back into the game. Fulham had bombarded Blackpool from kick-off, Mitrovic stooping in front of Keogh to meet a Denis Odoi cross with 55 seconds on the clock. A couple of minutes later Fabio Carvalho, a prodigious talent, flicked another Odoi cross goalwards but his effort dribbled towards Grimshaw. Fulham were living up to their status as the most prolific team in Europe – they have scored 74 goals this season, one shy of Norwich’s total in this division last season with 18 games to play – but faded after the enforced first-half break. “I don’t like to find an easy excuse,” Silva said. “I prefer to look at ourselves. The way the game was in the moment, we would score the second goal quickly. I don’t have any doubts about that. You could smell that the second goal would come for us.” The game had threatened to be a nonevent even before Mitrovic tapped in on five minutes but Blackpool somehow managed to survive an early barrage of chances and 10 minutes after the interval replied through Josh Bowler, who was released by Fulham as a youngster and scored the winner when these sides met in September. Bowler was a threat throughout and in the first half he smacked a shot against the crossbar after cutting inside Tim Ream following a powerful run by Shayne Lavery, who got the better of Harrison Reed on halfway. The equaliser arrived when CJ Hamilton pulled the ball back to the fringe of the Fulham penalty area and Bowler powered in a goal that will only add to his valuation as the transfer deadline approaches, with Nottingham Forest among the clubs keen to sign the winger. “I thought he was outstanding,” said the Blackpool head coach, Neil Critchley. “If he is still at the club at 11 o’clock on Monday night then we’ll all be delighted.” With a one-goal lead and the sun piercing through the imposing Riverside Stand, a work in progress set to be opened in time for next season, it looked as though Fulham would add to their advantage. A headed clearance by the Blackpool defender Jordan Thorniley recoiled on to a post and Mitrovic hit the woodwork before Harry Wilson went close to finding Fulham a second goal after latching on to a reverse pass by Reed. Wilson would have had a contender for goal of the season had he found the net when his sumptuous lob dropped wide. He brought a wonderful ball by Tosin Adarabioyo under his spell and then flicked a shot goalwards with his next touch. “We didn’t start the game particularly well, which was my fault,” Critchley said. “We started a little bit tentatively. I said to the players at the break [in the first half]: ‘If we fail, then we fail being us. We’ve got nothing to lose, let’s go for it. If we get exposed and they score, so what? They’ve been scoring goals for fun anyway.’ “In the second half I thought it was an even game. We knew that psychologically the game could be difficult for them, because they’re expected to win.” From there Blackpool successfully dampened Fulham’s mood and could have scored a winner but Marek Rodak saved smartly to deny Hamilton from an acute angle after a poor clearance by the Fulham substitute Nathaniel Chalobah. If this result is not enough to bring Fulham back down to earth, then a trip to Manchester City in the FA Cup next Saturday should do the trick.Anthony Martial played the pass, Edinson Cavani timed his run to deliver the cross and there was Marcus Rashford to sweep home, the stoppage-time goal giving Manchester United a 1-0 win over West Ham last Saturday and sparking wild scenes at Old Trafford. “Manchester United are targeting West Ham’s top-four place,” roared the TV commentator. “Going Fourth,” declared the front page of the following day’s Observer Sport. And the first thing to say is this was not how United had imagined it at the start of the season. They opened with a 5-1 home victory over Leeds and the idea was to build on last season’s second place under Ole Gunnar Solskjær and challenge Manchester City for the title. As it is, Solskjær has gone, courtesy of a spectacular implosion, so has Michael Carrick, briefly the interim to the interim, and now the club’s fans, expectations radically downsized, would see it as relative success if they could hold on to fourth in the Premier League ahead of West Ham and the rest – principally Arsenal and Tottenham – under Ralf Rangnick, who will then hand over to a permanent manager. United are in a rare state of uncertainty, prioritising short-term imperatives over a longer-term vision, albeit the latter is fundamental and not unrelated to the former; struggling to locate identity and conviction. Their rivals can see it. United have lost the fear factor. But can those clubs capitalise on the plot line that is set to crackle until the end of the season? Because what is clear is that they, too, have their problems. The stand-out detail of Rashford’s winner was that Rangnick had introduced him, Martial and Cavani as second-half substitutes. It felt a little cobbled together, an illustration of how United have attacking players that they cannot properly accommodate or fulfil. Jesse Lingard is a prime example. Martial has, of course, since departed on loan to Sevilla. On the other hand, from Cristiano Ronaldo to Bruno Fernandes via Paul Pogba, United have the individuals who can make the difference at any time, irrespective of their situation. Remember how Lingard scored the winner in the 89th minute at West Ham last September? At West Ham, there is quite the burden on Michail Antonio, the only pure No 9 at the club, although he has been supported by Jarrod Bowen, who is in the throes of a magnificent season, with Saïd Benrahma, Pablo Fornals and Manuel Lanzini chipping in. And the dynamics are similar at Arsenal and Spurs. In the case of the former, it has been magnified by the exile of the centre-forward Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, the latest illustration of Mikel Arteta seeking to establish a culture where discipline for the wider collective good is everything. Alexandre Lacazette has exciting young players around him in Bukayo Saka, Emile Smith Rowe, Martin Ødegaard and Gabriel Martinelli, whose output has been impressive. But can the quartet continue to in effect over-perform, particularly Smith Rowe, who has eight goals in the league? As an aside, can Arteta get anything out of Nicolas Pépé? At Spurs, it has been possible to count on the fingers of one hand how many attacking players have delivered for Antonio Conte – the lone No 9, Harry Kane, and the wingers Son Heung-min, Lucas Moura and Steven Bergwijn. It is not enough. At Wolves, who can count themselves as being on the fringes of the race after a fine season, one statistic stands out. They have 19 goals from 21 league games. It is not the kind of form that screams Champions League qualification. It is about quality, first and foremost and when West Ham, say, are able to play their best XI, they can look a match for anybody. Declan Rice is sure to be in the player of the year conversations. Yet it is about depth, too – particularly with the pandemic exerting its remorseless strain – and they have felt the losses to injury of the centre-halves Angelo Ogbonna and Kurt Zouma. The former was ruled out for the season after going off in the eye-catching home win over Liverpool in early November while the latter is only just back from a seven-week absence. Arsenal and Spurs also suffer a significant drop-off when the understudies have to step in and it is a part of the reason why the closing days of the January transfer window are so important. United are the best resourced and yet they have underwhelmed since Rangnick took over in early December, there being little evidence of a new-manager bounce or him making a distinctive mark on the team. Despite the attacking riches, they have found goals difficult to come by during what has been a favourable run of fixtures and the contribution of David de Gea has remained crucial. The opening 70 minutes at Aston Villa were perhaps as well as they have played – some signs of Rangnick-ball? – before they were pegged back to 2-2 and they have rather got away with it in some of their wins. If United must have Champions League football because, without it, the sell to the new manager would be so much harder, then West Ham are simply enjoying the ride. Few people saw this coming from them and it has been a rare challenge; echoes of their run to fifth in 1998-99 under Harry Redknapp, their highest finish of the Premier League era. David Moyes has shaped a team in his image – shrewd, selfless, never-say-die – and the manager must wonder where they would be without the home losses to Brentford, Southampton and Leeds. Only Chelsea have played more league games than West Ham, there has been the charge into the Europa League last 16, plus the Carabao Cup wins over the Manchester clubs, and so the tiredness that has crept in of late has been inevitable. The domestic break offers them the chance to draw breath for the next push, although Antonio will not have his feet up. He has three World Cup qualifiers to play with Jamaica. Arsenal remain enigmatic, capable of quick and well-structured football, performances to light the path to a promising future and then moments when it all goes dark; sometimes within the same 90 minutes. They can take steps forward in one area – the development of Saka and Smith Rowe – and then see a crisis blow up elsewhere, such as the Aubameyang situation. Indiscipline is an issue. Since Arteta took over in December 2019, they have had 14 red cards, more than any club in the division. It often feels draining and the same is true of Spurs, where Conte has grumbled constantly about the squad at his disposal – with justification – giving the impression that job satisfaction can only be a pipe dream but, at the same time, bringing the team up on the rails. He is mindful of the gap to the top and so do not tell him that if Spurs were to win their four games in hand, they would jump above third-placed Chelsea. For Conte, who represents the hope for Spurs and yet is also central to a sense of impending peril, it has to be about the space below Chelsea. The scramble to claim it will be all-consuming.Even in his first press conference after Monday’s disaster at the Stade Olembé in which eight fans died, Patrice Motsepe, the president of the Confederation of African Football, was looking to shift the blame. He convened a commission to investigate the causes – it was expected to report on Friday, but is yet to do so – but the avoidance of corporate responsibility had begun already. There was the gate that was “inexplicably” shut. And that, almost certainly, was the direct cause of the buildup of people and the surge towards the open gate that knocked down a temporary barrier and led to people being trampled on. Whoever didn’t open that shut gate will take the blame. Motsepe also spoke of fans without tickets. Nobody seems to doubt that is true, but neither is it provable – and the stadium was not full to capacity (although it was probably full beyond the supposed 80% cap imposed because of Covid); the problem was not the number of fans but their distribution. A photograph taken well before kick-off shows clearly the problem of a handful of police trying to check a growing crowd of thousands 20 yards or so in front of the fence where the tragedy occurred. But there are causes and there are causes. “Security,” Motsepe said, “is the responsibility of the local organising committee and it is not Caf’s responsibility. Caf’s responsibility is to advise. Caf has no legal obligation and has no responsibility and should not be blamed. But we are partners and it’s not time to point fingers.” Yet he had already done so twice. It’s easy – and not untrue – to say the cause is a basic one of crowd control. There has been talk that yet another perimeter fence had been planned but not built, and of the need for security checks to be conducted more quickly (in Douala on Saturday, they were more complex and slower), and perhaps there is merit in both points, but the fundamental issue was that too many people turned up at the same place at the same time. There may have been soldiers in that area, but looking menacing with an AK47 is of little use – and neither would the rooftop snipers who suddenly appeared on Saturdayyesterday have been – when what was needed was to divert large numbers of people away from the south entrance to the east and north. Clearly, the local organisers must bear responsibility for that. But then, how many major football matches are held in Cameroon? How often do their authorities have to deal with crowds of 60,000? There were 25,000 at Cameroon’s last home World Cup qualifier, and 10,000 at the one before that – and both of those were played not in Yaoundé but in Douala. It’s Caf that hosts tournaments every two years and Caf that has the experience; it cannot sit above the carnage and casually brush off responsibility. There have been suggestions from insiders that Motsepe has been appalled by the disorganisation and lack of leadership he has found at Caf. It has never been the most efficiently run governing body, mired in infighting and corruption, but things clearly got worse since Issa Hayatou’s 29-year reign came to an end with defeat to Ahmad Ahmad in a presidential election in 2017. Ahmad was forced to resign after corruption charges last year and is serving a Fifa-imposed two-year ban from football, with Motsepe, a South African mining tycoon, elected unopposed as his replacement. He was the candidate favoured by the Fifa president, Gianni Infantino, and the global governing body’s influence within Caf is growing. That may, in time, lead to World Cup-style efficiencies, but it must also be a serious concern. Caf should exist to run and promote African football, not as a voting bloc to support Infantino and his schemes. Infantino was at the Council of Europe this past week, explaining the “need to find ways to include the whole world to give hope to Africans so that they don’t need to cross the Mediterranean in order to find maybe a better life but, more probably, death in the sea”. A worthy aim, no doubt, but he was clearly talking in the context of staging the World Cup every two years, a plan that may have the support of Caf, or at least the presidents of various vocal federations, but does not seem popular at all among anybody else in African football: delegates, coaches, players, journalists or fans. It’s easy to see why Infantino supports a biennial World Cup: he thinks it would raise more revenues for Fifa (although exactly how much is disputed) and would be a strike against Uefa in their wrangle for political control over the game. But just as it would diminish the Euros, so it would diminish the Cup of Nations – and it’s very hard to see how that benefits African football as a whole. There 24 teams playing in a major tournament of decent standard every two years; who benefits if that is overshadowed by a global tournament that, following the model for the expanded 2026 World Cup would feature nine African sides every two years? Certainly not teams such as the Gambia, Burkina Faso, Equatorial Guinea and Comoros, who have lit up this Cup of Nations and shown how the African middle is rising even if the traditional giants have plateaued. But the truth is that the Cup of Nations is a success despite Caf and not because of it. It’s hardly a new phenomenon, but at every turn the tournament is mismanaged, from the poor accommodation endured by the Gambia and other teams to the dithering and ultimately aborted attempt to play the final minutes of Mali against Tunisia after the referee blew early for full time, to the abject media facilities in Douala, to the appalling fact that two and a half years after the tournament was scheduled to kick off, the Stade Olembé is still unfinished – and, unless more money is found to pay contractors, will remain so. There is a culture of indecisiveness and inaction and that creates an environment in which tragedies such as Monday’s can occur. Caf may, as Motsepe claimed, bear no legal responsibility, but it cannot simply blame somebody else, move on and forget what has happened.Outside, Cameroon’s supporters were left under no illusions about what was expected of them. Inside, those who fulfilled the conditions for smooth passage could raise the roof. This Africa Cup of Nations quarter-final, won with two goals from Karl Toko Ekambi, was always going to be loaded with added meaning but the host nation progressed on two fronts. There was no repeat of Monday’s tragedy at the Stade Olembé in Yaoundé which has scarred this tournament irreversibly and nor was there any real sense one might occur; there was also a distinct impression Cameroon are equipped to go all the way, brushing aside a spirited representation from the Gambia who have formed some of the past fortnight’s fonder memories and would be welcomed to this level again. “Condolences to families of the departed spectators,” read a message on the big screens at either end during a well-observed, if brief, period of silence before kick-off. The balance required of the competition’s organisers was one that honoured the eight who died in the crush at Olembé and acknowledged the systemic failings that brought it about, while keeping the show on the road. Douala, the country’s throbbing economic capital, was alive for the first Cameroon game it has hosted at an Afcon. Soon after 8am vuvuzelas echoed in the area around Marché Ndogpassi, a sprawling complex four miles away from the ground; many among the city’s dense network of streets became almost impassable but the appetite to maintain order around the venue was unmistakable. Along the road that skirts Japoma Stadium’s western side, soldiers bearing rifles stood on roofs or stared down from balconies. They were members of the Bataillon d’Intervention Rapide (BIR), a feared combat unit that reports directly to the president, Paul Biya, and has been the subject of torture allegations in the past. As fans queued to pass through the turnstiles, which were allowed to open five hours before kick-off to ease pressure on access points, they were man-marked by red-capped gendarmes. The heavy-handedness of the spectacle was deliberate and the visual message clear: nobody would be allowed to take chances in gaining entry. It was a problematic point, explicitly reinforcing the blame that has largely been passed on to supporters for Monday’s disaster. The Cameroon sports minister, Narcisse Mouelle Kombi, had felt no shame in finger pointing during the buildup. The beefed-up security presence was required, he said, “to stop the uncivil behaviour of Cameroonians who want to force themselves into the stadium when they do not have entry tickets and negative Covid-19 test results.” A ban on under-11s inside the arena was among the measures he announced. A statement attributed to the team captain, Vincent Aboubakar, had called for “a high sense of discipline and more responsibility”. The hope is that when the Confederation of African Football belatedly produces its report into what occurred in Yaoundé it views the chain of events that cost lives with a greater degree of nuance. Some fans in the more laid-back capital had been at pains to suggest Douala, with its bustle and chaos, carried a high risk of similar problems. In the event there were no significant problems reported: the figure of 36,259 in attendance, just under 80% of capacity as per Covid-19 guidelines, looked accurate to the naked eye and an unwanted test was safely passed. It meant that as António Conceição’s team turned the screw, those who had waited so long could crank up the volume. Strip away the more troubling elements of context and this was everything a Cup of Nations quarter-final should be: a home country backed with ear-splitting levels of goodwill; a dogged, competitive minnow in the Gambia whose luck eventually ran out; a high-tempo performance settled by well-taken goals that mean Cameroon, who will play Egypt or Morocco in the semi-finals, are two games from a historic title on home soil. The precise turf upon which they would triumph remains open to question. Olembé is slated to host their semi-final and the final but its fate rests on Caf’s review; Japoma Stadium is an impressive facility but the condition of its pitch has already cost it a last-four tie and one of Sunday’s quarter-finals. It is a shambolic state of affairs going into the final week of a major tournament, but Cameroon’s players have raised hopes they can leave a positive legacy. They had been mocked beyond their borders for labouring past Comoros, who lacked a specialist keeper, before matters of life and death took hold. For 20 minutes they struggled for rhythm against the Gambia, a likeable group who made no bones about their intention to frustrate. When Aboubakar’s 36th minute header was beaten away by Baboucarr Gaye, who plays in Germany’s fourth tier, the sense was they had met an unlikely goalkeeping nemesis once again. But Cameroon had torn their opponents apart down the flanks and brought the house down with smart finishes by Toko Ekambi, served from either wing in the 12 minutes after half-time. Douala’s football fans could dance into the night, horns honking. An hour after full-time a section of the security personnel were debriefed in one of the stands, departing with a round of their own applause. Their work was done, but a rigorous analysis of the trauma that apparently necessitated it must follow.Despite reports that he is retiring, Tom Brady has told the Tampa Bay Buccaneers he hasn’t made up his mind, two people familiar with the details told the Associated Press. ESPN first reported Brady’s retirement on Saturday, citing unidentified sources. Brady’s health and wellness company posted a tweet indicating he’s retiring, and reaction came from around the world congratulating Brady on his career. But the tweet was later deleted, and Brady’s agent, Don Yee, said the 44-year-old quarterback would be the only person to accurately express his future. Brady called Buccaneers general manager Jason Licht to say he has not made a decision, according to two people who spoke to the AP on condition of anonymity because of the private nature of the conversations. Brady, a seven-time Super Bowl champion and the NFL’s career leader in numerous passing categories, is under contract for 2022, but he has cited a desire to spend more time with his wife, supermodel Gisele Bundchen, and three children despite still playing at the top of his game. After ESPN’s report, TB12sports Twitter account wrote: “7 Super Bowl Rings. 5 Super Bowl MVPs. 3 League MVP Awards. 22 Incredible Seasons. Thank you for it all, @TomBrady” That post was removed, and Yee released this statement: “I understand the advance speculation about Tom’s future. Without getting into the accuracy or inaccuracy of what’s being reported, Tom will be the only person to express his plans with complete accuracy. He knows the realities of the football business and planning calendar as well as anybody, so that should be soon.” ESPN and NFL.com later reported that Brady plans to announce his retirement at some point after the Super Bowl in February, and that Saturday’s tweet had most likely been sent in error. Brady led the NFL in yards passing (5,316), touchdowns (43), completions (485) and attempts (719), but the Buccaneers lost at home to the Los Angeles Rams last Sunday in the divisional round. Brady won six Super Bowls with the New England Patriots in 20 seasons playing for coach Bill Belichick. He joined the Buccaneers in 2020 and led them to the second Super Bowl title in franchise history. Brady would leave the sport as the career leader in yards passing (84,520) and TDs (624). He’s the only player to win more than five Super Bowls and was MVP of the game five times. Widely considered the greatest quarterback to play the game, Brady won three NFL MVP awards, was a first-team All-Pro three times and was selected to the Pro Bowl 15 times. He was 243-73 in his career in the regular season and 35-12 in the playoffs. Overlooked by every team coming out of Michigan, Brady was eventually selected by the Patriots in the sixth round of the 2000 NFL draft with the 199th overall pick. He replaced an injured Drew Bledsoe as the starter in 2001 and led New England to a Super Bowl victory over the heavily favored Rams that season. Brady went on to lead the Patriots to Super Bowl victories over the Panthers following the 2003 season and Eagles after the 2004 season. No team has since repeated as champions. But New England wouldn’t win another one for a decade, twice losing to the New York Giants in the Super Bowl, including a 17-14 defeat on 3 February 2008, that prevented the Patriots from completing a perfect season. Brady earned his fourth ring when the Patriots held off Seattle thanks to Malcolm Butler’s interception at the goal line in the Super Bowl after the 2014 season. Two years later, in the biggest Super Bowl comeback, he led the Patriots out of a 28-3 deficit in the third quarter against Atlanta to win in overtime. After losing to the Eagles and backup quarterback Nick Foles the following year, Brady got his sixth championship when New England shut down the Rams following the 2018 season. He joined the Buccaneers in 2020 amid a pandemic, instilling a winning culture for a franchise that hadn’t won a playoff game in 18 years. With his old friend Rob Gronkowski joining him in Tampa, Brady helped the Buccaneers become the first team to play in a Super Bowl in its stadium. Naturally, Brady won again. Brady threw more touchdown passes in his 40s (168) than in his 20s (147). In the 20 seasons he finished as starter, Brady reached the playoffs 19 times, won 18 division titles, went 10-4 in conference championships and 7-3 in Super Bowls. He played in the conference championship eight times in his last 10 years. Since starting his first game on 30 September 2001, Brady was under center for every game except when he suffered a season-ending knee injury in Week 1 in 2008 and the first four games in 2016 when he sat out a suspension because of the deflated footballs scandal. After leaving New England, the stoic Belichick and Patriot Way, Brady’s personality shined in the Florida sun. He was personable, engaging and entertaining, and he displayed his wit on social media while promoting his brands. During the Buccaneers’ victory celebration, Brady, perhaps a bit inebriated, chucked the Lombardi Trophy from one boat to tight end Cameron Brate on another. Known for his work ethic, intense exercise and nutrition regimen, Brady found a funny way to congratulate Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger on his retirement earlier this week. Brady wrote: “Ben defied the TB12 Method in favor of the “Throw Some Ice On It” method his whole career, and ended up an all-time-great with 6 Pro-Bowls and 2 Super Bowls. There’s more than one way to bake a cake!”Sergio Mattarella has been reelected as Italy’s president, ending days of a farcical parliamentary voting process that has exposed deep divisions within the country’s governing coalition. Mattarella won a second seven-year mandate with 759 votes, far exceeding the threshold of 505, after being persuaded to stay on in the role after ruling party leaders failed to reach an agreement on a candidate who could secure broad support from the 1,009 parliamentarians and regional representatives electing the president. Mario Draghi, the prime minister, had also urged Mattarella, 80, to remain in post “for the good and stability of the country”. Mattarella had been due to step down on 3 February, and before succumbing to pressure had repeatedly said he did not want another term. “He had other plans for his future,” said Julia Unterberger, a senator from the small SVP party who was among the party whips who met Mattarella before the final vote. “Given the situation, we begged him to stay for another term.” Parliamentarians applauded after Mattarella clinched victory. After the result, Draghi said: “Sergio Mattarella’s reelection as president of the republic is splendid news for Italians. I am grateful to the president for his choice to support the very strong will of parliament to reelect him for a second term.” His reelection comes after six long days of fruitless back-door negotiations between squabbling parties in the ruling majority and eight rounds of voting. Enrico Letta, the leader of the centre-left Democratic party, earlier in the day thanked Mattarella “for this important and necessary choice of generosity”. Draghi, who has been widely credited with restoring political stability in Italy and, at least until now, keeping his broad coalition in line, was tipped as the frontrunner for president, but the ruling parties were reluctant to endorse him over fears his promotion would trigger early elections. “Italians do not deserve any more days of confusion,” Matteo Salvini, leader of the far-right League, said. Salvini’s endorsement of Mattarella came hours after he strongly backed a woman for president. “Let’s reconfirm President Mattarella … and Draghi, and immediately get back to work this afternoon. The problems of the Italians won’t wait,” he added. Matteo Renzi, who leads the small centrist party, Italia Viva, said that maintaining Mattarella as president and Draghi as prime minister was “the only way to leave Italy safe from the outlandish madness and lack of political direction”. Giuseppe Conte, leader of the Five Star Movement, the largest party in parliament, said: “The Mattarella option has found wide acceptance.” Both Mattarella and Draghi are popular leaders among Italians. But the perception of the “status quo” in the ruling majority prevailing is “superficial reading”, especially after a week of political drama that reflected a “lack of leadership, trust and courage”, said Wolfango Piccoli, co-president of the London-based research company, Teneo. “The whole political system failed the presidential election test,” added Piccoli. “The ruling coalition emerges weaker and deeply divided.” Francesco Galietti, the founder of Policy Sonar, a Rome-based political consultancy, said: “What is clear to me is that things are no longer the same. Trust within the ruling majority, and vis-a-vis Draghi, is undermined. Sadly enough, infighting will continue and possibly escalate.”USA forward Timothy Weah was unable to travel to Canada for Sunday’s World Cup qualifier because he did not meet the vaccination requirements to cross the Canadian border, coach Gregg Berhalter said Saturday. Weah, who was involved in the play that led to the only goal in Thursday’s 1-0 victory over El Salvador, has received one vaccine dose and was infected with Covid-19 before he could receive his second shot, Berhalter said. Weah meets the vaccination standards in France, where he plays professionally, but is unable to enter Canada, Berhalter said. “This is something we can’t control, the nuances of the Covid protocol, and we just have to deal with it,” Berhalter said. “It will be about the next man stepping up and doing their job.” Berhalter said the team became aware of Weah’s situation “a couple of days ago” and had hoped it could be resolved before Sunday’s game. “This was a nuanced technicality that we were hoping was going to get pushed through and, unfortunately, it didn’t,” Berhalter said. Berhalter also said fullback Brooks Lennon has returned to his MLS club, Atlanta United, to be “evaluated for a slight ankle injury”. Weah’s absence means he will miss the opportunity to face off against Canadian forward Jonathan David, his teammate with Lille OSC in France. David scored Canada’s second goal in Thursday’s 2-0 win in Honduras. “That’s my guy,” Weah said after Thursday’s game in Columbus, Ohio. “We always go at it. Most importantly, I love watching him succeed. Great guy, one of my best friends on the team. I wish nothing but success for him. Seeing what he’s been doing has really been great, and it’s pushed me to work even harder. Having that brotherhood, we really like to compete a lot. We’ve been waiting for this game the whole year, we’ve been talking about it, we’ve been joking about who’s going to win, who’s going to score.” Weah did not play for Lille between 1 December and 19 January because of a quadriceps injury. He missed a 1-1 draw against Canada last September because of a thigh injury. Canada are undefeated through nine games and lead the group, one point ahead of the US in second and two points ahead of Mexico in third. Panama are in fourth place, five points behind Canada. “They’ve certainly improved a lot over the past couple of years,” US defender Walker Zimmerman said of Canada. “I think there’s been a shift in their mentality and they play with a chip on their shoulder, they play with something to prove, and they play with an intensity that is very high.” Bayern Munich star Alphonso Davies is unavailable for Canada for this three-match window due to evidence of heart muscle inflammation discovered after Davies was infected with the coronavirus. Even without the speedy Davies, Berhalter said Canada’s roster offers plenty of attacking talent. “They still have some great players,” Berhalter said. “When you think about the speed of Tajon Buchanan, he can do that. When you think about Jonathan David, he’s got the quality. He’s one of Europe’s top strikers right now. Cyle Larin has always been a very good striker. They have weapons.” This is the first trip north of the border for the US men’s team since a 2-0 loss in Toronto in the Concacaf Nations League in October 2019. “That first Canada away game in the Nations League is where we really fell flat from a competitive standpoint,” Berhalter said. “That’s the emphasis in this game. We know that they’re going to be fired up. We know they’re playing in front of their home fans and we know they’re going to be confident. It’s going to be a competitive game. If we can embrace, we’ll be OK. It’s a good opportunity for us to move up in the standings.”Two long, dramatic weeks ago, just before the Australian Open was due to begin, Rafael Nadal sat down to set the scene for the fortnight ahead. The shadow of Novak Djokovic’s deportation saga looming large over the tournament, Nadal forcefully answered questions onabout his rival. He discussed his recent injuries and his health. He stressed the necessity of taking his return step by step. At no point was he asked about, or did he mention, the prospect of winning his 21st grand slam title. It was always clear that by virtue of entering the draw, this is what he was competing for, but at a time when he did not know how his body and game would handle his first-round match against Marcos Giron, the world No 66, it was a completely irrelevant subject. “I only played three matches in the last six months. It’s obvious that [nothing is] clear, no?” Over the past two weeks, despite abysmal preparation due to a six-month injury layoff and then being bedridden with Covid, Nadal’s body has survived. At times his game has even thrived as a 21st grand slam win has slowly come back on to his radar. Still, there have been reminders of the limitations he is playing through during this tournament. Nothing illustrated that more than when, in his quarter-final against Denis Shapovalov, Nadal wilted under the conditions after taking a two-set lead. Shapovalov not only handled the dry heat far better than Nadal – an unimaginable state of affairs in normal times – but he had chances to beat Nadal from two sets down. Nadal survived through his experience and sheer force of will. On Friday night, he admitted that he “got a little bit tired” after two routine sets against Mattteo Berrettini, yet he carried on to seal his place in the final. Despite how he is still often viewed, Nadal has not been the dominant physical player on the tour for years. With age and injuries his physicality has declined and he has adapted with increasing efficiency, from taking control of points to attacking even more with his backhand. He has done an excellent job of managing himself in Australia. Three years ago, when he faced Berrettini in the semi-final of the US Open, Nadal spent most of the match positioning himself by the ballkids to return Berrettini’s immense serve while only moving forward at certain points in the match. On Friday, he opted for the opposite, striking the ball on first and second serves just behind the baseline. Standing before Nadal on Sunday will be the player most adept at exposing any physical deficiencies his opponents possess. Daniil Medvedev is clearly the toughest player in the draw. The word “classic” is used often in best-of-five-set matches but their 2019 US Open final was a masterpiece. Nadal adapted to the physicality of his opponent by constantly taking to the net and, in the end, Medvedev followed him. The pair combined for 140 net points in the match, serving and volleying 49 times between them. This match-up can go in many directions as both players look for solutions. Nadal’s uncertain, stunted months of preparation starkly contrast with the recent events in Medvedev’s career. Medvedev won the last major he played, denying Djokovic a 21st grand slam title, and he has consolidated his maiden slam better than any man in history: he is aiming to become the only male in the Open era to achieve his first two major tournaments wins back to back. “If I’m not able to play at my top level, there will be simply no chance,” said Nadal. There are many reasons to believe that Nadal can leave Melbourne with his 21st grand slam title. He has built a career out of putting himself in the right position. Before the tournament, as Nadal explained his ambitions, he set the bar at giving himself a chance to play for the biggest titles again. “I just want to try again,” he said. “I want to give my best. I want to give myself a chance to keep enjoying this beautiful sport, to keep fighting for the things that I have been fighting for for the last 16 years.” An extremely difficult challenge awaits him in the final against Medvedev, but he has put himself in the position and he will now take his shot.The real villain in the story is Boris Johnson. He presided over a home and a workplace where the rules were ignored. The whole country has heard the stories. Of course everyone knew the the prime minister told lies and was unreliable. But this – a character who appeared sometimes engagingly anarchic turns out to be contemptuous and disdainful, lacking the most basic decency and honour. He shames our country, the office of PM and disables the leadership of the UK. He is on his belly to Conservative MPs: decisions about the nation’s future now depend on whether his backstairs deals with wavering MPs stem the haemorrhage brought on by the sight of his suppurating character. An authoritative account of what he did and the extent to which he lied about it is vital to allow the country to regain some self-respect, reach a decision about whether his premiership continues and move on to make decisions about the policies that matter for the people of the UK and the wider world. Sue Gray, throughout all of last week, appeared to be a short time away from producing that account – until the blundering intervention of the Met. Its request to Gray not to make public in any detail her findings on the eight parties it suspects broke the law derails the prospect of a worthwhile report in the near future. Johnson will now be handed a new “heavily redacted” version of Gray’s report in the coming hours or days, which will be compliant with the Met request that nothing “jeopardises” its inquiry. The facts leading to the holding of these eight events and what happened at them is a vital part of the story, important to making judgments about the culpability of the prime minister. Not to give any detailed account of them would be disastrous. Perhaps even a heavily redacted account would be enough to reveal a level of wrongdoing that sinks the PM. I don’t know. What I do know is that the right course is a full account of what he did, made public as soon as possible. Redactions allow the PM to get away with it. There is no law that requires the Met to make this ill-judged request or that requires Gray to comply with it. The Contempt of Court Act 1981 prohibits any action that could interfere with an investigation or a trial but only once a summons has been issued or an arrest made. Arrests or summonses are extremely unlikely for these breaches of the coronavirus regulations and a fixed penalty notice, the most likely response, does not trigger contempt protection. It is very unlikely that contempt law will ever kick in. There are other laws that stop people intentionally interfering with an investigation but the idea that Gray’s motivation is to undermine the Met’s investigation is patently for the birds. So there is no legal reason for the Met to delay the Gray investigation and report. It must be obvious even to a Metropolitan police commissioner under the most immense pressure that as much transparency as possible about what happened as quickly as reasonably possible trumps the remote possibility that once attenders at the No 10 parties read the Gray report they might amend their statements to the police about their involvement. That, according to off-the-record briefings from the Met, is the reason it has adopted this country-paralysing course. The Met’s request to Gray not to publish details of the eight parties it suspects broke the law makes the Met look complicit with the prime minister in trying to delay for as long as possible the truth about what happened. Through incompetence rather than malice, the Met gives the impression that when it comes to investigating the prime minister it does what it is told. The idea that the police are going to conduct interviews beyond asking was the suspect present is far-fetched. If the justification in the police’s own mind is that if Gray publishes the whole story, the police will not be able to trap the suspects into lies suggests it has lost all touch with proportion. That was the justification advanced by the secret barrister yesterday. Why has the Met made this obviously disastrous judgment? Probably because its approach in all other investigations is to shut down all non-police inquiries until it has completed its own. So it has mindlessly applied the same rule here, either unaware or indifferent to the fact that fixed penalty notice cases do not attract the same protection. The greased piglet might slip through the hands of those trying to hold him to account. If he does, it will be because he delayed a judgment on his conduct until the heat had gone out of the issue. Gray was a means forced on the PM, ensuring there would be a speedy conclusion. The Met is in danger of stringing the process out for so long that the report loses all utility. Its purpose is to ensure that there is true accountability for the PM. That accountability comes from there being full transparency about his attitude and conduct towards the laws of the lockdown. In many cases, true accountability means facing justice in a criminal court. But not in this case – a fixed penalty notice does not bring any sense of justice done to those who paid what was very often a high price for obeying the rules. That comes from the facts being exposed and the PM paying the price. Why can’t the Met let justice take its course and let Sue Gray deliver? • Lord Falconer was lord chancellor in Tony Blair’s governmentA bittersweet day for Dango Ouattara. He scored the decisive goal, a wonderful mixture of pace, skill and calm decision-making, sending a couple of Tunisian defenders off to the shops. But he’ll miss next week’s semi-final against either Senegal or Equatorial Guinea, having been given his marching orders for crumping his elbow onto Ali Maaloul’s jaw. Ah well, he’s the hero tonight, and he’ll always have Garoua. Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! The referee blows the full-time whistle with 16 seconds of added time still remaining! Told you he does things his way. Burkina Faso reach the semi-finals for the third time in the last nine years! 90 min +3: Koffi delightedly flops on an aimless long ball. Another chance to run down some of those precious seconds. 90 min +2: Burkina Faso win a corner, and take it short in the time-management style. Tick, tock. 90 min +1: The first of four extra minutes passes by without incident. Burkina Faso will be delighted it’s just four; there have been plenty of substitutions plus two pauses for VAR. 90 min: Khazri dribbles into the Burkina Faso box down the right. Tapsoba sticks to him like glue, and he’s forced to turn tail. 89 min: Maaloul threatens to break down the left but doesn’t back himself. He dribbles inside to little effect. 87 min: One of the Burkina Faso subs, Bande, warming up behind the goal, takes his sweet time to return the ball that had been uselessly dispatched into the darkness by Rafia. The referee comes over and books him. Tell you what, you wouldn’t try anything on with this referee. He’s brooking no nonsense, and does it his own way. He is nails. 86 min: The corner’s worked back to Rafia, who completes an undistinguished 60 seconds by hoicking deep into the stand behind the goal. 85 min: Rafia is immediately in the thick of the action, tearing down the right and entering the box. He’s got options in the middle, but can’t find any of them. Just a corner. 84 min: Tunisia make another change, throwing on Rafia in place of Skhiri. 82 min: Yep. It’s a red. VAR gets the referee over to the screen again, but this time he’s more than happy to change his mind. Dango properly crumped his elbow into Maaloul’s boat, and the young goalscorer walks. He’ll miss the semi should his team-mates see this out with ten men. 81 min: Bayala and Dango are booked in short order, for a tackle and a swinging arm respectively. The latter is fairly fortunate not to see red, having elbowed Maaloul squarely on the jaw. That could have been a red card. 79 min: ... but while that usually means an overturned decision, the referee sticks with his original take. No penalty! No sending off! Just a throw! 78 min: The referee draws a telly box in the sky, and trots across to the monitor. He’s been asked to take a look by VAR. 77 min: VAR’s going to check this, though. Soumaila bashed the ball away, but on the follow through, wrapped his legs around Khazri’s standing leg. Was he out of control? 76 min: Konate’s presence out on the left allows Yago to break into some space on the wing. Yago’s dinked cross evades Dango in the middle. Tunisia counter, Khazri sashaying down the inside-left channel and entering the box, only to show too much of the ball to Soumaila Ouattara, who steps across and blooters clear. 75 min: Tunisia replace Jaziri with Jebali. 74 min: Konate makes good down the left and rolls infield for Dango, on the edge of the D. A heavy touch allows Ifa to intercept and clear, when a better one would have set up a shooting chance. 72 min: Burkina Faso make their first change, replacing the hard-working striker Djibril with Konate. 70 min: Laidouni floats a pass down the right channel for Khazri, who spins this way and that before being awarded a corner. It looked as though he’d run that out of play himself, so it’s probably for the best that nothing comes of the corner. 68 min: Maaloul curls the free kick low and hard towards the bottom right. Koffi turns it around the post in a slightly unorthodox style, but gets the job done. Nothing comes of the resulting corner. 67 min: Tapsoba is booked for clipping the heels of Jaziri, who was attempting to break into space down the right. A free kick just to the side of the D. 66 min: Yako whips a glorious cross in from the left. Djibril waits to slam home from six yards. Ifa nips in just in time to hook clear. That was marvellous football all round. 64 min: Koffi spots Djibril free on the halfway line and pearls a long kick down the right wing. Said races out of his box to clear, then overruns the ball, checks back, and clears his line at the second attempt. Djibril was a yard away from nicking that ball and rounding the keeper. 63 min: This one bobbles around a crowded box, before Burkina Faso finally manage to larrup clear. They’re clinging onto their lead a bit here. 62 min: The corner’s pulled back for Khazri, who scuffs a shot from the edge of the box. The ball pinballs through the box and out for another corner. Take two. 61 min: Msakni twists down the right and earns Tunisia yet another corner. Burkina Faso are struggling to get out again. 59 min: Tunisia have been the better side since the break, even if Burkina Faso have had the best chance. 57 min: Tunisia should be level. Slitl strides down the inside-right channel and takes a shot. It’s going wide left, but drops to Khazri on the edge of the six-yard box. Khazri opens his body and slices a dreadful effort wide right. He might have been offside anyway, but he wouldn’t have known at the time. Awful miss. 55 min: Tunisia win their fifth corner of the game, out on the left. They play it short and pull back for Sliti, who floats a cross into the mixer. Nobody in red responds, and Burkina Faso are able to clear their lines. 54 min: Tunisia have also replaced Slimane with Sliti. 52 min: Tunisia go straight up the other end and nearly fashion a chance themselves, but Jaziri is caught offside with Burkina Faso there for the taking. 51 min: Acres of space for Djibril down the left ... and even more space for Bayala down the middle! Djibril’s pass pushes Bayala a little bit to the right, which pushes him wide, though he’s still one on one with Said when he reaches the edge of the six-yard box. He lashes goalwards, but straight at the keeper, who stands firm and parries. What a crucial save that could be. 50 min: A long pass down the Burkina Faso left nearly releases Djibril. Said comes romping out of his box to blooter clear, just in time. Tunisia are really struggling with Burkina Faso’s pace. 48 min: The resulting free kick leads to a corner that leads to nowt. 47 min: Laidouni concedes a garden variety foul in the midfield, then argues the toss a bit too forcefully with the referee, who brandishes the yellow card. He continues to gesticulate and rant, right up in the referee’s grille. He’s really pushing his luck. Burkina Faso get the second half started. A change for Tunisia, as Maaloul replaces Haddadi. Half-time entertainment. A night at the opera, anyone? That’s the last kick of the half. Tunisia trudge off deflated; Burkina Faso are still celebrating as they head down the tunnel. What a time to score the opener! This is a lovely goal! Toure latches onto a loose ball in the centre circle and pings it down the right. Suddenly Dango is clear! He enters the box, then checks to see off a couple of chasing defenders, and having sent them the wrong way, lashes past Said. What a finish by the young man! 45 min +1: The first of two added minutes sees Kabore cross viciously from the right. The ball flies all the way through to Said, who thankfully for Tunisia was concentrating and isn’t surprised. 45 min: Kahzri slaps the free kick straight into the wall, though the ball flies out for a corner. He takes long, hoping to find Bronn at the far post. Tapsoba flicks a header clear. 44 min: Jaziri chases a long ball down the left. Koffi comes out of his box and brings him down. It’s a yellow card - there were defenders in the middle - and a free kick in a very dangerous position, just to the left of the box. Khazri to take. 42 min: Sangare spins with sweet skill out on the left wing to escape the clutches of three Tunisians and set his team on the attack. A few passes later, he gets the ball back, and, high on life, tries his luck from 35 yards. Nope, but he’d earned the right to try. 40 min: Yago clips another lovely looping pass down the inside-left channel. Djibril meets the dropping ball with a volley from a tight angle. He connects well, but it’s straight at Said, who gathers without fuss. 38 min: Kabore turns on the jets and zips past Haddadi down the right with absurd ease. He reaches the byline but Ifa has read the danger, coming across just in time to get in the way and shepherd the ball out for a goal kick. 36 min: Bayala’s low cross from the left sits up invitingly for Djibril, but the striker is surprised to see the ball get past Bronn. Unprepared, he shins it out of play. 34 min: Tapsoba slices what appears an easy clearance behind for a corner on the right. Khazri takes. The ball makes it all the way through to Laidouni at the far post. A lack of composure sees him hoick the ball out for a goal kick from six yards. 33 min: Yago wedges a glorious pass down the inside-left channel for Dango, who nearly executes a perfect mid-air trap and spin as the ball drops over his shoulder. But the ball then runs away from him as he prepares to shoot. That could have been something. 31 min: Haddadi’s long pass down the left looks to have released Jaziri, but the flag goes up belatedly for offside. There wasn’t a lot in that. 30 min: Tunisia let their opponents out. 29 min: The busy Khazri wins a free kick out on the right. He swings it deep. Burkina Faso struggle to clear. They hack it away from immediate danger, but this is a good spell of pressure from Tunisia, who aren’t letting their opponents out. 28 min: Nothing comes of the resulting corner. 27 min: This would have been something, too. Tunisia have a free kick, 35 yards out. It’s surely too far for a direct strike, but Khazri thinks otherwise, and sends a vicious heatseeker towards the top right. Koffi is behind it all the way, and tips over. 26 min: A sensational barrelling run by Tapsoba from the right-back position, all the way to the edge of the Tunisian box. A one-two with Bayala en route. His shot is blocked. Shame, because that would have been one of the goals of the tournament. 24 min: Bayala turns Drager with absurd ease down the left. He enters the box and tries to nutmeg the keeper Said at his near post. Said blocks out for another corner, from which nothing comes. Burkina Faso are getting plenty of joy down both wings. 23 min: Now it’s Burkina Faso’s turn to waste a corner. 22 min: Haddadi slings a couple of crosses in from the left. The first is only just hacked clear by a skittish Burkina Faso defence. The second earns a corner. Koffi claims it easily enough, then, when looking for the quick throw out, nearly runs out of his own box with the ball still in his hands. He puts the brakes on, just in time. 20 min: Toure rakes a pass down the left for Djibril, who drifts infield, then slips a clever ball down the channel for Dango. The resulting cross is cleared, but that was a lovely move by Burkina Faso, who have settled the better. 18 min: Khazri is the recipient of a no-nonsense lecture from the ref. He’s made a few fouls already, and one more will surely see him go into the book. 17 min: Tapsoba belts the free kick straight at the wall. The ball ricochets to Guira, who sends a dribbler towards the bottom left. Easy for Said. 16 min: Koffi doesn’t want to miss out on one of the biggest games of his life, and will battle on. 15 min: Some hot #28 on #28 action, as Laidouni clumsily clatters Dango in a central position, 25 yards out. A dangerous free kick to give away. But before it can be taken, Koffi needs more treatment for that leg. He might not be able to continue. 14 min: Dango spins and sends a looping shot off Skhiri’s shin and towards the top right. Said is behind it all the way. 12 min: Kabore tears down the inside-right channel with an amazing burst of speed. He reaches the byline and wedges back to nobody in particular. Tunisia half clear. Burkina Faso come again down the same flank, Dango this time whistling a dangerous ball through the six-yard box. Nobody in white had taken the gamble. Had they done so, they’d have had a tap-in. 10 min: Koffi’s pass out from the back is nearly intercepted by Msakni. The keeper may still be feeling that sore leg. 8 min: Koffi stays down receiving treatment, having taken a knee in the thigh. Plenty of cooling spray is applied, and the keeper is quickly back up and running. 6 min: Khazri makes good down the right and cuts back for Msakni on the penalty spot. The Tunisian captain takes a heavy touch but chases after 50-50 ball. He clatters into the Burkina Faso captain Koffi in goal. For a second, it looks as though he’ll be able to force the ball under the keeper and over the line, but the whistle goes for a free kick. 4 min: The corner’s slipped short to Dango Ouattara, who turns cutely, reaches the byline, and looks for his namesake Djibril Ouattara. He overhits the cross, but that was a lovely little bit of skill. 3 min: Yago is tugged back by Khazri as he tries to make his way down the Burkina Faso left. The resulting free kick is swung into the box, where it’s hacked out for the first corner of the game. 2 min: Both teams take the opportunity to get an early feel of the ball, stroking it around the back to little real effect. Tunisia get the ball rolling. It’s a warm but not oppressive night at the Roumdé Adjia Stadium in Garoua. The teams are out! Both are in their change strips. Burkina Faso wear all white, Tunisia all red. We’ll be off once anthems are sung, pennants exchanged, hands shaken and coins tossed. Here’s Peter Oh: “Burkina Faso have scored exactly one goal per match so far. And aside from a four-goal haul against Mauritania in the group stage, Tunisia have also not been banging them in, scoring a goal or less in their other matches. I suppose we’re not likely to see a glorious feast for the eyes. An attritional, scrappy, cagey display capped off by a fortunate goal from a deflection, and the subsequent parking of a gigantic bus is more likely, I reckon.” Burkina Faso came second in Group A behind hosts Cameroon. They led the hosts in the tournament opener through a Gustavo Sangare goal, only for Vincent Aboubakar to slot two penalties during the last knockings of the first half. They followed up that 2-1 defeat with a 1-0 win over Cape Verde and a 1-1 draw with Ethiopia. In the round of 16, they were taken to penalties by Gabon after a 1-1 draw, and won the shootout 7-6. Tunisia squeezed through Group F as one of the best third-placed nations. They lost 1-0 to Mail, beat minnows Mauritania 4-0, and went down 1-0 to Gambia. But they pulled off perhaps the shock of the tournament so far by beating Nigeria 1-0 in the round of 16, captain Youssef Msakni the goalscoring hero. The prize for winning this quarter-final: a semi-final match against either Senegal or Equatorial Guinea next Thursday. We’ll go to extra time and penalties if necessary. Burkina Faso: Koffi, Kabore, Tapsoba, Soumaila Ouattara, Yago, B Toure, Sangare, Guira, Dango Ouattara, Djibril Ouattara, Cyrille. Subs: Sawadogo, O Traore, Malo, Simpore, B Traore, Konate, Nikiema, Tapsoba, Sanogo, I Ouedraogo, Bande, F Ouedraogo. Tunisia: Said, Hadadi, Bronn, Ifa, Drager, Slimane, Laidduni, Skhiri, Msakni, Jaziri, Khazri. Subs: Jemal, Jebali, Dahmen, Mathlouthi, Maaloul, Khaoui, Rekik, Sliti, Mejbri, Romdhane, Rafia, Chaalali. Referee: Joshua Bondo (Botswana). Burkina Faso, runners-up in 2013, play Tunisia, champions in 2004, for a place in the 2021 semi-finals. History is on Burkina Faso’s side: they’ve faced Tunisia twice at the Afcon, in 1998 and 2017, winning on both occasions. But perhaps Tunisia have the wind behind, having seen off the hotly tipped Nigerians in the last round. They’re slight favourites with the bookies as a result, but this is likely to be a close one. Kick off is at 8pm at the Roumdé Adjia Stadium in Garoua, Cameroon, 7pm GMT. It’s on!When Eddie Jones repeats something the chances are he wants to send a message, so his persistent pledge that England are “going after” Scotland is telling. These days you can’t have a Calcutta Cup match without the accompanying war of words but as opening moves go, it is pretty tepid. More pertinently, Jones understands the importance of making a fast start and is instructing his players accordingly. “A lot of it is about the mindset and the way you approach the game,” says Jones. “You’ve got to start the game well, get into the game and go after them. We know every time Scotland play against England it is their biggest game of the tournament. But the big difference this year is we are going up there to get them, we are going after them.” It is a tired trope to highlight the significance of winning the first Six Nations match, but a cursory glance at England’s fixtures demonstrates just how important Saturday’s match at Murrayfield is, with a trip to Rome followed by back-to-back matches at Twickenham an enticing prospect if they are victorious. “If you don’t win your first game you’re chasing your tails,” says the tighthead prop Kyle Sinckler. “So all our focus is to go out and perform in that first game and obviously win. Because once you do that, everything else follows, the team camaraderie, the feel of the group, all that off-field stuff takes care of itself.” The trouble for Jones, though, is that England have lost their opening matches in the past two tournaments. On both occasions Jones has sought to shoulder the blame, for failing to prepare his players well enough, but whereas once fast starts and early tries were the hallmark of his side, another defeat on Saturday would suggest a longer-term problem. That is, in part, why you sense that Jones has welcomed the disruption that England have faced this past week. Not only does the upheaval allow him to stress-test his players, to spread more responsibility through the ranks and empower more players in leadership roles, it might just take a degree of pressure off, too. To describe England’s injury problems as a “crisis” is pushing it – as their rivals were not afraid to point out – and with a fair wind Jones should be able to pick largely the side that shone against South Africa in the autumn, enhanced by the returning Ellis Genge and Luke Cowan-Dickie. As disappointed as he will be to lose his trusted lieutenant for the entire competition, Jones’s squad can at least get on with their campaign without having the distraction of Owen Farrell’s impending return. What Jones does have, however, is a smattering of players set to sample a packed-out Murrayfield for the first time, which brings us back to his determination that they hit the ground running against Scotland. Jones says: “We know the first 20 minutes in particular are going to be fast because Scotland like to play fast. We’ve got a set mindset of how we want to play. We want to be aggressive when we’ve got the ball and we want to be aggressive when we haven’t got the ball and we want to take the rhythm and tempo out of their game and put tempo and rhythm into our game.” When it comes to Calcutta Cup bingo, Murrayfield’s hostility is on most cards but, again, it is a watchword for England this week with supporters set to return to Six Nations matches in their droves. Four years ago Jones was accosted on his train journey back from Scotland, while in 2020 he did not take kindly to things being thrown at players and staff as they arrived at the ground, but he is happy to play the villain again and shield his younger charges. “It’s going to be hostile but the good thing is they’ve got me there and I’m not very popular so I’m sure I’m going to get plenty of abuse and I’m happy to take that,” he says. “[The new players will] love it. Why wouldn’t they? They get to play in the first game of the greatest championship. It’s for the Calcutta Cup. It means a lot. It’s important that they understand what it will be like and our more experienced players will share their experience with the younger guys.” Sinckler now counts himself as one of those as he nears his 50th England cap and he was part of the side who scraped to victory in horrific conditions two years ago. “I tend to get a lot of stick from the fans, especially the Welsh ones, but I love it, it is an unbelievable atmosphere,” he says. “That is what the Six Nations is about, everyone wearing their hearts on their sleeves, representing the country they are from and giving their all to the boys. We have been to Murrayfield a few times and it has been very, very hostile. I remember coming off the bus once or twice and the fans are giving it to you straight away and chucking certain things. “I love the hostility, it just makes everything a lot better in terms of the experience and definitely a lot better than playing in front of no fans. The more the better.”Human beings have a troublesome relationship with statistics. Them and damned lies. The wise treat them with caution, but only a fool, alas, dismisses these numbers as worthless. The hysterical, meanwhile, react extravagantly to whatever they find at the end of their nose and co-opt whichever statistics support their hysteria. This Six Nations has been hailed already as the most competitive and deliciously anticipated in the history of the world, ever. “It says behind me: ‘Rugby’s Greatest Championship,’” said Eddie Jones last week, in front of the mandatory branding, “and I think it is that now by a country mile.” He should know. England came fifth last year for the second time during his six years. But this claim of Six Nations vitality niggles only because of the feeling we have said it before. Probably this time a year ago, maybe a year before that, too. So, to the statistics. World Rugby’s ranking system, introduced at the start of the 2003 Rugby World Cup, has suffered as ferocious a mauling as any sorry collection of digits in the history of the world, ever, but as a rolling index, responsive only to that other sometimes misleading stat, the result on the pitch, its findings are dismissed by, well, only a fool. After a delve through the rankings at the start of each year since 2004, it is possible to ratify the claim that the Six Nations is better than ever. If we leave out Italy (and more on that later), the average ranking points of the other five (84.9) is higher now than it has ever been at the start of a year, pipping 2019’s 84.8. Even if we include Italy, whose ranking of 70.51 (14th in the world) is lower than it has ever been, only 2019’s figure is higher, just. It is also true, though, that this is no more than the latest year in a golden era for the Six Nations. There seems to have been a step-change after the 2015 World Cup, which marked the passing of a New Zealand team many consider the greatest in the history of the world, ever. The north’s resurgence has been led by England and Ireland, neither of whom have been outside the top five at the start of a year since 2016. The gap between South Africa at No 1 and France at No 5 is now a shade over five points, the tightest it has been. Normally, at least 10 points separate the top five. All of which should put into some perspective the recent travails of Jones’s England. His win ratio of 78.2% is not only by some distance the highest of any England coach (next best, Jack Rowell on 72.4%), it has been achieved in this era of unprecedented competitiveness. But England still struggle on the romantics’ most-prized achievement, that of a grand slam – only one since their own fabled team passed in 2003. One myth that does need debunking is this idea that grand slams are particularly hard to come by. The curious reality is that since the 1990s, when rugby became pseudo-professional, there have been more grand slams than not. Since a grand slam became five wins, rather than four, there have been 11 out of 22. Momentum is the key and the inclusion of Italy has helped on that front. Of those 11 grand slam winners, nine have played Italy in the first three rounds, seven in the first two. No team has ever had to beat Italy in the final round to win one, which means none of the original five nations has ever played the others in the first four rounds and escaped unscathed (bad news for Wales this year). The Italy Question has vexed fans and officials up here for most of these 22 years. The more hysterical regularly demand their ejection in favour of a Georgia or Romania, but the official line has remained consistent – and still does. Ben Morel, the Six Nations chief executive, is certainly more circumspect than his predecessor, John Feehan, whose regular reply to questions about the fate of Georgia et al might be paraphrased with only mild exaggeration as: “We don’t need to give a damn and we don’t.” Morel last week reiterated the stance against change and was anxious to promote the idea of the July and November windows as the opportunity for tier one to bring les autres along with them. This touches on another reality, more longstanding than any of the above. It is not just about playing standards. The quality of the Six Nations may now be higher than ever but the championship has always been, by far and away, the biggest beast in world rugby, its revenues dwarfing even those of the quadrennial World Cup. It is both rugby’s greatest showcase and most brutish menace. The wonder is that the home unions and France have taken so long to close the gap with the southern hemisphere, given the resources available. Could it be that this is the shape of things to come? If so, what hope for any of the others, even the “Big Three” down south? Worse still, the chances of Georgia and Romania joining the party any time soon might be minimal, but those of South Africa would have to be accounted favourable-to-nailed-on. That is another prospect repeatedly denied at official level but, as any coach worth their salt will tell you, don’t watch the hands when a player runs at you, watch the feet – that’s where they’re really going. South Africa’s best players have long played in the northern hemisphere. Now their best teams play up here, too, in the United Rugby Championship. Soon the Springboks will close a deal with CVC, which owns a chunk of the Six Nations. It is next to inconceivable that South Africa do not join in the next few years. Then we really would be looking at Rugby’s Greatest Championship in the world, ever. Hysterical? Maybe. But the numbers always tell in the end.Wales’s ambition to retain their Six Nations title has been hit by a lengthy injury list but the stand-in captain, Dan Biggar, says they cannot afford to let Ireland dictate in the Dublin opener next Saturday. Wayne Pivac’s champions, who were within seconds of a grand slam last year before conceding a late try against France in Paris, go into the tournament with several key players sidelined. Biggar takes the captain’s armband in the absence of Alun Wyn Jones, who had shoulder surgery in December, with experienced campaigners such as Ken Owens, George North and Taulupe Faletau also on the treatment table. The Exeter lock Christ Tshiunza is isolating after testing positive for Covid-19. Wales teams are often greater than the sum of their parts, though, and speaking at the tournament launch this week, the Northampton and Lions fly-half Biggar was in bullish mood. “The mindset we’re approaching the game with is we’re going out there to be positive and fire some shots,” he said. “We want to be quite aggressive in the way we play as opposed to absorbing and letting Ireland come out and dictate. “If we give Johnny [Sexton], in particular, time and front-foot ball and lots of it, we’re going to be up against it. It’s up to us to make sure we start the game really well and put Ireland under pressure.” In contrast, Ireland are almost entirely injury-free, although James Lowe is out with a hamstring problem. Andy Farrell’s side enjoyed a heartening autumn campaign when New Zealand, Japan and Argentina were defeated with an attacking approach that has clicked in recent months. The fortunes of the Irish provinces and Welsh regions in the Champions Cup have also been markedly different: Leinster, Munster, Connacht and Ulster have all progressed to the knockout rounds while winless Ospreys and Scarlets finished bottom of Pool A and Pool B respectively, with Cardiff ninth in Pool B. Sexton shone in Leinster’s 10-try destruction of Bath last Saturday, which was their second match in seven weeks after a spell of Covid disruption. But the 36-year-old Leinster fly-half believes a relative lack of recent competitive action can be a positive. “You can look at it two ways: you can say you’re underdone or you can say you’re really fresh and raring to go,” Sexton said. “I think we’re in that [second] bracket. We’ve had enough rugby, guys have been training hard, in the environment I’ve been in [at Leinster] we’ve been training hard, and we’ll get some hit-outs [in camp] that will prepare us really well.” Pivac, meanwhile, said he admires Ireland’s increasingly free-flowing style but that his players will also aim to keep ball in hand in Dublin. “We are seeing some tweaks and some advances in the style that Ireland want to play,” the Wales head coach said. “They were certainly ‘playing’ a bit more in that autumn series and I was very pleased to watch them do so well … because we enjoy playing, and we’ve got on the park at any one time 15 guys who like to get the ball in their hands and not just chase kicks or belt rucks. “They are going to be an improved side from last year’s Six Nations but if you focus on one team, you slip up against Scotland, and we know how good England are and France are.” Considering Pivac’s injury problems, an opening victory for Ireland at the Aviva Stadium is widely expected, but a wounded Wales can be a dangerous animal.If a Calcutta Cup fixture on the opening day of a Six Nations wasn’t enough to get the juices flowing, the identities of the two men wearing the No 10 jerseys at Murrayfield next Saturday should have rugby romantics everywhere salivating. At 29, Finn Russell may have 52 more caps of Test-match experience to call on than Marcus Smith, but the similarities between Scotland’s chief conductor and England’s thrilling young pretender are not lost on Gregor Townsend. The Scotland head coach shared many of the same qualities as a free-spirited fly-half himself and, as the British and Irish Lions attack coach last summer, witnessed the pair duelling it out after Smith’s late call-up and Russell’s recovery from injury before the final Test in South Africa. “The quality in that last week, with the way Marcus and Finn were training, was incredible,” Townsend said this week. “We are delighted Finn is with us, but I’m sure England are also delighted Marcus has come through and was playing so well in November. “They are different styles of 10 to maybe 10 or 15 years ago. They have a lot of shared vision and skills in how they play the game, whether that is a passing, running game or a shorter, kicking game.” If Townsend was an early pioneer as an attack-minded 10 – ahead of his own teammates at times, perhaps – success in the Test arena was sporadic, most memorably with the Lions in 1997 and as the ringmaster of Scotland’s 1999 Five Nations triumph. As a player, he tasted victory only once in 10 attempts against England but as a coach he has already triumphed twice and but for George Ford’s injury-time try in that mind-bending 38-38 draw at Twickenham in 2019, it would be three from four. Next Saturday will be Townsend’s 50th Test at the helm and he boasts a better win record than any of his predecessors, including Ian McGeechan and Jim Telfer across their multiple spells in charge. But those two legends both have a grand slam on their CV. The Scots have won three of their five matches three times on Townsend’s watch but never finished higher than third. Fourth place was meagre reward for those hoodoo-busting wins in Twickenham and Paris last year, but expectations have risen with the increasing depth of quality at his disposal. Compared with his first Six Nations foray in 2018 when a front-row injury crisis led to veterans Jon Welsh and Scott Lawson being summoned from the wilderness, Townsend has the rare luxury of having all his frontline troops fit and firing, subject to any late dramas affecting those on club duty this weekend. A few selection issues remain. Townsend has fielded 24 centre combinations in his 49 Tests to date, and Cameron Redpath’s return to fitness poses a dilemma. Is the inside centre, so classy on his lone Test outing at Twickenham a year ago, ready to be pitched back into another Calcutta Cup contest after three outings for Bath following an eight-month lay-off? In Sam Johnson, Townsend has a solid, in-form alternative and another option in the rambunctious Sione Tuipulotu, alongside the defensive kingpin Chris Harris – one of at least seven Lions likely to start against England. The prop Rory Sutherland, after an injury-dogged few months at Worcester and a red card on his recent comeback, may be short of a gallop but the South Africa-born loosehead Pierre Schoeman offers reassurance after a smooth entrance to Test rugby in November. A rejuvenated Magnus Bradbury is also challenging Matt Fagerson at No 8 but the Scots have a settled and confident air about them. There is a growing sense that if a genuine title challenge is to materialise, this could be the year. “That is why we are here,” Townsend said. “We believe in this group and we go into this tournament wanting to be right there in the last week. We know how hard it is going to be, but we have had the experiences to put ourselves in positions like that before and now we have got the players available to us to really challenge every team we will face this year.”The government has been accused of trying to manipulate announcements on extra funding for poorer parts of the UK in a desperate attempt to save Boris Johnson’s premiership. An extraordinary row blew up after Michael Gove’s Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities released a press statement – before publication of a levelling up white paper this week – saying 20 towns and cities would benefit from a “new £1.5bn brownfield fund”. The release, which named only Sheffield and Wolverhampton as recipients, said the 20 areas “will benefit from developments combining housing, leisure and business in sustainable, walkable beautiful new neighbourhoods”. Gove added that the “radical new regeneration programme” would prove transformational and deliver on the government’s flagship policy to create a more equal country. “This huge investment in infrastructure and regeneration will spread opportunity more evenly and help to reverse the geographical inequalities which still exist in the UK.” But after the Observer contacted senior sources at the Treasury to ask if its ministers had signed off on the promised £1.5bn, Gove’s department backtracked and confessed that the “new” fund was not new money at all but would be made up of levelling-up funds that had been announced by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, in his spending review last autumn. The confusion was seized upon by Labour and other opposition parties as evidence of the lengths Johnson and his ministers are prepared to go in order to persuade Conservative MPs in so-called “red wall” seats to stick by the prime minister before the imminent publication of a report into the “partygate” scandal this week by the senior civil servant Sue Gray. If at least 54 Tory MPs write to Sir Graham Brady saying they want Johnson to go, it would trigger a vote of confidence in the prime minister. If he were to lose the vote of Conservative MPs it would mark the end of his premiership. Shadow levelling-up secretary Lisa Nandy said the Tories had been caught out trying to spin that extra money had been found for poorer areas when the white paper actually contained nothing they did not already know about. “I don’t think Tory MPs are going to find it very reassuring when the supposed new pot of gold contains not a penny of new money,” Nandy said. The SNP leader in Westminster, Ian Blackford, added: “Not only is the government trying to take the public for fools, they are also trying to take their own MPs for fools. It shows the lengths they are prepared to go to keep Boris Johnson in power. It is beyond contempt.” The Liberal Democrat deputy leader Daisy Cooper said the episode showed the government was not “remotely serious about levelling up this country.” Johnson has spent much of the past fortnight calling and meeting his MPs to persuade them to stick with him as the row about lockdown-busting parties has grown. One former minister told the Observer last week he had been reassured by the PM personally that his area would receive help for local industries – which had persuaded him to stay loyal. In spite of the government’s troubles, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer shows Labour’s lead over the Tories has shrunk to 5pts, with Keir Starmer’s party on 39% (down 2pts compared with a fortnight ago) while the Tories are up 2pts on 34%. But while the Labour bounce over partygate appears to have peaked, and gone into reverse, the party is now favoured by more voters to do a better job than the Tories on 10 out of 14 policy issues, including tackling crime and handling immigration. Both are subjects on which the Tories have traditionally been strong. On crime, Labour is now 3pts ahead of the Conservatives and on immigration it is 4pts ahead. On Saturday night, Gray – who on Friday was asked by the Metropolitan police to make “minimal” references in her report to serious matters to do with the gatherings that the Met is investigating – was understood to have still not yet submitted her report to No 10. Sources indicated she would only do so on a day when parliament is sitting, so Johnson would be obliged to go straight to parliament to make a statement, rather than giving him a weekend to spin its conclusions to the media. One Whitehall source said he expected the report to make “uncomfortable reading for all concerned”. Another said: “Sue Gray is very clear how she wants this handled. She will hand it over on a day parliament is sitting because she believes strongly in the propriety of the process.” Meanwhile there were calls on Saturday night for the Met to be discharged from its investigation because of a “conflict of interest”. The demands came from officials tasked with monitoring the force who claim it cannot be trusted to deliver on such a politically sensitive case. Unmesh Desai, whose questioning at the London Assembly last Tuesday led to the Met commissioner Cressida Dick announcing the investigation, said an outside police force needed to take over the inquiry. Desai, Labour’s London Assembly policing and crime spokesperson, said he was writing to the commissioner this week raising his concerns that Dick’s boss is, in effect, the home secretary, Priti Patel, who in turn owes her position to Johnson. “It’s a clear conflict of interest. Wouldn’t it be better for an outside force to investigate?” said Desai, a member of the police and crime committee which scrutinises policing in London. Speaking on behalf of a number of committee members, Desai added: “You could even call in a retired chief constable to oversee it, the evidence is all there.” Johnson controversially backed Patel after she was found to have bullied staff in an internal inquiry in 2020. The home secretary has recently thrown her full support behind the prime minister over the lockdown parties. Patel had prompted further controversy last year after handing Dick a two-year extension as Met commissioner despite a series of scandals that have embroiled the country’s most senior police officer. Desai will also urge the commissioner to make sure Met officers are investigated for potential breaches of Covid regulations while deployed at Downing Street. He will ask the commissioner to “review” the Met’s diplomatic protection group, which is tasked with monitoring premises such as 10 Downing Street, amid concern they may have colluded by allowing the parties to take place.The UK has offered to deploy land, air and sea forces to bolster the defence of Nato countries on their northern and eastern borders as tensions over Russia’s military ambitions in Ukraine deepen. Boris Johnson is expected to speak to the Russian leader Vladimir Putin this week, and travel to the region, despite intense domestic pressure over a possible leadership challenge in the wake of the “partygate” scandal. Johnson said the extra resources were a sign of Britain’s commitment to its Nordic and Baltic allies, and come after the US president, Joe Biden, promised on Friday to send a small number of American troops to eastern European and Nato countries “in the near term”. The decision aimed to “send a clear message to the Kremlin”, Johnson said in a statement. “We will not tolerate their destabilising activity, and we will always stand with our Nato allies in the face of Russian hostility.” The deployments included sending two warships to the Black Sea, increasing troop numbers and supplying rocket systems in Estonia, on the Russian border, and deploying fast jets to patrol Romanian and Bulgarian airspace from a base in Cyprus, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office said. UK officials will travel to Brussels to finalise details of the military support this week. Johnson asked defence and security chiefs to step up efforts in Europe, and told his foreign and defence secretaries to travel to Moscow to meet their Russian counterparts. In the UK, chief of defence staff Admiral Sir Tony Radakin will on Tuesday brief the cabinet on the Ukrainian crisis. Top US officials on Friday urged a focus on diplomacy while saying that Russia now had enough troops and equipment in place to threaten the whole of Ukraine. Mark Milley, the top US general, warned that a Russian invasion would be “horrific” for both sides, and “result in a significant amount of casualties”. Both the US and UK have withdrawn staff and families from embassies in Kyiv, and British travel advice now warns against all but essential travel to the country. The Foreign Office is also expected to announce tougher sanctions on Monday, meaning the UK can target Russia’s strategic and financial interests – despite reported US worries over the extent of “dirty” Russian money in London. • This article was amended on 30 January 2022. The picture caption incorrectly said it showed British-supplied anti-aircraft rather than anti-tank missiles. This has been corrected.Boris Johnson’s chief of staff spent the day watching cricket just days before Kabul fell to the Taliban last year, according to reports. Dan Rosenfield was at the first day of the England v India Test at Lord’s on 12 August, three days before Taliban forces entered the Afghan capital, the Sunday Telegraph has claimed. In the following days, a senior Downing Street figure ordered then foreign secretary Dominic Raab to return from his own holiday in Cyprus to deal with the crisis. Since Kabul’s fall on 15 August, No 10 has faced criticism that it didn’t take the Taliban threat seriously until it was too late, and the withdrawal of UK forces was mismanaged. Members of the armed forces still in Afghanistan, along with those eligible to be evacuated who had worked with the British forces, were hastily evacuated out of Kabul. Some who had worked with the UK agencies were left behind. The newspaper also claims that Rosenfield was present at the Hundred final at Lord’s on 21 August, as the Afghanistan evacuation entered its final days and US citizens were told not to go to Kabul airport. This week it emerged that an evacuation of cats and dogs from a British charity in Afghanistan during the fall of Kabul may have been personally approved by the prime minister. Two emails released by the cross-party foreign affairs select committee appeared to contradict Johnson’s insistence he did not authorise the decision. In a television interview Johnson called the accusation that he had intervened “total rhubarb”. Rosenfield has been seen as a potential makeweight for Conservative party MPs unhappy with Johnson’s leadership in recent months. Amid mounting unpopularity, it is believed a reshuffle of staff could help reset his premiership. Some Tory MPs have privately complained that Rosenfield is not politically astute enough for a position crucial to the prime minister. Johnson has faced calls to resign over alleged parties and Covid rule-breaking in Downing Street during lockdown. David Davis, the former Brexit secretary who called for Johnson to resign during prime ministers’ questions earlier this month, told the Telegraph: “It is an extraordinary reflection of the work ethic and commitment of No 10 staff that a senior member of that staff is taking days off when Afghanistan is falling and No 10 demanding that ministers return from holiday.” A No 10 source told the Telegraph: “Dan was in constant contact with the office, working long days and weekends throughout the period which saw the fall of Kabul and subsequent safe evacuation of 15,000 people in Operation Pitting.”West Ham’s determination to strengthen their squad this month has seen them make offers for Leeds United’s Kalvin Phillips and Raphinha. David Moyes wants to add more depth to his squad before the transfer window shuts on Monday night and has funds available as he tries to boost his side’s hopes of qualifying for the Champions League. West Ham’s search for a forward has seen them have a bid rejected for Raphinha and Moyes has also identified Phillips as a key target. It is believed that West Ham are willing to make Phillips their record signing and have had a £50m bid for the England midfielder turned down. However Moyes is ready to wait until the summer for Phillips if the transfer does not happen this month. The 25-year-old is out until March with a hamstring injury, but he has proven himself at international level and has formed a solid partnership in England’s midfield with Declan Rice, West Ham’s captain. However some sources have suggested that West Ham could be lining up Phillips as a replacement for Rice, who is wanted by Chelsea, Manchester City and Manchester United. West Ham were also prepared to pay a club-record fee for Raphinha, who produced a dazzling display when Leeds beat them two weeks ago. However, their attempts to sign the Brazilian winger were knocked back, with Marcelo Bielsa adamant that the 25-year-old will not leave Elland Road this month. West Ham, who are fifth, are under pressure to sign an attacking player. Michail Antonio is the only recognised centre-forward in their squad and has looked tired at times this season. Antonio needs more support and while Raphinha usually plays on the right, Moyes thinks the Brazil international can play a number of roles. Moyes believes Raphinha can play in the same team as Jarrod Bowen, who plays on the right for West Ham. West Ham also made an inquiry about Bayer Leverkusen’s Patrik Schick this month, but were told the Czech Republic forward is not for sale. The club have also looked at Blackburn’s Ben Brereton Díaz and Everton’s Dominic Calvert-Lewin, who is unlikely to leave Goodison Park this month. There is also the possibility of a loan move for Crystal Palace’s Christian Benteke. Moyes also wants a centre-back and has targeted Marseille’s Duje Caleta-Car. However, West Ham would prefer to sign the Croatia defender on loan, with Marseille after a permanent sale.There is a nice symmetry that when Rafael Nadal faces Daniil Medvedev in the final of the Australian Open on Sunday, it will be the Spaniard’s turn to try to win a record 21st grand slam title. Roger Federer had his chance at Wimbledon in 2019, when he had two match points in the final against Novak Djokovic but lost in a deciding tiebreak. Djokovic had his chance at the US Open last year when, having won all three of the year’s previous majors, he reached the final in New York but was beaten by Medvedev, denying him the calendar year grand slam. Now it is Nadal’s time, a fitting moment for the trio who have dominated men’s tennis for more than a decade and whose lives and successes have been inspired by and, in terms of numbers at least, adversely affected by the presence of the other two. The three men have been tied on 20 grand slams since Djokovic triumphed at Wimbledon for the sixth time last year. Nadal reached 20 when he won his 13th Roland Garros title in 2020 and Federer hit 20 when he won the Australian Open for the sixth time in 2018. Between them, they have claimed 60 of the past 73 grand slam titles, dating back to Federer’s first Wimbledon win in 2003. There will surely never be another era like this one. Though Federer’s future, at 40 and recovering from another knee operation, is uncertain, Nadal, who turns 36 in June, and Djokovic, who will be 35 in May, have time to add to their tallies. By the time they are finished, the men’s record may be out of sight. That is what most people thought in 2000, though, when Pete Sampras passed Roy Emerson’s record of 12, which had stood since 1967. At the time, Emerson predicted Sampras would win four or five more, but the American was more circumspect. “Time will tell if it will be broken,” Sampras said. “In the modern game, it could be difficult. I mean the next person might be eight years old, hitting at a park somewhere around the world. You never know. There are great players who could do it, but it’s not easy.” Sampras got a glimpse of the future the following year when he was sensationally knocked out at Wimbledon by Federer in the fourth round. Though Pistol Pete extended the slam record to 14 when he won the US Open in 2002 – in what turned out to be his last event – maybe he had seen the writing on the wall. Nadal was 16 and about to burst on the scene and Djokovic was a leading junior, with great things expected by those around him. The following year, Federer beat Mark Philippoussis to win Wimbledon for his first grand slam title. Few would have predicted what was to follow but the speed at which Federer began to dominate meant that by the time Djokovic reached his first grand slam final, at the US Open in 2007, Federer had won 11 grand slam titles. His win over the Serb in New York made it 12. At that time, Federer was more worried about Nadal than the emergence of Djokovic. Nadal had won three straight French Open titles and was proving he was far more than just a mudlark; he had reached back-to-back Wimbledon finals and once he won Wimbledon in 2008, in that epic final against Federer, he was away. Federer equalled Sampras on 14 when he secured his only French Open title in 2009 and passed him when he won Wimbledon for No 15 the following month. At that stage, Nadal had six slams to his name and Djokovic one. Sampras, who was there to see his record fall, said he believed Federer “could get to 18 or 19”. Sampras was not far off but the rise of Nadal meant his progress slowed. The Spaniard’s utter domination of Roland-Garros – 13 titles is a record that surely will never be equalled and he may win more – meant he thrust himself into the equation, that blistering forehand and never-say-die attitude piercing him into Federer’s psyche. Though Nadal undoubtedly stopped Federer from winning a few more French Open titles – for years he was the world’s second-best player on clay – the Spaniard’s brilliance also forced him to improve. Federer worked on his backhand, switched to a bigger racquet-head, played more aggressively. Likewise, Nadal stood closer to the baseline, beefed up his serve. And when Djokovic moved up a level in 2011 and started to dominate the game, Nadal and Federer added things to their games. As Nadal said this month, in an interview with Bild: “I’m sure Roger and Novak made me a better player. And I made them better. We had and still have great moments and the fans enjoy our rivalry.” The battle to be called the greatest of all time will rage on. In grand slams, Nadal leads Federer 10-4; he leads Djokovic 10-7 and Djokovic leads Federer 11-6. Djokovic has won three of the past four and eight of the past 15 slams. Without each other, they might have won more but without the need to reinvent themselves, they may not have kept the hunger so long. Whatever the result on Sunday, do not think for one minute that they are done yet.Before this game Moeen Ali blamed England’s defeat in the third match of the five-game series on the fact they had to bowl eight overs of heavily punished spin. In this, Moeen’s second game in temporary charge in the absence of the injured Eoin Morgan, they bowled 10 – and this time Adil Rashid, Liam Livingstone and Moeen himself spun the team to victory, with the captain playing as crucial a role with the ball as he had a little earlier with the bat. After ending the match with a demonstration of efficient death bowling that will be as morale-boosting as the result itself, England won by 34 runs to level the series and set up a decider on Sunday night. Moeen’s 28-ball 63, and in particular his vicious assault on a single Jason Holder over, was instrumental in hauling the tourists to a competitive total, on the same Kensington Oval pitch where they successfully, if narrowly, defended 171 last Sunday. After Brandon King and Kyle Mayers had started the West Indies innings by scoring 64 for the opening wicket, with the latter, opening for his country for the first time in his 16th appearance in all formats, particularly impressive, it was Moeen who made the crucial breakthrough, dismissing both openers in successive overs as West Indies fell into a mid-innings funk. When Nicholas Pooran eventually hammered Livingstone over long on at the start of the 14th over it was West Indies’ first boundary in 42 balls, and though both Livingstone and Rashid had expensive final overs the damage had been done. Then it fell upon England’s seamers to finish the job, and Chris Jordan and Reece Topley did so admirably. On Wednesday Moeen had bowled one expensive over and got out for a duck, but this was a very different experience. “In the last game I did nothing – I got hit, I got nought, you’ve got to accept that sometimes,” he said. “Today I’m really happy I could contribute to keeping the series alive. When you’re captain you tend to underbowl yourself and today I thought it was a good situation for me to have a go.” England’s was an innings built around two half-centuries, with both Jason Roy and Moeen accelerating impressively after pedestrian starts. Roy in particular started awkwardly, surviving a decent review for lbw from the third ball of the innings and presenting Holder with a caught and bowled chance during a second over in which he was wildly unsettled by variations of pace and length. After four overs he had scored 11 off 18, hitting one boundary, and looked anything but at ease. Just 16 balls later he was raising his bat to celebrate a half-century, having clicked into gear by hitting Sheldon Cottrell past point for a stylish four and then over midwicket and on to the roof of the Greenidge and Haynes Stand. Once at the landmark he retreated back into his shell, scored two off his next eight balls and finally edged to Pooran behind the stumps. James Vince followed precisely one over and four runs later, top-edging an attempted cut to short third man. It was the seventh time he has scored more than 30 runs in a T20 and he has just one 50 to his name. The 30-year-old has never enjoyed an extended run in the team – more than six years after his debut this was his 16th match, and he has only once played more games in a calendar year than he has managed in the first month of 2022 – but after another wasted start he has yet to produce a compelling reason why he should. By then Moeen was at the crease, and quietly starting to drag his side to a position of dominance. After 17 balls he had 22 and England seemed well short of par; after 23 balls he had 50 and they had a chance. Holder, who would eventually claim Moeen’s wicket with the first ball of the final over, was hit for four successive sixes as the stand-in captain delivered just the second half-century by an England skipper in 28 matches since August 2020 – Eoin Morgan has led the side in 24 of those games but Jos Buttler, captain for a single outing, scored the other.Here’s a round-up of this evening’s Covid-19 news. The UK government reported its lowest new case figures for more than a month on Saturday, with 72,727 infections. The figures don’t include Scotland’s case numbers, as figures for new positive PCR cases are not available at the weekend. Chile has broken its record for daily cases for the fourth day in a row, with more than 29,000 confirmed in the last 24 hours. Ukraine has marked the 100,000th person to die from Covid-19 in the country since the start of the pandemic. Turkey’s health minister Fahrettin Koca said the worst of the pandemic was over, despite the country joining others in breaking its daily case record on Saturday. A total of 94,783 new cases were registered in the last 24 hours. Italy reported 137,147 new cases on Saturday. Some schools in the UK have reintroduced mask wearing in classrooms, in the same week where the government dropped it as part of its official rules. France has reported 332,398 new Covid-19 cases, the fifth day in a row the figures have fallen. Former US presidential candidate Mitt Romney is isolating after testing positive for Covid-19. Another 522 people have died from Covid-19 in Mexico, Reuters reports. It means that 305,762 have died from the virus during the pandemic. Another 522 people have died from Covid-19 in Mexico, Reuters reports. It means that 305,762 have died from the virus during the pandemic. The country’s health ministry also reported 42,582 new cases, meaning more than 4.9 million people have tested positive for the virus since March 2020. Former US presidential candidate Mitt Romney is isolating after testing positive for Covid-19. The Utah senator, who is fully vaccinated and boosted, is working remotely. His wife, Ann, has tested negative, Associated Press reports. Romney, 74, unsuccessfully ran against Barack Obama in 2012. France has reported 332,398 new Covid-19 cases, the fifth day in a row the figures have fallen. The number of patients in intensive care with Covid also dropped by 22. Another 178 people have died, as the country’s overall death toll stands at more than 130,000. Some schools in the UK that stopped mask wearing in classrooms have reintroduced it because of a rise in Covid cases. The Metropolitan police’s investigation into parties in Downing Street during Covid-19 lockdowns could “neuter” the inquiry and report being put together by senior civil servant Sue Gray in the eyes of some. The Observer’s Mark Townsend has more: Unmesh Desai recalls feeling righteous frustration as he sat opposite the head of the Metropolitan police on Tuesday morning. For months Cressida Dick’s force had refused to investigate what appeared to be unambiguous breaches of Covid regulations at Downing Street. “The perception is that you’re covering for those in power,” Desai told the commissioner. Arms folded, Dick leant towards those assembled for the Greater London authority police and crime committee meeting in Southwark and responded: “We police without fear or favour.” Moments later, at 10.08am, Dick dropped the bombshell that sent shock waves thundering a mile west to Downing Street and nearby parliament. Desai felt the room go quiet, with others clearly sharing his “total surprise,” at the commissioner’s revelation. Read more: Italy reported 137,147 new coronavirus cases on Saturday. The figure represents a drop compared with Friday, where 143,898 were recorded by its health ministry. Its death toll stands as the second worst in Europe after the UK, with 145,914 deaths during the pandemic. Another 377 new deaths were registered on Saturday, one less than a day before. Turkey’s health minister said the worst of the pandemic was over, despite the country joining others in breaking its daily Covid case record on Saturday. Fahrettin Koca said that despite rising case figures, the illness caused by Covid is less severe and would reduce the impact of the virus. A total of 94,783 new cases were registered in the last 24 hours. In comments reported by Reuters, he said: “The rise we see in case numbers should not be seen as disheartening. The virus is not at its old strength. The worrying part of the pandemic is over.” Its health ministry reported the death toll rose by 174. Ukraine has marked the 100,000th person to die from Covid-19 in the country since the start of the pandemic. The country confirmed 149 more deaths on Saturday, meaning that 100,031 people have died with coronavirus. The Kyiv Post – the country’s English language news website – said that while case numbers have remained high during a wave of infections caused by the Omicron variant, death numbers have tailed off due to vaccinations. Four times in the last week, it has broken daily Covid case records, with 37,351 reported on Saturday. However the total number of deaths, 825, is lower than that of its highest number of deaths to take place on one day, 848, set in November 2021. Chile has broken its record for daily Covid cases, with more than 29,000 confirmed in the last 24 hours. Its the fourth day in a row that the country has broken its highest one-day number of new cases. The government’s reporting dashboard showed that nearly 100,000 people are confirmed to have the virus, with 33 people dying in the last 24 hours. Another 72,727 cases were reported in the UK on Saturday, the lowest figure for more than a month. The previous low was on 14 December, when only 59,610 positive tests were logged at the start of a spike caused by the Omicron variant. The figures don’t include Scotland’s case numbers, as figures for new positive PCR cases are not available at the weekend. It means 16,406,123 positive tests have been registered since the beginning of the pandemic. Latest government data shows that a further 296 deaths were recorded of people who had a positive Covid test within 28 days of dying. I’m Harry Taylor, and I’ll be bringing you the latest coronavirus updates from the UK and around the world for the rest of tonight. If you have any comments, tips or suggestions - drop me an email or get in touch via Twitter where my DMs are open. Below is a roundup of all the latest Covid news from around the world: Scotland has recorded 18 coronavirus-linked deaths and 6,679 new cases in the past 24 hours, according to recent figures. It means the death toll under this measurement, of people who tested positive for the virus in the previous 28 days, has risen to 10,309. Hungary’s daily tally of new Covid-19 cases could reach 30,000 in the next one or two weeks, up from about 20,000 this week, a government minister said on Saturday. Miklos Kasler, the minister for human resources, blamed the Omicron variant for the rise, Reuters reports. Japan logged 84,936 daily coronavirus infections on Saturday, a new record for a fifth consecutive day, as Omicron continues to spread across the country. The number has more than tripled from two weeks ago, according to the Kyodo News agency. Austria will begin easing Covid-19 related restrictions next week, the chancellor, Karl Nehammer, told a news conference on Saturday, allowing shops and restaurants to remain open longer and easing restriction on unvaccinated people. Russia reported more than 100,000 daily coronavirus cases for the first time on Saturday as the country weathers a surge of infections driven by Omicron. A government Covid-19 portal registered 113,122 new cases over 24 hours, nearly double the number of daily infections just a week ago. New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has gone into self-isolation until Tuesday after being deemed a close contact of a person who tested positive for Covid-19, the government said. Trucks rolled into Canada’s capital, Ottawa, on Saturday to stage what police say will be a massive protest against the prime minister Justin Trudeau’s Covid-19 vaccine mandates in front of parliament on a frigid winter day. The so-called “Freedom Convoy” – coming from east and west – started out as a rally against a vaccine requirement for cross-border truckers, but has turned into a demonstration against alleged government overreach during the pandemic, with a strong anti-vaccination streak. Portuguese election organisers were taking extra safety precautions on Saturday after the government decided to allow voters who are infected with the coronavirus to leave isolation and cast ballots in person along with everyone else. With around a tenth of Portugal’s 10 million-strong population thought to be isolating due to Covid-19, the government decided last week to lift restrictions for Sunday’s vote. In a press conference on Saturday, the electoral commission said: “All conditions have been met for the vote to take place in absolute safety.” Like many European countries, Portugal is experiencing record-setting infections, although widespread vaccination has kept deaths and hospitalisations lower than in earlier waves. Authorities have asked people with Covid to vote between 6pm and 7pm, but the time recommendation is not mandatory. There will be no designated areas for infected voters. Staff setting up a polling station at an vehicle repair shop in the Lisbon parish of Santo Antonio were placing stickers on the floor on Saturday to encourage social distancing. Voters will receive a face mask before they enter. Scotland has recorded 18 coronavirus-linked deaths and 6,679 new cases in the past 24 hours, according to recent figures. It means the death toll under this measurement, of people who tested positive for the virus in the previous 28 days, has risen to 10,309. There were 1,291 people in hospital on Friday with recently confirmed Covid-19, down 11 on the day before, with 35 in intensive care, up three. So far 4,410,290 people have received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccination, while 4,122,152 have received their second dose, and 3,286,355 have received a third dose or booster, according to figures published by the Scottish Government on Friday. Thanks for following the Guardian’s coronavirus live feed, bringing you the latest Covid-19 news from around the world. If you have any questions, comments or news tips then contact me on Twitter, Instagram or by email. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com The inquiry into Downing Street parties could be shared with Boris Johnson as soon as this weekend as cross-party demands mount for the report to be published in its entirety after an intervention by Scotland Yard. The timeline for the publication of the long-awaited report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray on alleged lockdown breaches at Downing Street and Whitehall was thrown into question this week when the Metropolitan police announced on Tuesday that a criminal investigation had been launched. Scotland Yard provoked outrage by demanding that references to matters it was examining be removed from the report. MPs labelled the force, which is investigating possible breaches punishable by fixed-penalty notices, “a broken organisation”. Hungary’s daily tally of new Covid-19 cases could reach 30,000 in the next one or two weeks, up from about 20,000 this week, a government minister said on Saturday. Miklos Kasler, the minister for human resources, blamed the Omicron variant for the rise, Reuters reports. In a Facebook video, he said the variant was causing less severe illness, but the third of Hungarians not vaccinated were at higher risk. Just over 6 million of the country’s 10 million people have received at least two shots, and nearly 3.6 million have also received a booster, but the country’s vaccination rate lags western European levels. Hungary is now offering shots to anyone, without people needing to register in advance, as well as booster shots to children aged 12-17. The government announced in mid-January that a fourth Covid-19 booster shot was available should people want one, after they have had a consultation with a doctor. Hungary has made booster shots mandatory for healthcare workers, and vaccinations mandatory for all teachers. Protective masks have been required in most indoor places since late November. London’s Metropolitan police have been “vacillating” about alleged Downing Street lockdown parties in the face of major public concern, a former attorney general has said. Lord Morris of Aberavon was commenting on Scotland Yard’s intervention regarding the publication of Sue Gray’s inquiry report on “partygate” over concerns that its contents may affect a police investigation into possible lockdown breaches. Morris told the PA news agency: I am dismayed with the vacillation of the Metropolitan police. Surely it is in the public interest that major concerns over events in Downing Street be investigated and reported on. Any prejudice that might result in fines would be a disproportionate concern. The Met has asked Gray, a senior civil servant, to make only “minimal reference” in her report to No 10 events that are subject to a criminal investigation, buying more time for Boris Johnson as he faces a threat to his leadership. Japan logged 84,936 daily coronavirus infections on Saturday, a new record for the fifth consecutive day, as the Omicron variant continues to spread across the country. The number has more than tripled from two weeks ago, according to the Kyodo News agency. The Osaka prefecture reported a record 10,383 casesand Tokyo 17,433, slightly down from Friday’s record of 17,631. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next hour. Feel free to flag anything you think is relevant to our coverage, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. A backbench Tory MP who has been critical of the government’s handling of the Afghanistan withdrawal has become the first to announce he intends to stand for leader if Boris Johnson is voted out. The news comes as the prime minister could finally get sight of the highly anticipated “partygate” inquiry report from the senior civil servant Sue Gray as early as this weekend, after police insisted they had not delayed its publication. No 10 had still not received a copy of the report into possible lockdown breaches in Downing Street and Whitehall on Saturday morning. It is widely believed that either the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, or the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, are frontrunners to win the top job if Johnson is ousted. But the Daily Mail reported on Friday that centrist Tories are backing the former soldier Tom Tugendhat. The newspaper said some Conservative MPs believed the chair of the foreign affairs committee ( represented the “best chance for a fresh start”. The MP for Tonbridge and Malling told Times Radio on Saturday: “I think I’m making it pretty clear that I think that it’s up to all of us to put ourselves forward. And it’s up to the electorate, in the first case parliamentary colleagues, and in the second case the party, to choose. “I think it’s a position of absolute integrity to say that of course you should offer yourself to the electorate if you think you can do it. Of course you should talk to colleagues and see if you can get a group together, and if you can get a group together you should go for it. “Now I haven’t been canvassing support so I don’t know if I’d be able to get the first group together – you’ve got to get a group first. But if you could, of course you should have a go.” Austria will begin easing Covid-19 related restrictions next week, the chancellor, Karl Nehammer, told a news conference on Saturday, allowing shops and restaurants to remain open longer and easing restriction on unvaccinated people. The moves come as the Omicron variant leads to reduced hospital admissions despite high infection numbers. Austria will extend the maximum permitted opening hours of restaurants and shops until midnight from 5 February, and will increase the number of people able to participate in events from 25 to 50, Nehammer said. “The good thing in spite of everything in this difficult situation – the hospital numbers are at a good level, the intensive care beds, I think it’s fair to say, are at a very good level,” he said. Russia reported more than 100,000 daily coronavirus cases for the first time on Saturday as the country weathers a surge of infections driven by the Omicron variant. A government Covid-19 portal registered 113,122 new cases over 24 hours, nearly double the number of daily infections just a week ago. The number of cases across Russia continues to rise sharply, with Omicron accounting for the majority. Since a brief, strict national lockdown at the beginning of the pandemic, Russia has held back on curbs, hoping instead to protect its struggling economy. But with four vaccines widely available for months, Russians remain reluctant to take them up. Just under half of the population is fully vaccinated. The Russian government has reported 330,111 deaths from Covid-19 since the start of the pandemic, the highest death toll in Europe. The figure is contradicted, however, by the statistics agency Rosstat, which counts Covid deaths under a broader definition and says the overall toll is close to double the official number. An interesting article by Eric Berger in St Louis, US. He writes about parents and doctors who think children under five are being left behind in the Covid vaccine race. New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has gone into self-isolation until Tuesday after being deemed a close contact of a person who tested positive for Covid-19, the government said. The exposure took place on 22 January during a flight to Auckland from the town of Kerikeri, the government said on Saturday, adding that the result of whole genome sequencing of a sample from the infected person was expected on Sunday. That would show if the infection was caused by the Omicron variant, it said. Ardern was asymptomatic and feeling well, the statement added. She will be tested on Sunday and is in isolation in line with the health ministry’s directives. The governor-general and members of her staff who were also on the flight are following the same isolation procedure. In the UK, a heavily redacted report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray on parties at Downing Street will be published imminently, the Guardian understands. It comes after Scotland Yard provoked fury and confusion by revealing it had demanded key details of the worst offending be removed. MPs labelled the Metropolitan police a broken organisation after the force admitted it had asked Gray to make “minimal reference” in her inquiry report to matters its officers were now investigating. The Met, battered by criticism, insisted it needed to protect the integrity of its investigation. Ukraine registered a record daily high of 37,351 new coronavirus infections over the past 24 hours, the health ministry said on Saturday. The previous high of 34,408 cases was a day earlier. Ministry data showed 149 new related deaths, putting the total above 100,000. Ukraine’s tally of infections in the pandemic stands at 4.02 million, with 100,031 deaths. Russia’s daily coronavirus cases exceeded 100,000 on Saturday for the first time since the pandemic began, the coronavirus taskforce said. The country confirmed 113,122 new daily infections, setting a record high for a ninth consecutive day, which the authorities blame on the spread of the Omicron variant. Russia’s coronavirus task force said 668 deaths had been confirmed in the past 24 hours, after Russia’s coronavirus death toll exceeded 700,000 on Friday. Indonesia is bracing for a third wave of Covid-19 infections as the Omicron variant drives a surge in new cases, health authorities and experts said on Saturday. The country reported 9,905 new infections and seven deaths on Friday in the latest 24-hour period. It was the highest daily caseload since August last year when the country was struggling to contain a Delta-driven wave. Indonesia had recovered from last year’s spike in cases and deaths that was among the worst in the region, and daily infections had fallen to about 200 by December. But cases are rising again just weeks after the country reported its first local Omicron case. The health minister, Budi Gunadi Sadikin, said the next few months would be critical because Omicron was spreading “rapidly and massively”. “Its upsurge will be extremely fast ... We will see a sharp rise in the near future,” he told a news conference on Friday, adding that the current wave would probably peak at the end of February or in early March. Daily Covid-19 infections among athletes and team officials at the Beijing Winter Olympics athletes jumped to 19 on Friday from two a day earlier, as Games organisers warned of more cases in coming days. Including the athletes and officials, 36 Games-related personnel were found to be infected – 29 when they arrived at the Beijing airport and seven already in the “closed loop” bubble that separates event personnel from the public, the organising committee said in a statement on Saturday. “We are now just going through the peak period of people arriving in China and therefore we expect to see the highest numbers at this stage,” the Games’ medical chief, Brian McCloskey, told a news conference. Organisers were confident in their system of Covid prevention and infections were unlikely to leak out into the public, McCloskey said. Cases among athletes and team officials exceeded those for “other stakeholders”, including media, sponsors and staff, for the first time since China started releasing daily numbers of Olympics-related coronavirus cases on 23 January, according to a Reuters tally of previous statements. “It’s annoying that every morning you need to get up a little earlier specially to get a PCR test. I think that in a few days it will be like brushing your teeth,” the Russian hockey player Anton Slepyshev told RIA news agency. “Everyone is concerned that the test result will suddenly turn out to be positive. But the reality is such that we are living with Covid. We accept all the risks and fears,” he said. The Games are to run from Friday to 20 February, its bubble sealed off from the rest of China, where the government’s zero-tolerance Covid policy has all but shut the country’s border to international arrivals. The Argentinian singer-songwriter Diego Verdaguer, whose romantic hits such as Corazón de papel, Yo te amo and Volveré sold almost 50m copies, has died of complications from Covid-19, his family said. He was 70. The naturalized Mexican-Argentinian musician, who was married to the singer Amanda Miguel, died on Thursday afternoon in Los Angeles, his daughter Ana Victoria said in a statement released by Diam Music, Verdaguer’s record company. “With absolute sadness, I regret to inform his fans and friends that today my father left his beautiful body to continue his path and creativity in another form of eternal life,” said his daughter. “My mother, I and the whole family are immersed in this pain, so we appreciate your understanding in these difficult times.” The statement was also published on the Twitter account of Amanda Miguel, with the hashtag #restinpeace along with emojis of a pair of her hands palm to palm and a white heart. The Tory MP Adam Holloway defended Boris Johnson over lockdown-breaking party allegations. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “This is a really remarkable guy who got an 80-seat majority and I believed him when he said he didn’t know it was a party. “He’s the PM of a nuclear-armed state, operating in a Downing Street that at the time was [on] a war footing, with 300-plus passholders virtually working, you know, 24/7. “I mean, he’s not the office manager. And if he’s asked to go outside and thank some staff, I’m not sure what the crime is there. I mean, if I’d gone out and I’d seen people with glasses of wine, yeah, I would have sent them packing back inside. That was a mistake.” Researchers have discovered abnormalities in the lungs of long Covid patients who have breathlessness that cannot be detected with routine tests. The Explain study uses xenon, an odourless, colourless, tasteless and chemically non-reactive gas, to investigate possible lung damage in the patients who have not been admitted to hospital but continue to experience the symptom. The initial results of the study suggest there is significantly impaired gas transfer from the lungs to the bloodstream in the long Covid patients despite other tests – including CT scans – coming back as normal. The study’s chief investigator, Fergus Gleeson, a professor of radiology at the University of Oxford and consultant radiologist at Oxford university hospitals NHS foundation trust, said: “We knew from our post-hospital Covid study that xenon could detect abnormalities when the CT scan and other lung function tests are normal.” In China, a total of 36 new Covid-19 infected were detected among Olympic Games-related personnel on 28 January, the organising committee of the Beijing 2022 Winter Games said on Saturday. Nineteen were either athletes or team officials who tested positive after arriving at the airport on Friday. A notice on the Games’ official website said 29 were found among new airport arrivals, while seven were among those already in the “closed loop” bubble that separates event personnel from the public. Welcome to the coronavirus live feed, with the latest news from around the globe on Covid-19. If you have any questions, comments or news tips to send over then please contact me using the below platforms. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.comThough widely believed to mean cloth of kings, corduroy can get a bad rap. But thanks to nipped-in blazers and kick flares, it’s back in style. SS22 sees a multitude of great pieces, from matching pantsuits, like Wyse London’s patch pocket jacket and trousers or Bella Freud’s in rose pink (£690). The cord blazer has had an update, too. If you fancy recreating Pussy Galore’s taupe blazer look from Goldfinger, try Ganni’s double-breasted version (£115) from theoutnet.com or the Frankie Shop (£141). Choose shades spanning the colour wheel, from seafoam green to navy to bubblegum. Ganni’s hot pink trousers (£215) are perfect when styled with a cashmere sweater, and H&amp;M’s cream pair are a chic wardrobe staple. Or try Yolke’s scarlet waistcoat (£155) with matching trousers (£207), styled over a ditsy print blouse. Slow fashion label Justine Tabak offers several micro cord dresses (from £195) in rich crimson or mulberry that are perfect for chilly days layered over a thin roll neck with flat boots. There’s also a crop of cord jumpsuits this season, from Rivet Utility’s worker in navy and Miss Selfridge’s chocolate belted style (£59.99, asos.com) to Whistles’s Gabby in burgundy (£149). If you’d rather not commit full-time, rent a black Alexa Chung pinafore dress for £46 for four days from hurrcollective.com, or a pair of trousers for £6 per day from mywardrobehq.com. Both would look great with a cream silk blouse. Bring a touch of cord to an all navy look with APC’s chic camel corduroy baseball cap (on sale at £65, endclothing.com) or a hair scrunchie made from offcuts (from £3.95, etsy.com) 1. Jumpsuit, £325, Rivet Utility, net-a-porter.com 2. Shirt, £22.99, zara.com 3. Skirt, £39, johnlewis.com 4. Bag, £720, Gucci, net-a-porter.com 5. Bomber, £147.50, alexachung.com 6. Trousers, £19.99, hm.comThat was Moeen’s third game as England captain, his first win, his first fifty and his first wickets. The performance with everything. And that’s it from me. Thanks for your company and your correspondence, and do come back tomorrow evening (from 7pm) when Tanya Aldred will be here to talk us through the denouement of a very satisfying series. Heeeere’s Moeen. Sure enough, he’s the player of the match. “I thought we were outstanding today,” he says. “Batted well at the top and the last four overs. Bowled brilliantly throughout – Rash, Toppers with the new ball...” Asked about his own knock, he says he didn’t feel he started well. “I went from not being able to hit the ball, and then, couple of shots, you get a bit of momentum and you keep going with that.” A caption shows that he faced just 28 balls – seven of them dots, seven sixes. Symmetry in motion. West Indies lost fewer wickets than England, but they paid the price for seizing up in the middle of their innings. England had their own bad patches – the first four overs of their innings (15-1) and the first seven of West Indies’ reply (63-0), but you don’t have to play well for all 20 overs – you just need one class act, sparkling with both bat and ball. It couldn’t happen to a more elegant player. 20th over: West Indies 159-5 (Pollard 18, Bravo 3) Reece Topley does his best to bowl a no-ball, with a waist-high full toss, but it’s not given. The batters settle for some batting practice, and the series goes all the way to a decider tomorrow. Well played England. Cometh the hour, cometh the Mo. 19th over: West Indies 156-5 (Pollard 17, Bravo 1) Darren Bravo has not only been demoted this evening: he’s now stuck at the non-striker’s end as his captain turns down a single. Ouch! Pollard, to be fair, justifies his own faith by whipping Jordan’s yorker for four and slogging a slower ball (I think) for four more as Roy misses a tough chance in the deep. West Indies need 38 off the last over; England just need to bowl six legitimate deliveries. “Livingstone, I presume,” says the subject of an email from my colleague Philip Cornwall. “Your reference reminded me of this classic from Vic Marks, getting the whole thing in when previewing a 2017 ODI series with Ireland: ‘Rashid and Moeen remain fragile assets and would welcome the reassuring presence of Saqlain as their spin doctor. Livingstone, I presume, may well get his chance later in the year if he maintains his stunning start to the season.’” Superb. 18th over: West Indies 145-5 (Pollard 8, Bravo 0) So Topley becomes the first England seamer to take a wicket tonight. He celebrates by trying to grab a run-out with his feet, for the second time in the series, but this time he finds the side netting. Not to worry: only five off the over! West Indies need 49 off the last two. Not even England can allow that, can they? Holder manages one more four, only to perish trying to hit a six. He was good, but not quite good enough. 17th over: West Indies 140-4 (Holder 32, Pollard 7) Jordan is back, still going well – mostly singles, partly thanks to some electric fielding from Livingstone on the midwicket boundary – the right man in the right place. He’s such a good all-round cricketer. West Indies need 18 an over. “Still chuckling,” says Brian Withington, “at your Warnistic reference to Rashid being all over the batters ‘like a cheap soup’. Does make me wonder in passing what constitutes an expensive soup though? I do recall as a student ordering a Vichyssoise in a rather nice French restaurant (it was the era of full grants) and naively (but politely) asking in vain if it could be heated up …” Ha. And ah yes, full grants. We didn’t know how lucky we were. 16th over: West Indies 133-4 (Holder 29, Pollard 3) Holder is still going well, hitting Tymal Mills for four, straight as an arrow, and then for six to cow corner. After making three off his first ten balls, Holder has 26 off his last nine. Mills strikes back with a fine slower ball, inducing a pop up in the air, but it plops down in no-man’s-land. West Indies need 61 off 24 balls. It’s still just about feasible. 15th over: West Indies 119-4 (Holder 17, Pollard 2) Jason Holder needs to get going – and he does. As Rashid returns for his final over, Holder goes six, dot, six, wide, one. A single for Pollard, before Holder miscues but gets away with it, taking another single. That’s 16 off the over, yet Rash still finishes with one for 28. And so to the death, with West Indies needing 75 at 15 an over. That would have been absurd eight days ago – now, not so much. 14th over: West Indies 103-4 (Holder 3, Pollard 1) Pooran had just got going – pulling Livingstone for six, slog-sweeping for six more. But then he became the fourth wicket out of four to fall to spin. England have read this pitch much better than their opponents. I wonder if Joe Root is tuning in? “BBC are reporting 7 sixes for Moeen,” says Panu Long. “Guardian has it down as 8 maximums. Who (understandably) lost count?” I did! Sorry, corrected now. Another one! Pooran miscues a big hit and Roy takes a fine diving catch at long-on. 13th over: West Indies 84-3 (Pooran 10, Holder 2) Moeen is now so confident that he’s prepared to bring back one of his seamers. It’s Jordan, and he’s on the spot this time with his yorkers and slower balls. Have West Indies given up? They need 110 off seven overs. 12th over: West Indies 81-3 (Pooran 8, Holder 1) Moeen brings on his third spinner – Mr Livingstone, I presume. He bowls off-breaks like Mo, and leg-breaks like Rash, and his over goes for only three. West Indies need a very big over, followed by seven more. The last boundary was 35 balls ago. 11th over: West Indies 78-3 (Pooran 6, Holder 0) Kieron Powell has sent out Jason Holder, to redeem himself after going for those four successive sixes. Suddenly the required rate is above 13 and England’s chances of a win on CricViz are 90 per cent. The big one! As so often, it’s hero to zero as Powell is baffled by Rashid’s googly and bowled through the gate. 10th over: West Indies 76-2 (Pooran 5, Powell 4) In the last game Pooran and Rovman Powell put on 122. If they do that again here, and someone else can hit a four, they’ll win the series. And they’ve seen off Moeen, who finishes with two for 28 from his four overs. At the halfway stage, West Indies need 118. Another one! Moeen gets the wicket, as King holes out to cow corner, but Rash gets the credit for smothering both batters in the previous over. 9th over: West Indies 69-1 (King 26, Pooran 3) England have already bowled two more overs of spin than West Indies did (5-3). Moeen keeps Rashid on and he’s all over the batters, as Shane Warne once said, like a cheap soup. Three off the over: the tide has turned. 8th over: West Indies 66-1 (King 24, Pooran 2) So Moeen, I think you could say, is leading from the front here. Nicholas Pooran, so good the other night, strokes a nice two but that’s an outstanding over – only three from it. Got him! Moeen brings himself back, bowls a super-slower ball and lures Mayers into picking out Chris Jordan at long-off. 7th over: West Indies 63-0 (King 23, Mayers 40) It’s Adil time! He’ll calm things down, surely – nope, King sees a googly and helps it round the corner for four. Rashid replies with a beauty, a flighted leg-break, drifting past the outside edge. Facing the explosive Mayers for the first time, Rashid drops too short, gets pulled hard, but is saved from another four by a fearless dive from James Vince. Seven off the over: a relative triumph for the bowler. 6th over: West Indies 56-0 (King 18, Mayers 38) Chris Jordan comes on and ... bowls wide! King slaps him for four to bring up West Indies’ fifty off only 31 balls. And then another four, a jump-cut – first a jump, then a cut. Jordan, like Mills, shows some resilience, conceding just a single off the other four balls. The cameras find Jofra Archer, looking pensive. And the PowerPlay ends, with West Indies going great guns but England still fancying their chances. 5th over: West Indies 47-0 (King 9, Mayers 38) If there’s one thing you don’t want to do on this pitch, it’s bowl wide. Tymal Mills comes on and does just that. Mayers says thank you very much, lofting him for four over point and six over third man. Mills has bowled two balls and gone for ten! He has to bowl straighter now – and he does, so Mayers flicks him for six more. That’s 25 off five balls for Mayers! But Mills fights back, beating him with a slower something-or-other, and adding two more dots. That takes character. 4th over: West Indies 31-0 (King 9, Mayers 22) Moeen keeps himself on and has a couple of moral victories, only to see Mayers thwack him against the spin over long-on for six. Mayers follows up with a deft cut for three into the gap at cover. He’s threatening to go the full Rovman. 3rd over: West Indies 21-0 (King 8, Mayers 13) These two seem more interested in singles than some West Indies openers you could mention. We’ve had seven of them already... but then Mayers hooks Topley for four! needing a retort, Topley produces a better bouncer, which Mayers misses. But this is a promising start. 2nd over: West Indies 14-0 (King 6, Mayers 8) Moeen fancies this one: not content with playing a great little innings, he’s now opening the bowling. He begins by beating Mayer all ends up with a big turner but then gets mown himself, for four. No dramas for the rest of the over. Not often you can say that in this game. 1st over: West Indies 6-0 (King 5, Mayers 1) It’s Reece Topley, so impressive in this series though not quite on the spot here as an attempted yorker turns into a full toss, driven for four by Brandon King. The new batter, the left-handed Kyle Mayers, gets a nick but it’s a thick one, flying safely down to third man. Well that was an innings of a few chapters. England started slowly, rallied as Jason Roy got going, slumped again – and then Moeen went gently ballistic, making his fastest fifty in T20 internationals, caressing sixes in all directions. Jason Holder was a giant at the start (2-0-3-1) and a patsy by the end (2-0-41-2). I think England are ahead of the game, on a tacky surface, but who knows? 20th over: England 193-6 (Billings 13, Jordan 0) Billings is fuming at not being given a wide as a bouncer from Holder sails over his head. He takes it out on the next ball, hooking for six, and the one after – belting it straight, the drop-kick for six more. That’s the finish this innings needed. And another! Salt attacks from ball one and this time he perishes to it, chipping a slower ball into the covers. Mo is caught in the deep. Seven sixes and out! Now that’s what I call a captain’s innings. 19th over: England 180-4 (Moeen 63, Billings 0) Why Billings is out there, ahead of the scintillating Salt, is anyone’s guess. But Moeen is still in the mood: a tuck for two to reach fifty off only 23 balls, a swing for six! He’s only hit one four so far. Shepherd’s only answer is to bowl wider still and wider – three wides in the over. then there’s a full toss: six more! That’s Moeen’s eighth six, and 18 off the over. Livingstone, reduced to a spectator, tries to join in but slices into the stratosphere. “Scunged it,” says Mark Butcher. (Rhymes with lunged.) 18th over: England 162-3 (Moeen 48, Livingstone 16) Back comes Jason Holder, the bowler of the series so far. Mo cuts for two, then mows for six! And again! That was superb, down the track, dead straight, half Morgan, half Gower. And yet again! Over extra-cover. Mo at his Mo-est. And another one! Flicked over square leg. Six, six, six, six! It’s the mildest of massacres. 17th over: England 134-3 (Moeen 20, Livingstone 16) Sheldon Cottrell is back, itching to give that salute of his, not succeeding but managing to keep the scoreboard down to singles and finishing with 0-34. This time there is a wide, not half as wide as the non-wide in the previous over. Moeen mistimes another one, innocuously. The pitch is showing signs of weariness: if it was a person, it would be Sam Billings, bouncy but knackered. 16th over: England 129-3 (Moeen 18, Livingstone 14) Livingstone has reached the moment of truth: hit out or get out. He sees this, spots Pollard’s slow bouncer, and nails it, out of the ground for six. To show that he’s not just a blaster, he brushes a fuller ball for two. Then he goes back to brute force, can’t time it and settles for a single. Moeen mistimes it too, for once, but picks up two as he goes nice and straight. And then one of the widest wides you’ve ever seen is not called a wide! Perhaps because Mo wandered out to inspect it. Eleven off the over, which is handy, but England need a big one. 15th over: England 118-3 (Moeen 16, Livingstone 5) Health is one thing, form another. Livingstone, facing Hosein, hurls himself into a reverse sweep and can’t get so much as an edge. And the same again! Which at least brings a bye. Something needs to be done, so Moeen slog-sweeps... for six! 14th over: England 109-3 (Moeen 9, Livingstone 4) The even better news is that Liam Livingstone, who’s been unable to eat for much of the tour because of his oesophagitis, is looking himself again. Meanwhile Moeen is facing Pollard, who’s got him out twice in the series at a personal average of 8. Mo is understandably watchful. Pollard and Jason Holder have 2-15 off five overs between them; the other seamers have 0-77 off seven. 13th over: England 103-3 (Moeen 7, Livingstone 1) Well bowled Akeal Hosein, who has troubled Vince before. The bad news is that England have thrown away a dominant position. The good news is that Moeen and Livingstone have a bit of time to play with. Mo plays a lovely lofted sweep, over the man at short fine leg. Noooo! James Vince, you need to stay there now, anchor the innings – not chase a wide one and chop it straight to backward point! Live by the flash, die by the flash. 12th over: England 96-2 (Vince 34, Moeen 2) So one captain strikes and the other comes out. Moeen has two ducks inn this series, not that that’ll bother him. He gets a bouncer first ball and hooks it for a gentle single, as if playing in the back garden with a small nephew. The breakthrough! A crafty cutter, a thick nick, a simple catch, and West Indies have the wicket they needed – and most wanted. 11th over: England 93-1 (Roy 52, Vince 33) Romario Shepherd is back, going round the wicket, trying to go wide of Roy’s off stump but only succeeding in dishing up two wides. When he goes wide-ish, Roy takes a single and Vince plays his best shot so far, a deliberate slice past the cover sweeper. Shepherd recovers to string together three dots, before Vince square-slices another two. The commentators are not sure about the pitch: “a bit tacky,” says one. In which case England have done extremely well to make 78 off the last seven overs. 10th over: England 84-1 (Roy 51, Vince 27) In the face of this sudden fusillade, who can Kieron Pollard turn to? Himself. He bowls very straight, into the pitch as the players say, and manages to restore order – it’s all ones and dots and the odd leg-bye. But at drinks, in gentle sunshine, England may just have their noses in front. 9th over: England 80-1 (Roy 50, Vince 25) And now Vince comes to the party, clouting Drakes back over his head for six. That’s one way to get past the dreaded 18. Roy sees that and raises him a flat slog-sweep for six more, which takes him to a punchy fifty off only 34 balls. There are plenty of runs in this bouncy surface: the question is whether the spinners can slow things down. 8th over: England 65-1 (Roy 44, Vince 16) As Akeal Hosein starts the first over of spin, Roy takes a single and brings up the fifty partnership in no time (aka 32 balls). Roy goes leg side and whips Hosein through point, so hard that the sweeper can’t get there. His 44 is almost the highest score made by one of England’s senior players in the series – only Banton and Salt have reached fifty. 7th over: England 57-1 (Roy 39, Vince 14) On comes Dominic Drakes, looking the part – he walks with a strut and bowls with a high arm action. He troubles both batsmen, deceiving Roy with a slower ball and luring Vince into another rash slash, but he gets no reward – in fact Roy’s shot goes for four and Vince’s for six, just over third man. Harsh. And England have amassed 42 off the last three overs. Drakes’ dad Vasbert, by the way, is now coaching Barbados (men), not West Indies (women). I wonder if he calls his dad “Manager”, as Alec Stewart used to do. 6th over: England 45-1 (Roy 34, Vince 7) Cottrell has 0-29 from there overs, Holder 1-3 from two – so Holder is taken off. As Romario Shepherd comes on, Roy goes on making whoopee, squirting a wide ball for four through the non-existent slips. That’s 22 off the last eight balls. Shepherd gets the plug in – dot, one, one – but then Roy goes inside-out for another six. As the PowerPlay ends, honours are about even and all the power has come from Roy. 5th over: England 32-1 (Roy 23, Vince 5) Vince gets some width from Cottrell and flashes over backward point for four. Give him a cordon, Kieron! When he takes a single, Roy misses out on a wide one and says, very audibly, “Fuck”. It does the trick: he plays a lovely late cut, of the evening so far, followed by a chip onto the green for two. He’s away! The last ball is flicked onto the roof of the Greenidge-Haynes stand. Game on. “I noticed the other day IN THIS VERY PAPER,” says Pete Salmon, “that Moeen said he is ‘always ready to captain teams’. Is this a pitch for the Test job do you think? And if so, would there ever be a more glorious thing for the followers of OBO than this? “Every problem that bedevils English cricket would be gone at a stroke. We’d have our number six batsman. We’d have our spinner. We’d have our best batsman full of schoolboy energy like in the olden times. And most of all we’d have our sense of wonder back. Please make it happen.” I couldn’t possibly comment. 4th over: England 15-1 (Roy 11, Vince 0) Roy gets a thigh-high full toss from Holder and does well to swat it behind square for two. He’s jumping round the crease but Holder is equal to it, aiming for his feet then rapping him on the box. “I think that’s hit him,” says Harmison, “in the unquestionables.” An idiom is born. 3rd over: England 13-1 (Roy 9, Vince 0) Another cover drive from Roy off Cottrell, sweeter than the first. James Vince swishes and misses, then nicks and sees it drop short of the keeper. There’s no slip for him, when there should be at least two. This is such a big moment for him: England need Vince the centurion from the summer, not Vince the maker of endless elegant 18s, who seems to have made a comeback since. 2nd over: England 8-1 (Roy 4) That swing is there for Jason Holder, who gets just enough shape to beat Roy outside off. Next ball, Roy chips it straight it back and is dropped by Holder. It’s already a good over, four dots and a single, and it gets a whole lot better as Banton departs. West Indies on top already. Banton picks the wrong ball to charge, gets it on the splice and dishes up a dolly to deep mid-on. 1st over: England 7-0 (Roy 3, Banton 4) So West Indies lose a review and Roy, who had been watchful, celebrates his reprieve by cover-driving Cottrell for three. Steve Harmison, commentating, notes that there was a lot of swing for Reece Topley in the warm-ups. Tom Banton gives a big fat nick, second ball, head height, but there’s no slip! And it goes too fast for Nicholas Pooran, taking over as the keeper, to move. Bouncing well over the leg stump. For lbw against Roy, who got a long way across his stumps... The players are out there and Jason Roy is waiting to face Sheldon Cottrell. Ali Martin retweets a comment from Kerry O’Keeffe, now a veteran among Aussie commentators. “Having Sunday breakfast,” O’Keeffe writes, “brie , strawberries , crisp bread and a short black coffee…” It does get better, eventually. “Watching @FoxCricket highlights of Heather Knight century… thru extra cover front foot…forward of mid wicket front foot…on a pitch with nibble..bliss…” Meanwhile Phil Salt is talking to Mark Butcher, saying his debut fifty would have meant more if it had brought a win. Heather Knight may be saying something similar tomorrow after her monumental 168 not out. And yes, Dominic Drakes is the son of Vasbert, who played Tests and ODIs for West Indies either side of the millennium and is now coaching West Indies’ women’s team. Dominic, like his dad, is a Bajan fast bowler, but left-arm rather than right. He’s played just three T20 internationals, taking two for 114. Things can only get better. West Indies also make two changes. The misfiring Shai Hope makes way for Kyle Mayers at the top of the order, and among the bowlers Dominic Drakes comes in for Fabian Allen. England 1 Jason Roy, 2 Tom Banton, 3 James Vince, 4 Moeen Ali (capt), 5 Liam Livingstone, 6 Phil Salt, 7 Sam Billings (wkt), 8 Chris Jordan, 9 Adil Rashid, 10 Reece Topley, 11 Tymal Mills. West Indies 1 Kyle Mayers, 2 Brandon King, 3 Nicholas Pooran (wkt), 4 Rovman Powell, 5 Darren Bravo, 6 Kieron Pollard (capt), 7 Jason Holder, 8 Dominic Drakes, 9 Romario Shepherd, 10 Akeal Hosein, 11 Sheldon Cottrell. It’s the same one that produced an England victory last Sunday, by the barest of margins – and they batted first then too. It’s now less than hirsute. “There’s more hair on my head,” says Mark Butcher, “than there is on this deck.” Tom Curran, commenting from the studio, reckons England’s spin trio will be crucial – Adil Rashid, Moeen and Liam Livingstone. “I wasn’t too fussed about losing,” says Moeen. (About the toss.) Two changes for England – Garton and Brook drop out after their debuts as Jordan and Billings return. Kieron Powell wins the toss and, sure enough, he opts to field. Evening everyone and welcome to the fourth act of an engrossing drama. England are now the cornered tigers: one more duff spell of death bowling and they’re toast. West Indies, who were meant to be the underdogs, have been the leaders of the pack. Even the one time they were beaten, in the second match, felt like a win. They can afford another defeat, which would be the best thing for the series. But they’ve got the wind in their sails after piling up 224 in The Rovman Show, and they would make worthy winners. For England Eoin Morgan is ruled out of the rest of the series with his quad injury, so Moeen Ali has a chance to do things his way after being thrown the car keys at the last minute on Wednesday. Today he may even remember how many changes England have made to their XI. My money is on one or two. Chris Jordan could return in his capacity as the shepherd of the young seamers, and after Phil Salt’s sparkling 57 on debut, the brains trust may have more faith in the top order, which could mean ditching the other novice batter, Harry Brook, and bringing in a bowler – Saqib Mahmood if the pitch is pacy, Liam Dawson if it’s slow. That would allow Liam Livingstone, still recovering from a debilitating bout of oesophagitis, to keep his powder dry for hitting sixes. West Indies don’t need to do anything different, but they’ve tended to make the odd change and they’ll be conscious that there’s another game tomorrow. There are a few showers forecast so Kieron Pollard, like Moeen, will surely choose to chase if he wins the toss. Play starts at 8pm GMT (3pm local time), all being well. Unless the toss is delayed, I’ll be back around 7.35 with news of the teams. In the meantime click here to see a stroke that even Rovman Powell would have been proud to play.