Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual. This page was initially published with an incorrect headline and an old Azed grid. This was amended on 30 January 2022.It’s someone’s nightmare job: Amazon boss Jeff Bezos’s newspaper, the Washington Post, is seeking a special correspondent just to cover the billionaire’s online shopping and web services titan. Having your own chronicler could be seen as the ultimate in billionaire egotism, but we are all close Amazon watchers now. The group’s tentacles have spread into so many areas of our lives that it is almost impossible to escape – from its cloud storage technology that supports government services and numerous businesses, to its Prime subscription service tying clients into an “ecosystem” that ranges from film and music to shopping deliveries, to the Alexa-driven smart speakers that turn on lights and radios in many homes and search the internet while logging intimate user data. Covid-19 may have knocked the sales and profits of many businesses, but Amazon was a standout pandemic winner, notching up millions of new recruits who turned to online streaming and shopping while shielding at home. In Britain, 56% of households are now thought to have had access to Prime Video after almost 700,000 more people signed up in the final quarter of last year, according to analysts at Kantar. On Thursday, Amazon will reveal the extent to which it has been able to hold on to those new customers as high streets reopened while the costs and complexities of serving shoppers increased. Widespread supply chain hold-ups, with some factories shut during Covid scares and shipping routes disrupted, are expected to have affected its ability to obtain and deliver products. The cost of delivering has also gone up, as Amazon has had to battle for staff and invest in additional logistical kit amid a global surge in demand for home deliveries. In the UK, it increased pay for warehouse workers and offered signing-on bonuses of up to £3,000 before Christmas to attract staff, as well as offering more than £11 an hour in some parts of the country – three pounds more than the current minimum wage. Meanwhile, shoppers now have more chance to try clothes on in boutiques, go on holiday or venture out to bars and clubs – meaning less cash to splash on Amazon. Such problems have already hit the share prices of tech companies, from online fashion sellers Asos and Boohoo to streaming service Netflix. At Amazon, difficulties prompted a disappointing performance in the three months to the end of September when the company reported its biggest year-on-year profits decline since 2017. Another fall is expected for the Christmas quarter. Overall, analysts expect fourth-quarter revenues of $137.7bn (£102.8bn) and operating profits of $2.6bn: a 9%-plus increase in revenues on the same period a year before, but a chunky 60% fall in quarterly profit. Costly investments in chartering cargo ships and leasing planes are expected to have given Amazon a degree of protection from the global supply chain issues. However, almost a third of its packages are delivered by partner companies. Michael Pachter, an analyst at Wedbush, says: “Industry-wide shortages in shipping containers, truck drivers, and readily available ports likely impacted delivery times and caused strain for many orders as shipping container [rates] surged from under $2,000 before the pandemic to over $20,000 with multi-week delays.” On the demand side, it is not plain sailing either. In groceries, for example, Natalie Berg, a retail analyst and co-author of a book on Amazon, says: “All the things that made Amazon unique, such as same-day delivery and checkout-free stores, are quite quickly becoming the norm.” In the booming world of fast-track groceries, the likes of Getir, Gopuff and Gorillas promise to deliver in less than 15 minutes, and are battling with Amazon partner Deliveroo and its rivals Just Eat and Uber Eats, as well as Tesco’s own Whoosh and Sainsbury’s Chop Chop in the UK. Meanwhile, Amazon has opened about 15 of its “just walk out” till-less grocery stores in the UK, but it is already facing a challenge in this area from Tesco and Aldi – and plenty of competition from regular local convenience stores. A tie-up with Sainsbury’s, which is using Amazon technology to power its just-walk-out store, may suggest a more lucrative way forward. Don’t be surprised if Amazon brings hi-tech physical fashion stores to the UK before long too. If shoppers are keen, the tech giant’s real assault on the high street will be via partnering with more familiar brands with better fashion credentials. All of this will fuel the appetite to take on the dominance of big tech firms. In the US, a change of regime is being led by Lina Khan, the new boss of the Federal Trade Commission, who made her name helping guide investigations into monopoly tech power, particularly Amazon. Historically, taking on monopoly businesses has been a slow and arduous process. But Khan showed her ambition in the first meeting she chaired last summer, saying the US needed “a different set of rules” to control big tech.New South Wales has recorded its deadliest day of the pandemic so far, reporting 52 deaths from Covid in the last 24 hours. It comes as the state’s chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, confirmed four cases of the new Omicron subvariant, described as “son of Omicron”, saying there is “likely to be more”. “This is a sublineage, a sort of breakaway from the Omicron variant. We know that it is circulating in countries and we have seen it grow significantly,” she said. “At the moment we don’t see that it is presenting anything different clinically in terms of the severity or its response to vaccine but we’ll obviously be watchful, monitor the situation closely.” Chant said the new variant contains the “S gene” that characterised the Omicron variant, but said “special genomic sequencing” was required to “get a handle on its distribution.” NSW reported 13,524 new cases, with a total of 2,663 hospitalisations, of which 182 are in ICU. Of the 52 deaths, 33 were men and 19 were women. One person was over 100, 11 were in their 90s, 26 were in their 80s, 11 were in their 70s and three were in their 60s. Thirty-one of the people that died were aged care residents, with only two of them having received booster shots. “On behalf of everybody across our state, can I extend our condolences to the families, our thoughts and prayers, our hearts are with you today and over this difficult time,” the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said. Chant said NSW Health was also changing its reporting period, changing its cut-off time from 8pm to 4pm, to allow epidemiologists, surveillance officers and data analysts to shift to “more sustainable footing.” “This will also allow them to focus on some additional work in epidemiology reports and provide more granular detail that will support the community as we move forward with our Covid response,” she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Perrottet urged people to get their booster vaccine dose, noting that only about 40% of the eligible population had received their third jab so far. The premier told Sky News he expected the number of Covid deaths to “remain stable” and that NSW should prepare for “a difficult fly season”. “We expect those [death] numbers to stay pretty consistent,” he said. “This is the new world.” Perrottet unveiled a $1bn support package for small businesses and landlords who have been affected by the state’s skyrocketing case numbers. The support package includes payment of 20% of weekly payroll costs to companies that can prove a decline in turnover of at least 40% across January, and an extension of the commercial landlord hardship grant, which supports landlords providing rental relief to tenants affected by downturns. It also included an increase to the small business fees and charges rebate, with the treasurer, Matt Kean, saying the government would also cover 50% of the costs of rapid antigen tests. “This is to help our small business sector to get through the other side so they can support the economy. “Money will come online by March to ensure that we don’t put additional pressure on the supply of rapid antigen tests in the market. “It will come online at a time when there are enough rapid antigen test to ensure they are affordable and accessible to everyone in the community.” In Victoria, 20 deaths and 10,589 new cases were recorded. The premier, Daniel Andrews, said the booster shot may soon be considered as important as the earlier two jabs. “I think it’s only a matter of time before the relevant federal agencies confirm that this is three doses, but it is not two plus a bonus. “It really is three doses to be protected not just against really critical illness, but to be protected or minimise the likelihood that you get it and give to the people that you love.” Andrews noted that the seven-day case number average had been dropping in Victoria, from “nearly 19,000” last week to 12,659 this week. “We are seeing that positive trend, and a more optimistic picture than even our modelling predicted,” he said. “You can see a very significant reduction in the number of people in the community that have Covid.” There are now 889 people in hospital with Covid in Victoria, with 111 in intensive care and 35 on ventilators. Tasmania reported one death on Sunday and 594 new cases, while South Australia reported two deaths and 1,633 new cases.The New South Wales government has unveiled a $1bn support package for businesses after a summer of exploding Covid-19 infections caused by the Omicron variant. But the scaled-down, jobsaver-style payment for small- and medium-size businesses will be capped at half of what was offered during the Delta wave of infections in 2021, after the federal government refused a request from the NSW government to split the cost of the package. On Sunday the NSW government announced a new $700m small business support program, which will provide payroll support to businesses with turnover of between $75,000 and $50m. The package will provide a payment of 20% of weekly payroll costs to companies that can prove a decline in turnover of at least 40% across January. Payments would range from a minimum of $500 to a maximum of $5,000 a week. But businesses which meet the threshold for the payment would not receive relief for losses incurred during January. Instead, the payment would cover February and be paid as a lump sum. While the size of the fund may increase if payments extend beyond next month, the support plan is considerably smaller than those rolled out during earlier waves of the Covid virus, including $10bn in relief during the Delta lockdown from both the state and commonwealth governments. Despite calls from premier Dominic Perrottet for the commonwealth to split the cost of the package as it did during the long Delta lockdown in 2021, the NSW government has been forced to fund the package itself after the calls for support were rejected by the federal government. On Sunday deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce defended the decision not to provide financial support to the program, saying it wasn’t “penny pinching”. Joyce said the Morrison government had laid out billions of dollars out in the form JobKeeper, JobSeeker, stimulus for the airline industry, concessions for the rapid antigen tests and other measures during the pandemic. “It goes on and on and on,” Mr Joyce told Sky News’ Sunday Agenda program on Sunday. “So I don’t think it is penny pinching. You can’t just keep putting things on the credit card over and over and over again.” By capping the payment to businesses with a turnover of $50m and asking businesses to prove the loss of turnover, the NSW government hopes to avoid a similar situation to the commonwealth’s jobkeeper program which allowed large companies such as Harvey Norman able to claim millions of dollars in assistance despite posting record profits. Perrottet said the package would “help support businesses that experienced the worst effects of the Omicron wave”. “NSW is tracking better than expected and confidence is returning. And as we did with earlier recoveries, we will come through this recent challenge stronger than ever,” he said. The package comes amid increasing pressure on the government to provide support for businesses amid the wave of Covid-19 infections which have swept through NSW since the Omicron variant of the virus arrived in late November. While Perrottet has resisted pressure to increase Covid restrictions amid the surge, businesses have felt the brunt of both a decrease in economic activity and the effect of isolation measures which have led to workforce shortages. In January consumer confidence fell to its lowest point since 1992, when Australia was emerging from recession, while a survey of 2,000 members by the lobby group Business NSW found 40% “don’t have enough cashflow for the next three months”. But while the business support program will be based on losses in January, no retrospective payments will be made for this month. This week the opposition leader, Chris Minns, criticised the government for the time it had taken to announce the package. “Talk to anybody in this state and they’ll tell you that many businesses hoped that they would make up for lost revenue over the Christmas and New Year period,” he said. “They cross their fingers, they kept their doors open, but as a result of the Omicron wave it’s had a severe effect on the NSW economy.” The $1bn package will also include an extension of the commercial landlord hardship grant to 13 March. The payment provides up to $3,000 per month to landlords who provide rental relief waivers to tenants affected by downturns. The fund also includes a further injection of funds into the performing arts sector with the performing arts package extended until April 2022. “As we continue to protect the health and safety of our community, we have to ensure our economy is resilient and our businesses are supported so they bounce back from this most recent phase of the pandemic,” the treasurer, Matt Kean, said.Hillsong founder Brian Houston has announced he is stepping down as leader of the church as he defends criminal charges that allege he covered up his father’s child sexual abuse. In a statement made on Sunday, Houston said he made the decision after consulting with the church’s leadership and legal counsel. “The Hillsong Global Board feel it is in my and the church’s best interest for this to happen, so I have agreed to step aside from all ministry responsibilities until the end of the year. “The court case I am facing is related to circumstances surrounding my father, and I need to be fully committed to preparation and engagement with the case and work closely with my lawyers in defending this charge. “I have said, including in a prior statement, that I intend to fight the charge and welcome the opportunity to set the record straight.” Houston was charged last October with one count of concealing the serious indictable offence of another person. He had initially stepped aside as Hillsong’s board chairman after being charged. In the statement, the pastor said the charges came as a “shock” to him, and he intends to “vigorously defend” himself. He said his decision to step down was also driven by his emotional wellbeing. “We have talked about the effects of the situation with my father, which go back many years up to the current legal case, and the impact this has had on me emotionally.” Houston’s father, Frank, died in 2004, and has been accused of the alleged abuse of a young man in the 1970s. His son is due in court in Sydney in October, and said his latest decision came after discussions with the church’s board last December. “In December, during our board meeting, Hillsong’s external legal counsel gave the board advice regarding the current charge I am facing,” he said. “That it would be ‘best practice’ for me to step aside completely from church leadership during the court proceedings. “The court processes are likely to be drawn out and take up most of 2022 (especially considering the backlog in the courts, exacerbated by the Covid pandemic).”Anthony Albanese has accused the federal government of failing to understand how badly small businesses are hurting during the Omicron wave, as the Coalition resists calls to provide extra economic support. The Labor leader said businesses were suffering from a “void of national leadership” after the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, declared the government could not say yes “every time someone turns up and says I want money”. The New South Wales Coalition government announced on Sunday it would roll out a $1bn economic support package to help small- and medium-size businesses, but the payment will be capped at half of what was offered during the Delta wave. The state treasurer, Matt Kean, said he was “very disappointed” that the federal government had declined to pour in funding. “In their absence we’re having to step up to the plate and do our bit to preserve those businesses and help our national economy,” Kean told the Nine Network on Sunday. Joyce said the federal government had “paid billions and billions and billions of dollars out” for pandemic-related programs including jobseeker, jobkeeper, stimulus to the airline industry and “it goes on and on and on”. “So I don’t think it’s penny pinching,” Joyce told Sky News on Sunday. The deputy prime minister argued the government could not “keep putting things on the credit card” and had to make “hard decisions”. But Albanese said the federal government was leaving business behind. “One of the things you notice around any shopping centre in the country is the number of empty shopfronts and business is really doing it tough,” Albanese told the ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday. “You’ve had consumer confidence in decline. You’ve had people essentially imposing their own restrictions on their activity and that’s really hurting small business.” Pressed on whether businesses should be getting more federal support now, Albanese said: “I would like to see, where the conditions are there that were the same for giving support before, why is it that this support has been completely withdrawn?” The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, argued on Friday Australia was “transitioning to a new phase of our pandemic response” and “we’ve actually seen credit card spending in aggregate terms, 19% higher right now through January than what we saw during the Delta period”. But Albanese dismissed that argument, saying that is “because people are buying things online”. “It says it all about the treasurer and how out of touch he is, the fact that he doesn’t seem to understand how tough small business is do doing at the moment,” Albanese said. Albanese said Labor’s pledge to provide free rapid antigen tests would be subject to “limits based upon the health advice”. That could include a cap on the number of tests a person could receive each month, in order to “control supply”. “What you’ve had from this government is a ‘let it rip’ approach when it comes to the market delivering and the market hasn’t delivered.” The Labor party released a new policy on Sunday to increase Australia’s sovereign manufacturing capacity in medical essentials including testing equipment, masks, personal protective equipment and ventilators. The party is pledging to “give first priority to Australian-made medical technology for government purchases in consumables and equipment”. It also says it would instruct Labor’s promised $15bn National Reconstruction Fund “to make medical technology a top priority and work with the A Future Made in Australia Office to develop a national investment plan for healthcare essentials”. Albanese said Australia needed immediate supply “so some of that will obviously need to be overseas purchase”. “But the truth is that there’s one company in Brisbane that’s currently exporting 100,000 tests a day to the United States,” he said, referring to Ellume. “And they wanted to establish a manufacturing facility, they wanted to ramp it up here. They approached the federal government and the federal government wasn’t interested but the US government was.” When the Insiders host David Speers pointed to the fact that certain batches of Ellume’s Covid-19 home test kits had been recalled by the Food and Drug Administration in the US because of “higher-than-acceptable false positive test results”, Albanese said it was important to respect regulatory processes. “But the point here is, David, we need to manufacture rapid antigen tests here. One of the lessons of this pandemic is that we need to be more self-reliant.” The federal finance minister, Simon Birmingham, accused the Labor party of failing to do its “homework” before announcing “thought bubble” policies. Birmingham said the Coalition would act on advice from the Therapeutic Goods Administration. “We saw today that Mr Albanese was spruiking a provider who has not yet received that TGA approval and who has faced a significant recall of products in the US,” Birmingham told reporters in Adelaide. “Now, of course, we urge that provider to continue to engage with the TGA, and if its case stacks up, it will receive approval.” The government also issued a statement claiming that Albanese’s comments about monthly limits on free free rapid tests represented a “backflip”. The health minister, Greg Hunt, and the industry minister, Angus Taylor, said Albanese’s “vague, sound-good pledge has collapsed”. Earlier, Albanese also indicated a Labor government would increase funding for aged care, without committing to specific amounts. Albanese pointed to the ongoing wage case before the Fair Work Commission, in which aged care providers and unions have quietly reached consensus on the increased complexity and value of aged care work. “The federal government should be making a submission to the commission supporting an increase in wages,” Albanese said. The Health Services Union – which is seeking a 25% wage increase for aged care – welcomed Albanese’s “hugely significant” comments. “In the short term it will lift the spirits of aged care workers,” the HSU national president, Gerard Hayes, said. “But in the longer term we need to lift wages to allow more workers to stay in the industry and stem the short staffing crisis.”The Washington DC Auto Show has been showcasing alternative fuel vehicles for 15 years, but this is the first year an entire pavilion was dedicated to electric vehicles, or EVs. In part, you can thank the current occupant of the nearby White House for that. If Joe Biden has his way with his ambitious $2.2tn Build Back Better plan there will be 50% zero-emission vehicles on the road by 2030. The Biden administration also has plans to convert an estimated 600,000 of its fleet to alternative fuels as part of a renewed commitment to combat climate change. There are major issues ahead – the plan is being blocked by Republicans and there are serious equity issues to be addressed as the US transitions away from fossil fuels. But big changes are already happening, and the car show, which ends this weekend, is on it. EVs have now been adopted on a global scale, said John O’Donnell, chief executive of the Washington DC Auto Show, and the show, which focuses on public policy and gives congressional members and auto industry leaders a space to review the latest technology, needed to reflect that. “We’ve had other technologies and declared them a pavilion, but I thought it was very important right now for us to make it larger and more high profile,” said O’Donnell. Not just because of the current debate over EVs in Washington but also to “dispel the myth the US car dealers do not want to sell electric vehicles”. An aggressive transition like the one Biden envisions will require an equally aggressive overhaul of infrastructure. In the bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, $7.5bn is dedicated to EV-charging infrastructure and building charging stations along highway corridors. But the industry is concerned about how that money is spent. Matthew Nelson, director of government affairs at Electrify America, said the infrastructure that serves the public must be “future-proofed”. Ultra-fast charging at 350 kW of power, or the equivalent to 20 miles of range per minute, has been his paramount message to government stakeholders. “We think it’s really important that the chargers paid for today are able to charge faster than the vehicles on the market today,” Nelson said. “The vehicles are getting faster and faster every model year. If we design for today’s vehicles it will be outdated in five years.” Electrify America, a sponsor of the EV Pavilion at the car show, has the largest network of DC (direct current) charging stations in the US. Currently, the Electrify America network consists of 800 charging stations, mostly along highway corridors, and the company is planning an increase to 1,800 charging stations with 10,000 chargers by 2026. However, 500,000 charging stations are needed to meet Biden’s goals and Nelson said they should be reliable and non-proprietary. There are 31 different brands of auto manufacturers in the US that use the same non-proprietary standard for charging and Nelson said leveraging the consensus around that single standard is in the public’s interest. Right now, consumers’ biggest concern is their bottom line, and EVs are more cost-efficient than gas-powered cars. An e-gallon – the cost to drive a comparable vehicle the same distance you could go on a gallon of gasoline – currently averages $1.16, compared with gasoline’s $2.85. Because Electrify America offers public charging their prices are a little higher than at-home chargers, but are standard in every state. Recently, Congress amended the Public Utility Regulatory Act (Purpa) that requires each state to consider EV-specific utility rates, giving them the liberty to change rates not suited for EV adoption. These demand charges lead to “extremely high-priced” electricity being charged to the stations, making it difficult to maintain low prices. States such as Colorado, Massachusetts, California, Rhode Island and Connecticut have revised these rates, but Nelson said every state should be on board. And there’s an equity element to charging. Homeowners who charge their cars in their garage do not pay demand rates, but those who charge at commercial charging stations or who live in multifamily dwellings or apartments will pay the demand rate. Incentives to support EV charging infrastructure in multi-family dwellings and more community-based charging infrastructure are important tools to making EV adoption more equitable, said Kellen Schefter, director of transportation at Edison Electric Institute, which leads the National Electric Highway Coalition. He believes the biggest barrier to EV adoption is the lack of charging infrastructure that’s affordable, equitable and reliable. Making sure investments go into those communities that are not traditionally getting those allocations is a large part of the National Electric Highway Coalition’s agenda. “There is such a great need on the infrastructure front,” said Schefter. The right policies will be critical if Biden is to hit his EV goals. O’Donnell said a wider range of tax incentives are needed to persuade the American public to swap their fuel-dependent cars for EVs. “In Build Back Better, they are proposing $12,500 per vehicle purchased, but only if it is built by a United Auto Worker manufacturer. It doesn’t seem like mass-market adoption will be achieved using only union-made vehicles. We think all electric vehicles should qualify for the full $12,500 incentive,” O’Donnell said. But while tax incentives make a difference, chargers are more meaningful said Dilip Sundaram, chief international business officer at Acrimoto, an electric autocycle company. China – the biggest EV market – has about 800,000 chargers and Sundaram said 500,000 chargers in the United States, a car-dependent country, is not enough. “In China, the tax incentive is about $2,500,” Sundaram said. “Accessibility to chargers is what is driving mass adoption. If you remove range anxiety to make sure chargers are available everywhere you will suddenly see the EV adoption increase.” “Biden wants to put the United States in a leadership role instead of a passive role on the issue of climate change, but policies need to reflect the new challenge,” Sundaram said. “So that any new structure whether it be a mall or apartment complex, has chargers.” Despite a lower than usual attendance at this year’s show because of Covid, the line to ride in the new Arcimoto was long. As attendees watched the small autocycle whip around the EV pavilion, others buzzed about the displays for the latest EV models presented by Bentley, McLaren, Polestar, Hyundai and Nissan. The star of the show was the new all-electric Ford F-150, the latest iteration of the US’s best-selling vehicle. The impressive aluminum truck can pull 10,000lb, gets 300 miles on a standard charge, and can generate power for an entire house for three days. And it’s fast – going from 0-60mph in less than five seconds. As the demand for these new high-performing EVs grows, gasoline-powered cars look more and more like relics. But for now, all eyes are on Congress as to how soon the US can transition to mass adoption, and an equitable, EV market.North Korea fired what appeared to be the most powerful missile it has tested since the US president, Joe Biden, took office, possibly breaching a self-imposed suspension on the testing of longer-range weapons and sparking condemnation from the United States and its allies. The Japanese and South Korean militaries said the missile launched on Sunday travelled on a lofted trajectory, apparently to avoid the territorial spaces of neighbours, and reached a maximum altitude of 2,000km (1,242 miles) and traveled 800km (497 miles) before landing in the sea. The flight details suggest North Korea tested its longest-range ballistic missile since 2017, when it twice flew intermediate-range ballistic missiles (IRBMs) over Japan and separately flight-tested three intercontinental-range ballistic missiles (ICBMs) that demonstrated the potential range to reach deep into the American homeland. Sunday’s test was North Korea’s seventh round of weapons launches this month. The unusually fast pace of tests indicates its intent to pressure the Biden administration over long-stalled nuclear negotiations as pandemic-related difficulties unleash further shock on an economy broken by decades of mismanagement and crippling US-led sanctions over its nuclear weapons program. “The United States condemns these actions and calls on [North Korea] to refrain from further destabilising acts,” the US military’s Indo-Pacific command said in a statement after Sunday’s launch. The South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, called an emergency national security council meeting, where he described the test as a possible “midrange ballistic missile launch” that brought North Korea to the brink of breaking its 2018 suspension in the testing of nuclear devices and longer-range ballistic missiles. The Japanese defence minister, Nobuo Kishi, told reporters it was clear that the missile was the longest-range weapon the North has tested since launching its Hwasong-15 ICBM in November 2017. The launch came after the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, chaired a ruling party meeting on 20 January where senior party members made a veiled threat to lift the moratorium, citing what they perceived as US hostility and threats. Kim in April 2018 declared that “no nuclear test and intermediate-range and inter-continental ballistic rocket test-fire” were necessary for the North any longer as he pursued diplomacy with then-US president Donald Trump in an attempt to leverage his nukes for badly needed economic benefits. The latest missile’s flight details suggest that North Korea’s moratorium is already broken, said Lee Choon Geun, a missile expert and honorary research fellow at South Korea’s Science and Technology Policy Institute. He said the data suggests that the North tested an intermediate-range ballistic missile or possibly even a weapon approaching ICBM capacities. George William Herbert, an adjunct professor at the Center for Nonproliferation Studies and a missile consultant, said on Twitter: “Regardless of whether it’s a IRBM or ICBM, this is a strategic missile of some sort and clearly not the same as the prior tests in the January 2022 test series to date.” The launch could make January the busiest ever for North Korea’s missile program which analysts say is expanding and developing new capabilities despite strict sanctions and UN security council resolutions that ban the country’s ballistic missile tests. “All signs suggest this is a big test – not performing as well as prior North Korean ICBMs, but could have been deliberately flown on a more limited trajectory,” said Chad O’Carroll, the chief executive of Korea Risk Group, which monitors North Korea. The test comes less than a week before the opening of the Winter Olympics in Beijing, with the host China being North Korea’s main political and economic partner. Pyongyang has said it would be skipping the Games because of the Covid-19 pandemic and “hostile forces”. This month, North Korea has tested a dizzying array of weapon types, launch locations and increasing sophistication. From hypersonic missiles and long-range cruise missiles, to missiles launched from railcars and airports, the tests highlight the nuclear-armed state’s rapidly expanding and advancing arsenal amid stalled denuclearisation talks. “The ballistic missile launch and the ones before it are a threat to our country, the region and the international community,” Japan’s chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, said. “This series of launches violate UN resolutions and we strongly protest [against] this action by North Korea.” The tests appear aimed at modernising North Korea’s military, bolstering national pride ahead of several major North Korean holidays and sending a message of strength as the country grapples with economic crises caused by sanctions and Covid-19 lockdowns, said Leif-Eric Easley, a professor of international studies at Ewha University in Seoul. “The Kim regime hears external discussions of its domestic weaknesses and sees South Korea’s growing strength,” he said. “So it wants to remind Washington and Seoul that trying to topple it would be too costly.” Its latest launches included a test of two short-range ballistic missiles and their warheads on Thursday, and an update to a long-range cruise missile system was tested on Tuesday. Pyongyang has defended the launches as its sovereign right of self-defence and say they are not directed at any specific country, but accused Washington and Seoul of having “hostile policies.” Kim visited a munitions factory last week, where he called for “an all-out drive” to produce “powerful cutting-edge arms”, and its workers touted his devotion to “smashing ... the challenges of the US imperialists and their vassal forces” seeking to violate their right to self-defence, calling it “the harshest-ever adversity”. Reuters and the Associated Press contributed to this reportCelebrity Hunted 9pm, Channel 4 As part of Stand Up To Cancer, the nation’s favourite game of cat and mouse returns with a new cohort of celebrities on the run. Split into teams of four trying to escape capture from 30 expert hunters, our fugitives this time include Drag Race winner The Vivienne, wonderfully double-barrel-named Made in Chelsea stars Ollie and Gareth Locke-Locke, and garage artist Lisa Maffia. With six episodes running weekly, the hunt is on – who will make it to the end? Hollie Richardson The Green Planet 7pm, BBC One Deserts aren’t the friendliest places on Earth for plants, but the cactus has an advantage. Sir David Attenborough finds this out the hard way when he gets on the wrong side of a cholla cactus. As always, the effects of climate change loom behind the beauty of the plants. Hannah Verdier The Great Pottery Showdown 7.45pm, Channel 4 Garden Week arrives at GPTD HQ and the eight remaining contenders are tasked with creating a trio of gnomes. As well as that jolly but demanding challenge there is also the biggest ever Throw Down. Will the potters have the energy to work so much clay? And who let judges Keith Brymer Jones and Rich Miller near the dress-up box? Graeme Virtue The Tourist 9pm, BBC One Having just about stayed on the road through so many twists, switchbacks and sharp left turns, the Williams brothers’ fun thriller reaches its conclusion and plays to its strengths: Jamie Dornan and the fantastic Danielle Macdonald are on screen together for as much of the episode as possible. Jack Seale The Caribbean with Andi and Miquita 9pm, BBC Two Emotions and spirits are high as the sparky mother-and-daughter team finish their Caribbean tour in Barbados. It’s not all morning pub crawls and singing on the beach; the pair also unpick the island’s much darker points of history through a very personal lens. HR Trigger Point 9pm, ITV After the opener’s explosive cliffhanger, Lana (Vicky McClure) is reeling from the aftermath of what happened to pal and fellow expo Joel Nutkins (Adrian Lester). But there’s no time for too much sentimentality – Lana has a summer reign of terror to get to the bottom of, with this episode providing some leads while maintaining that high Jed Mercurio tension. HR Film choices Dead of Night, 7pm, Talking Pictures TV This 1945 portmanteau film is one of the greats of British horror, if only for the chilling final segment of its five tales-with-a-tale. The brilliant Michael Redgrave plays a tormented ventriloquist whose dummy starts to get ideas of its own about their partnership. The other stories – directed by the likes of Robert Hamer and Alberto Cavalcanti – feature a haunted mirror, premonitions of death and child ghosts in country houses, plus the bonus of Basil Radford and Naunton Wayne basically reprising their Charters and Caldicott double act from The Lady Vanishes. SW In the Heat of the Night, 10pm, BBC Two Norman Jewison’s 1967 crime drama is the late Sidney Poitier’s finest film – a fiery denunciation of racism wrapped up in a gripping murder mystery and decorated with a superb jazz-blues soundtrack from Quincy Jones. Poitier is Virgil “They call me Mister” Tibbs, a Philadelphia homicide detective passing through rural Mississippi who is roped in to helping bigoted sheriff Gillespie (Rod Steiger) investigate the death of a white industrialist. Poitier is magnetic and permanently on the boil, while Steiger nails the difficult shift from resentment of Tibbs to respect. SW Live sport Championship Football: Derby v Birmingham 1pm, Sky Sports Main Event Followed by Cardiff v Nottingham Forest at 3.30pm. Premiership Rugby Union: Sale Sharks v Leicester Tigers 2.30pm, ITV From the AJ Bell Stadium.• An article about a reader who was wrongly pursued for an energy bill said the debt collection company, BW Legal, confirmed it had sent further payment demands after the customer disputed the bill. In fact, the company had said it did not contact the customer about the balance after that time, other than to request evidence of non-liability. We regret the error, which was made during editing (BW Legal is chasing a debt I don’t owe, 23 January, p63). • In early editions last week, an article said that Eric Williams’s seminal book, Capitalism and Slavery, first published in the US in 1944, “continued to be spurned by British publishers until 1966, when a small university press gave it a very limited print run”. In fact, the UK publishing house was André Deutsch, which published the work in 1964, with a number of reprints over the next 20 years (Shunned critique of Britain’s slavery role finally hits bookshops, p31). In correcting this for later editions, we misspelled the surnames of two more authors published by André Deutsch, Margaret Atwood and VS Naipaul. • A travel piece about sculpture trails (Time to get in shape, 23 January, Magazine, p43), which featured the New Art Centre at Roche Court in Wiltshire, referred to the Lord Nelson pub “in nearby Middleton”. That is the hostelry’s street address but the village is Winterslow. • The psychologist whose work is shown in BBC Two’s Couples Therapy is Dr Orna Guralnik, not “Orla” (I’ve seen everything as a couples therapist. It’s not a job for the faint-hearted, 23 January, p46). Other recently amended articles include: Rudy Giuliani and Michael Flynn to see honorary university degrees revoked Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736The question I walked in on my husband watching porn and now I feel extraordinarily hurt and abandoned. My grown-up children have left home and I have managed to have a rewarding career. However, having a good relationship always eluded me until I was in my 50s. I have been married before and I am in my early 60s now. We have been together for a while. I thought we were ecstatically happy and that, at last, I was in a truly fulfilling and equal relationship. I now doubt all this, and have lost respect for my husband. We have tried to talk about it, and he is only sorry that I am upset and doesn’t seem sorry that he used porn. He must know women are often exploited and always objectified in these situations. He says his love for me is as it ever was, and says he’ll stop if I want, but I want him to want not to do it. I experienced a serious trauma when I was in my teens and have had bouts of depression since then. I have not been good at choosing the right men to have relationships with, but with years of counselling I managed to turn my life around. I really thought that this time, by being with a kind and interested man I had at last got it right, but now I’m unsure. I feel betrayed by my husband using porn. It is as though he has been cheating on me. Philippa’s answer I’m not saying using porn is right or wrong, because me declaring judgment on it won’t change anyone’s behaviour. It is more useful to understand it. And yes, I dislike the objectifying, potentially exploitative side of the porn industry. But I can also understand it’s nice to have a little private pleasure. A bit like having a lovely, satisfying poo that you wouldn’t necessarily tell anyone about. You mentioned your teenage trauma, so I’m thinking it is still relevant. What trauma can do is shatter previously held beliefs such as: “Most people are good and trustworthy.” After the trauma, you may have developed rigid rules like emergency measures that come with new beliefs such as, “I shouldn’t trust anyone.” I’m wondering whether discovering something new about your husband which is hard for you to understand means you’ve reverted to this type of emergency-mode way of thinking – thinking in very “all or nothing” terms. You’ve gone from “ecstatically happy” to what sounds like panic – that marrying was a mistake, as though your discovery may have reactivated this old trauma and tipped you into an emergency trauma-mode mindset. What you are doing is discovering something new about him. It’s a part of him, it’s not all of him. Some of us tend to assume that sex means the same thing to our partners that it does to us. This is not done consciously but in a sort of take-it-for-granted way, and it is often left unsaid. This is why it can be a great shock when differences are found. You might be feeling excluded because he kept this part of his sexual life a secret. Maybe you find it disgusting and feel contaminated by it. It might be tantamount to him having sex with someone else. But for him, porn is probably nothing to do with his real-life relationship with you, but instead about his relationship with himself. The thing to remember is that each of you will have formed different attitudes to relationships and to sex and to porn: this might be difficult to explain or talk about because both of you might not have been in the habit of putting non-conscious assumptions about sex or porn into words (perhaps not even to yourselves). But I want to encourage you to keep trying, so that each of you can understand the other. I don’t think you’ll ever be on exactly the same page, but I do think it is important that you both really understand what is on your respective pages and have sympathy for each other’s points of view. He has probably been watching porn in private moments all the time you have been together, and all the while you loved and trusted him and felt “ecstatically happy”. He may need private time to masturbate, but whether you want this to be kept secret from you is something else to talk about. There is a difference between privacy and secrecy. The former is OK and the latter can feel like betrayal. I hope you can find a way of talking about how you each do privacy, how you need it and how you use it. It might enrich your relationship. Porn can be destructive when it is addictive, but as he offered to give it up if you wanted him to, it does not sound like he has an addiction to it. Beware of seeing this issue in terms of just right and wrong, and keep the dialogue open. Porn is what the genitals enjoy in private. This might be very different to who we each are with each other. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukEnergy is vital to our daily lives. We need reliable supplies to heat our homes, to cook, to keep our food fresh, to power our transport systems, to illuminate our cities and to stay in communication with each other. Ensuring there are no significant disruptions to that provision is one of the most important tasks that a government must perform on behalf of its citizens. In recent months, it has become clear that serious strains are now being placed on energy security in the United Kingdom, however. Spiralling gas costs are causing considerable financial difficulties for thousands of households. At the same time, electricity supplies are now threatened because most of the UK’s ageing nuclear reactors, which currently provide 20% of our electricity, face closure in the next few years with little prospect, at present, of new atomic power plants being ready to fill the gap in lost output. On top of these issues, an urgent overhaul of our use of fossil fuels is required if the country is to have any chance of reaching its goal of achieving net zero carbon emissions by 2050, a promise made by the government as part of its commitment to tackle climate change and to help halt the dangerous warming of our planet. At present, roughly half our electricity is generated by burning natural gas in power plants. About half of that comes to our shores from North Sea rigs whose overall output is dwindling as gas fields reach the end of their lives. The rest of our gas is imported from other nations; most of it is shipped from Qatar or the US or piped from Norway. Very little is imported from Russia, it should be noted. In addition, gas plays a dominant role in heating our homes, a reliance that cannot last for much longer if we are to meet our climate change obligations. In short, we need, as a matter of priority, to replace gas with electricity generated in a safe, renewable, environmentally friendly manner. The nation can achieve this goal in two ways: it can import more electricity from mainland Europe (around 6% of our power already comes via inter-connectors to France, the Netherlands and Ireland) or it can find alternative sources within the UK. The latter path is very much the preferable one, both in terms of establishing security for our energy supply while also ensuring this power is generated in a manner consistent with our carbon emission aspirations. Energy security and fighting climate change are inextricably linked, in other words. This transformation needs to be done as a matter of urgency, however, a point that appears to have escaped ministers whose attempts to reshape power use in the UK have already started to unravel. Consider the government’s green homes grant scheme for England. Hailed by Boris Johnson as a key plank in his green industrial revolution by helping the public make their homes more energy-efficient and less reliant on fossil fuel heating, it targeted a total of 600,000 homes for improvement. In the end, however, only 47,500 were upgraded. As Dame Meg Hillier, chair of the public accounts committee, put it last year: “This scheme was a slam dunk fail.” Such setbacks are alarming and underline the urgent need for ministers to provide the nation with a cogent, detailed set of proposals for generating power securely and sustainably while minimising energy waste. Several key issues need to be addressed to achieve these goals. The first is the creation of a system of smart grids. These local networks would distribute power generated from renewable energy sources to supplement mains supplies and reduce electricity bills. Establishing such a system should be seen as a priority for they offer the prospect of making maximum use of power generated within our shores at low cost. Properly insulating buildings would have a similar effect. Despite Johnson’s green homes initiative failure, efforts to make homes and workplaces more energy-efficient should be redoubled. It will not be possible to fit every house in Britain with a heat pump or solar panels. Nevertheless, making more houses and offices greener today will have critical impacts in coming years. Providing power when weather is gloomy and winds are non-existent is also key. At present, nuclear and gas-power plants provide that electricity. The disappearance of the latter over the coming decade will put more pressure on the UK to develop an efficient atomic power programme. Currently, our nuclear plans look piecemeal and unimpressive, despite last week’s announcement of a £100m investment to help develop the Sizewell C power station in Suffolk. Further research is also needed to find new, efficient ways to store energy, so power from renewable sources can be stored for those gloomy, windless days. We also need to find ways to capture and store carbon dioxide from old power plants and so extend their lives. Such developments will be crucial in providing the nation with a full range of options for generating its own power securely and cleanly. The alternative is to sit back and allow these issues to be resolved beyond our shores. In a world where energy will become ever more critical to national survival, that is not an option to be countenanced.It was meant to be a sermon on the importance of having faith in God’s vision, even when that task seems difficult. An object lesson from the book of Mark, in which Jesus heals a blind man by spitting on his eyes. But it’s how Pastor Michael Todd brought this message home that made the sermon unforgettable. Addressing congregants and a live-streaming audience, Todd placed one hand on the shoulder of a closed-eyed worshipper on stage before letting out a deep snort and twice hacking phlegm into his other hand. The audible gasps inside the Transformation Church, a Tulsa, Oklahoma-based mega ministry rooted firmly in Black Baptist tradition, turned to full on outcry when Todd smeared said loogie on the worshipper’s face. “How you just reacted is how people in your life will react when God is doing what it takes for the miracle,” the pastor reassured horrified onlookers. That the man playing blind on stage turned out to be Todd’s brother Bentom didn’t make the pastor’s, erm, heavy-handed demonstration any less revolting. The internet broke into fits at first sight of this clip. “God wasn’t nowhere near that,” snarked the Root’s Shanelle Genai. “If your pastor rubs spit on your face”, quipped the Rev Dr Chuck Currie, a United Church of Christ minister, “find a new pastor.” Still, a fair few came to Todd’s defense, some making a case for saliva’s medicinal properties and others making a broader case for nastier offenses other shepherds have committed against their flocks. (See Commandments 8 and 9.) Within days, Todd predictably reappeared on camera to apologize for his “too extreme and too disgusting” example. “It’s never my intention to distract others from God’s Word and the message of Jesus … even with illustrations!” In this Covid-addled chapter of the internet age, the 35-year-old Todd epitomizes a new brand of holy man – the preacher-influencer. In South Carolina, there’s the Oprah-approved John Gray. In Georgia there’s Jamal Bryant, a preacher’s kid turned megachurch leader who sometimes appears alongside his ex-wife on The Real Housewives of Potomac. But none is as of-the-moment as Todd – whose second book, Crazy Faith: It’s Only Crazy Until It Happens, could just as easily describe his viral clip. He promotes family on TikTok and parades fashion on Instagram. When memes like the Silhouette Challenge go viral, Todd isn’t just aware; he has a whole tangent in a sermon about “men anchoring their families” in which he discourages young ladies from “being impressive” with their bodies – an aside met with considerable pushback from secular feminists who’d long written off the Black church as overly paternalistic. It’s definitely not the kind of thing you can imagine hearing from Jesse Jackson. How social media became a new stage For more than a decade, these preacher-influencers have been spreading the gospel to reach souls spending more of their lives in front of screens. And it was only a matter of time before Todd reached them. “The principle of what he’s doing is very, very difficult,” says Cean James, the 47-year-old leader of Philadelphia Salt &amp; Light ministries. It used to be that the Baptist preacher didn’t need much in the way of frills; he (usually a he) was the show – needing only a bit of gospel organ, a catchy refrain and a dash of the holy spirit to move the crowd. With his father as a pulpit mentor, Martin Luther King Jr elevated this elocution style into an historic second act as a civil rights icon and touring public speaker. It’s a style that Black politicians – not least Barack Obama – often drop into when preaching to the choir on the campaign trail. And even though African Americans remain the most church-going demographic – with a 40% attendance rate that’s almost 10 points higher than the national average, according to a Barna survey – young Black people lag well behind older generations in their weekly church engagement. Well before the pandemic, Black churches were scrambling to capture these short attention spans with flashy PowerPoints, studio-grade musicianship, concert-quality light displays and similarly high production values. Increasingly, they’re finding themselves pitted against the mainstream likes of Kanye West, whose viral Sunday Service productions have only further blurred the line between spiritual and secular. Todd’s Sunday sermons, which have seen him set against an Imax-quality display, sometimes while standing on a stage pooled with water or in a driving artificial rain – are as ambitious as anything you’d see on a Vegas proscenium. Parishioners don’t just want a silver tongue, holy hands and a whiff of fire and brimstone. They want to feel it. There’s always been a performance expectation in the Black church. “I know stories of preachers who Palm Sunday rode donkeys into sanctuaries, hoping that the donkeys had cleaned their bowels before going on stage,” says Bill Lamar, pastor of Washington DC’s Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church. Lamar doesn’t apologize for or excuse Todd’s behavior. But as an incisive historian of the Black church and its preaching traditions he argues that technology has played a part from the dawn of print publishing. “The only difference between this young man [Todd] and the others is we’ve got technology now that makes stuff go viral.” Social media is just another stage. Gone are the days when pastors got by by penning bestsellers and hawking sermons on CD. The competition to win souls became more intense once Covid hit and church services were forced to shift to a streaming-only setup. “Churches that had younger clergy or younger people who were already leaning into a lot of the technological advances before Covid were really at an advantage,” says James, who also serves as associate conference minister for southern Pennsylvania’s United Church of Christ’s 66 affiliate members. “I had been encouraging our congregations to go virtual as far as worship services and giving three years before Covid.” Still, it’s not enough simply to minister to the internet. A preacher-influencer has to appeal in other ways. The Instagram account @PreachersNSneakers, which posts screenshots of pastors in their sneakers with the market price appended, boasts more than 269,000 followers. Among other clothes horses, the account has featured Todd in his Nike Air Fear of God 1s (up to $760 at post time). Even Paula White, Donald Trump’s one-time spiritual advisor, was singled out for wearing $785 Stella McCartney sneakers; in fact, this trend is hardly exclusive to Black preachers. To those who say the fashion photos images are just as likely to offend as inspire, recognize the posts for what they are: the new prosperity gospel. Not every preacher-influencer can pull a Creflo Dollar, a notorious old-school televangelist who raised eyebrows seven years ago with a six-minute video soliciting donations for a $65m private jet – a goal he had no problem meeting, by the way. Before cracking social media, some pastors attempted to proselytize through reality TV projects like Oxygen’s Preachers of LA, a sort of real husbands of the cloth that ran for two seasons less than a decade ago (and spawned a Detroit-based spin-off). But that can just as easily destroy an image as burnish it. Gray and Bryant’s separate forays into reality television have only invited tabloid scrutiny on personal indiscretions that contradict their stated beliefs. ‘Church is hybrid now’ Todd, though, isn’t merely telegenic and tapped in. He can also deliver attention-arresting sermons that would seem to defy the evangelical practice of sermonizing with metaphors and parables “the way Jesus did”, says James, who believes He might have been leaning on visual aids too. “Think of the parable of the sower. Just imagine Jesus standing next to a field. So the people listening to that sermon might have literally been watching someone sow seeds. Or at least they were familiar with that process. If He did not have the physical illustration right there, He was painting a picture in their minds. That’s really been the old technique of preaching.” But these days, James says, preacher-influencers rely on visual examples to appeal audiences in the room and the online following. And each time one of James’s peers asks him how to strike that delicate balance, he offers the same recommendation: watch old-school televangelists work. “Whether you agree with their theology or not, they were really good at being present for the crowd that was in person and present for the crowd that’s on camera,” says James, adding that the video stream is just one piece of the internet play. “The chat section has really become the new Amen Corner for worship. At our church, we have a group of people in our production room who are literally just going through the chat responding to what people are saying. People will put prayer requests in the chat. Church is hybrid now, and you can’t make either group feel like they’re auxiliary.” Nor can a preacher-influencer get too shocking on the pulpit, at the risk of overshadowing their good intentions. Far less circulated than Todd’s expectorated miracle attempt was his efforts to raise more than $1m for the survivors of the 1921 Tulsa Race Massacre. “God is a God of reparations,” he told parishioners last year during an outdoor service held over the weekend of Juneteenth. “Reparations means that somebody is going to take up the mantle and actually put into action the process of repairing something that was destroyed. If God is the God of reparations … and I’m one of God’s people … then I am responsible for being part of restoring what has been torn down.” That sermon would seem to prove this much about the modern preacher-influencer: their most meaningful impacts don’t have to be quite so heavy-handed.The Observer Magazine has never again featured an extract from the autobiography of a philosopher on its cover after ‘The Great Years of Bertrand Russell’, 26 February 1967. But then Bertrand Russell was no ordinary philosopher. ‘Three passions, simple but overwhelmingly strong, have governed my life,’ he wrote. ‘The longing for love, the search for knowledge and unbearable pity for the suffering of mankind.’ Russell had his share of death to deal with – his mother, father and sister all died before he was four and his grandfather (a former prime minister) when he was six. His grandmother was the most important person to him in his childhood, although ‘by the age of 14, her intellectual limitations became trying to me, and her Puritan morality began to seem to me to be excessive’. He must have been equally trying as a child. Sample anecdote: ‘“Auntie, do limpets think?” To which she answered, “I don’t know.” “Then you must learn,” I rejoined.’ He taught himself ‘enough Italian to read Dante and Machiavelli’. For secrecy, he wrote in Greek in his journal. Russell writes: ‘Throughout my childhood I had an increasing sense of loneliness and despair of ever meeting anyone with whom I could talk. Nature and books and (later) mathematics saved me from complete despondency.’ Then there was his eccentric friend McTaggert, at Cambridge. ‘I used frequently to go to his breakfasts, which were famous for their lack of food.’ Under McTaggert’s influence, he became a Hegelian. ‘I remember the exact moment during my fourth year when I became one. I had gone out to buy a tin of tobacco and was going back with it along Trinity Lane, when suddenly I threw it up in the air and exclaimed: “Great God in boots! – the ontological argument is sound!”’ Hold the front page.Blind Spot Dolcetto, Adelaide Hills, Australia 2020 (£11.50, The Wine Society) I’ve been a big fan of the Blind Spot range of Australian wines since it emerged a decade ago. The project is a collaboration between one of Australia’s best winemakers, Mac Forbes, and one of the UK’s best wine retailers, the Wine Society. Forbes made his name with a range of exceptionally elegant wines from various small plots in the Yarra Valley. For the Blind Spot range, the Wine Society turned to Forbes to act on its behalf as what the Burgundians call a négociant: sourcing interesting wine from producers all over Australia which the Society would then bottle under the Blind Spot label and sell at reasonable prices. The latest vintage of the Dolcetto is a delicious tribute to their methods: a plum-tangy take on the Piemonte grape grown in the Adelaide Hills. Aldi The Voyage Australian Durif, Victoria, Australia 2020 (£8.99, Aldi) The rest of the quartet of new Blind Spot releases takes things a step further with Forbes sourcing grapes and making the wines himself. Together, they make for a revealing snapshot of current trends. There’s a wonderfully fragrant Syrah (£12.95) from the fashionable Grampians region of western Victoria in the modern Australian idiom; a red so light it’s almost a rosé in its crisp acidity and sappy strawberry, made from Pinot Meunier (£12.95); and a genteel white take on northern Italy’s soave, made from Garganega (£11.50). The latter pair are examples of Australia’s growing confidence with lesser-known varieties, a development you can also trace in a recent addition at Aldi, in the shape of the inky and succulent red made from the unheralded durif. Tolpuddle Vineyard, Tasmania Chardonnay, Australia 2019 (£48, Woodshire Wines, theatreofwine.com; philglas-swiggot.com) For all the cornucopia of varieties and styles now on offer in Australia, the grape variety I keep coming back to is chardonnay. The very particular, Southern Ocean-cooled climate of Tasmania is the source of many of the best examples, whether it’s being used to make the southern hemisphere’s best champagne-style wines or multilayered dry whites. Of the former, the steel-and-silk feel of the House of Arras Blanc de Blancs NV (£25, harveynichols.com) makes it a treat. For still wines, a recent highlight is the electric Tolpuddle from a vineyard originally planted in 1988 by two of the far-sighted stars of Australia’s emergence as a fine-wine country, Tony Jordan and Garry Crittenden, and now owned and run by two other distinguished winemakers from the same generation: Martin Shaw and Michael Hill-Smith. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachAccording to this week’s release from the commerce department, the US economy has been growing at its fastest pace in almost 40 years. Corporate profits are their highest in 70 years. And the stock market, although gyrating wildly of late, is still scoring record gains. So why do most Americans remain gloomy about the economy? Mainly because their real (inflation-adjusted) wages continue to go nowhere. Steeply rising profits, economic growth and stock market highs – coupled with near-stagnant wages – has been the story of the American economy for decades. Most economic gains have gone to the top. So why not share the profits? Profit-sharing was tried with great success in the early decades of the 20th century but is now all but forgotten. In 1916, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co, then one of America’s largest corporations with more than 30,000 employees, announced it would begin to share profits with its employees, giving workers shares of stock and thereby making them part-owners. The idea caught on. Other companies that joined the profit-sharing bandwagon included Procter &amp; Gamble, Pillsbury, Kodak and US Steel. The Bureau of Labor Statistics suggested profit-sharing as a means of reducing “frequent and often violent disputes” between employers and workers. Profit-sharing gave workers an incentive to be more productive, since the success of the company meant higher profits would be shared. It also reduced the need for layoffs during recessions because payroll costs dropped as profits did. By the 1950s, Sears workers had accumulated enough stock that they owned a quarter of the company. And by 1968, the typical Sears salesperson could retire with a nest egg worth well over $1m, in today’s dollars. The downside was that when profits went down, workers’ paychecks would shrink. And if a company went bankrupt, workers would lose all their investments in it. The best profit-sharing plans took the form of cash bonuses that employees could invest however they wish, on top of predictable wages. But profit-sharing with regular employees all but disappeared in large US corporations. Ever since the early 1980s when corporate “raiders” (now private-equity managers) began demanding high returns, corporations stopped granting employees shares of stock, presumably because they didn’t want to dilute share prices. Sears phased out its profit-sharing plan in the 1970s. Yet, just as profit-sharing with regular employees disappeared, profit-sharing with top executives took off, as big Wall Street banks, hedge funds, private equity funds and high-tech companies began doling out huge wads of stock and stock options to their MVPs. The result? Share prices and chief executive pay (composed increasingly of shares of stock and options to buy stock) have gone into the stratosphere, while the wages of the typical worker have barely risen. Researchers have found that before the 1980s, almost all the increases in share prices on the US stock market could be accounted for by overall economic growth. But since then, a large portion of the increases have come out of what used to go into wages. Jeff Bezos, who now owns about 10% of Amazon’s shares, is worth $170.4bn. Other top Amazon executives hold hundreds of millions of dollars of shares. But most of Amazon’s employees, such as warehouse workers, haven’t shared in the bounty. Amazon used to give out stock to hundreds of thousands of its employees. But in 2018 it stopped the practice and instead raised its minimum hourly wage to $15. The wage raise got headlines and was good PR – Amazon is still touting it – but the decision to end stock awards was more significant. It hurt employees far more than the increased minimum helped them. If Amazon’s 1.2 million employees together owned the same proportion of Amazon’s stock as Sears workers did in the 1950s – a quarter of the company – each Amazon worker would now own shares worth an average of more than $350,000. America’s trend toward higher profits, higher share prices, mounting executive pay but near stagnant wages is unsustainable, economically and politically. Profit-sharing is one answer. But how can it be encouraged? Reduce corporate taxes on companies that share profits with all their workers, and increase taxes on those that do not. Sharing profits with all workers is a logical and necessary step to making the system work for the many, not the few. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comJuke and Loe, 617 Ecclesall Rd, Sheffield S11 8PT (0114 268 0271, jukeandloe.com). Lunch – two courses £25, three courses £30. Dinner – starters £14-£16, mains £24-£30, desserts £10. Wines from £24 It is time to address the most pressing question of the age: when going out to eat during the week, which is better, lunch or dinner? The arguments for dinner are cheerfully robust. The working day is at an end, so we are not dodging important jobs like pretending to study a vital spreadsheet while actually watching hilarious reels on Instagram of dogs being shocked by their own farts. Mostly we are not dodging our own puritan guilt. We are free to show the wine list some truly grown-up, adult love. There are downsides, however. Restaurants make their real money in the evenings, hence that’s when the bigger prices are charged. We do not begrudge them that. In return for the extra dosh, you get the more developed, filigreed expression of the kitchen’s art. There will be more stuff on the plate. This is either a positive or a negative, depending on taste. If the restaurant is especially popular, tables will be harder to come by and you’ll have to bash the online booking form furiously in the hope of finding a civilised slot. Finally, there is the issue of a restful night’s sleep. It’s simply harder to kip on a stomach full of over-ordered sharing plates and a barrel full of the second cheapest lousy merlot on the list. The struggle is real. What of lunch? You have more time to digest, of course. Sleep comes easier. Plus, the real bargains are found at lunchtime: it’s when the grand places offer their cheap but extremely cheerful menus. One of the bleaker moments of the pandemic, for those too interested in their bellies, was the decision by Le Gavroche to close at lunchtime because of staff shortages. The three-course lunch menu there, including half a bottle of very good wine, petits fours and service, was legendary. At the point it was discontinued it was £76, which is a slab of anyone’s cash. Then again, the full high-kicking lineup in the evening can easily be double that or more, so much more. Of course, that bargain can quickly be cancelled out by having to take the day off work to facilitate the decadence of a cheaper weekday lunch. Although there is the sweet, groinal twinge of the illicit that comes with shouting, “Sod it, I’ll have another bottle of that delightful Chablis. What do you mean, it’s 2pm on a Wednesday?” God, but it’s complicated. At which point I must acknowledge, as ever, the stupid privilege of my job which not only allows me to visit Sheffield to discover the joys of Juke &amp; Loe at lunchtime, but actually requires me to do so. There, two courses are £25 and three, £30 as against around £50 in the evening. It’s a small bistro, a couple of miles from the city centre, run by two brothers, Luke and Joseph Grayson. I assume the name is a sweet spoonerism of their first names. That lunch menu, currently served only on Fridays and Saturdays, has three choices at each course: one meat, one fish, one vegetarian. Initially I thought I had travelled some distance to be fed something merely solid but unshowy. To start there was a perfectly competent plate of salt and chilli squid with mayonnaise enriched by the briny hit of oysters. There was a crispy duck salad with cucumber and orange, which recalled the version created by Gary Lee at the Ivy when it was still good. Then the mains came along and it stepped far beyond solid to become something delightful and impressive. It’s the sort of cookery that makes you pause, mid-conversation, and study the plate. A milky white fillet of precisely cooked plaice has been rolled in on itself. It sits on a thick, glossy beurre blanc, perky with lemon and studded with capers. Butter and reduced white wine have been beaten together until they have surrendered and become firm friends. There is a good sprinkling of chives. On the side there’s a bowl of buttery new potatoes. Bliss. The other main is a braised beef cheek that has miraculously kept its shape despite having been cooked until, like a highly strung cabaret artiste, it is waiting to fall apart completely. It comes with one of those lip-smacking meaty sauces that was meant to go out of fashion sometime around 1984, but never got the memo. It’s a joy to pour on to the plate. With it is a hefty canoe of powerfully dressed cos lettuce leaves. It’s described as an ox tongue Caesar salad. It doesn’t dishonour the name. With it are well-made chips under a truffled mayo. There’s nothing coy or understated about any of this. It’s bold cooking designed to satisfy rather than impress with its own cleverness. It all reminds me of the crowd-pleasing but luxurious food at Gary Usher’s Elite Bistros further to the west: places like Kala in Manchester and Burnt Truffle in Heswall. The essentials of each dish have been understood and then built upon. But they know exactly when to stop. Desserts are equally delightful. A dome of honey parfait comes dribbled with more honey, and ringed by pieces of honeycomb and cubes of soft honey cake; a shiny oblong of a chocolate delice is stabbed by slices of caramelised white chocolate and is accompanied by a scoop of white chocolate ice-cream. Despite having written a ribald hymn in praise of lunchtime drinking, neither of us do so today. He has a car to drive; I have a train to catch and I do so hate dribbling down the windows. That said, the short list – a bit of the old world, a bit of the new – is priced to make it seem like a really good idea. There’s nothing beyond a Paxton Shiraz from Australia at £39. So what of the evening menu? Well yes, it’s slightly longer and more expensive, though there is also more ambition. In the current version the squid starter comes with a hot and sour squid consommé, the braised beef cheek main is joined on the plate by an ox tongue boudin. I’m sure the simple room with its stripped floorboards and picture window on to the street, will do the business at night. I’m sure it’s lovely. But I can tell you that on a Friday lunchtime, if you can slack off from work and tell yourself all the good self-justifying stories and seriously investigate your inner louche, it’s also a very nice place to be. Today, I win at lunch. News bites Cardiff-based Matsudai Ramen, which delivers ramen kits nationwide, has joined forces with noodle meister Tim Anderson, to create a kit with proceeds going to charity. Together they have developed a kit version of Anderson’s Lazy Goat Ragu-Men, named London’s best dish by Time Out in 2018 when it was served at Anderson’s then restaurant Nanban. It includes curried goat, handmade noodles and scotch bonnet-infused bamboo shoots. The kits will be available from 18 February for two weeks and will cost £13.99 each, with money raised going to Cardiff Mind and Mosaic Brixton (matsudai.co.uk). Meanwhile in London, Claude Bosi, chef-patron of the multi-Michelin starred Bibendum, is also expanding. He has announced plans to open Socca Bistro on South Audley Street in Mayfair. It will take its inspiration from the culinary traditions of the French Riviera and is a collaboration with restaurateur Samyukta Nair, who is behind Bombay Bustle and MiMi Mei Fair. Socca should open in the summer. Well known publican and restaurateur Piers Baker of the Sun Inn in Dedham, has acquired the White Hart Inn on Mersea Island, Essex, a renowned area of pilgrimage for oyster lovers everywhere. The pub, which has been closed since 2013, is undergoing a refurbishment and will, according to Baker, cater “for everything from a casual pint to a special dinner”. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1 • The headline of this review was amended on 30 January 2022. An earlier version misspelled the name of the restaurant as Juke &amp; Low.Reading Will Hutton’s piece on the threat posed by the police and crime bill to our democratic right to peaceful protest got me thinking about how we should challenge it if it is eventually passed (“Attempting to ban protest is usually the mark of a repressive state. That’s not us, is it?”, Comment). I am dismayed at the lack of coverage being given to the dangers of climate change; it is as if Cop26 never happened. Government, big business, the media and the public are rejoicing at the prospect of resuming foreign holidays, cruises, driving to work again and consuming. What happened to “building back greener”? I would like to see a grand coalition of environmental groups joining forces and getting out on to the streets. A few thousand Extinction Rebellion protesters blocking roads may be dismissed as “crusties”. Hundreds of thousands of “middle England” members of the RSPB, National Trust, Wildlife Trust, Woodland Trust et al could not be so easily ignored. Even this government can’t arrest and imprison us all. Geoff Jones Lincoln What happened to loyalty? The treatment of Kate Clanchy by her publisher, in dropping her from its list and dropping a book of poems by her pupils, makes one wonder what has happened to the tradition that publishers stick by their authors (“The hounding of author Kate Clanchy has been a witch-hunt without mercy”, Comment). It also makes one feel helpless: how to show solidarity with this exceptionally humane woman in the face of treatment such as this? One solution might be for Pan Macmillan’s authors to sever their links with this disgraceful publishing house. One thing publishers can’t do without is authors. I have published several books with Macmillan, but that was years ago and they’re now out of print. If I was still publishing with them, I’d break my contract and publicise the reason why as widely as possible. Behaviour like this brings the entire industry into disrepute. Ruth Brandon London NW3 Slavery on the curriculum Eric Williams’s Capitalism and Slavery was certainly recognised as an important book in the 1960s (“Hidden history of why the British abolished slavery back on the shelves”, News). I still have a copy of the 1964 André Deutsch edition. It was recommended to me as a sixth former in the late 60s and my history teacher, Patrick Richardson, who was an expert on 18th-century history, also used it in his published work which included work for school students. He also taught us to balance sources and historians, so Williams was one voice among many. It was also among the works on my reading lists at university. It is often asserted (by Sathnam Sanghera, among others) that slavery was not taught in schools until recently. This is certainly not true. I taught it as part of the curriculum in comprehensive schools in the 1970s and the well-known Jackdaw series for schools had a whole pack on the African slave trade, with graphic images. Later, when I was visiting a range of schools for a publisher in the 1980s, slavery/the slave trade was in the curriculum, placing it of course in its full historical context. To assert that modern academic historians don’t recognise the context of abolition is not sustainable. Peter Langworth London NW1 Poverty and inflation Poor people become poorer because wage negotiations and benefit rises are based on inappropriate inflation indices (“Poor people face a perfect storm. Let no one tell you it’s their fault”, Comment). The CPI and RPI underestimate inflation for poorer people by including items such as new cars and consumer durables that generally have a lower inflation rate than food, energy and rent. We need an additional index based on, say, the spending of the poorest 20% of households. Richard Mountford Hildenborough, Kent Fire guidance not ignored Kenan Malik is wrong in claiming that the Labour government “ignored” the recommendations of the 1999 select committee report following the Garnock Court fire (“Grenfell delivers yet more horrors. But the guilty still fail to take responsibility”, Comment). As minister responsible for the building regulations from 1997-2001, I gave evidence to the select committee and responded to all its recommendations. In the government response, I agreed to introduce the new full-scale test methodology as recommended by the committee and confirmed that I had begun the process to secure its adoption as a British Standard. I made it clear that when this was achieved the government would amend the guidance (Approved Document B) to reflect its status as a British Standard and review whether the reference in the guidance should be strengthened. On the committee’s tragically prescient concern about the possibility of a serious fire resulting in many people being killed, I strongly endorsed the committee’s view, explained the mandatory requirements of the building regulations – in this case “to resist the spread of fire over the external wall surfaces” – and the role of the guidance document and added: “The department considers that if this guidance is followed, then the risk to life safety as a result of fire spread via the external cladding system will be minimal.” Sadly, the shocking evidence that has been emerging from the Grenfell public inquiry has illustrated serious subsequent failures to adhere to the requirements of the regulations and the advice in the guidance in Approved Document B. In the amended online version of the article, Kenan Malik maintained that the retention of approval for Class 0 materials was a “loophole”, which undermined the government’s response. However, the government’s technical advisers (the Building Regulations Advisory Committee), which had recently conducted a review of Part B of the building regulations, made no recommendation to withdraw approval from Class 0. The select committee emphasised that the main focus of concern was the adequacy of the previous small-scale arrangements for testing the performance of materials, which is why the government supported the introduction of the large-scale test. Like all other materials, Class 0 should have been subject to the new, more rigorous testing regime designed to demonstrate the performance of cladding materials in a “live” fire situation after the test methodology was adopted as a British Standard. A reading of the government response to the select committee report illustrates the degree to which the government at that time was seriously committed to enhance fire safety and, far from ignoring the committee’s report, engaged fully and constructively with the committee, and many others, to this purpose. Nick Raynsford London SE10 Give trees a chance Farmers don’t need to plant trees as they have already been planted – in their hedges (“Farmers’ dilemma: if we plant trees, will we take a cash hit?”, News). The trees already in our hedges have a good rootstock, are healthy, indigenous and can start absorbing carbon immediately – if hedges are just “faced” but not “topped” with the tractor flail every year. If farmers were paid for the trees already growing on their land, rather than wished for, we could make a major and immediate impact on carbon absorption, rather than waiting 20 years for newly planted trees. Bob Harvey Blackawton, Totnes, Devon Dishonourable mention William Keegan’s comparison of Boris Johnson to Falstaff is extremely apt. I’m reminded of Falstaff’s catechism on honour: “What is honour? A word. What is that word ‘honour’?… Air… Therefore I’ll none of it.” Roger Cottrell Kenninghall, NorwichAnd then there were five. More to the point, there are only five. To win a major on all three surfaces is a rarity. So rare, in fact, that the only current players to have achieved it before Saturday night’s Australian Open women’s singles final were Serena Williams, Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic. Now Ash Barty joins them, and that is where the list ends. Four all-time greats of the game holding 84 grand slam crowns between them, and one who has three on which to build. Aside from Barty, Williams is the only other in this elite category to have the first three slams across clay, grass and hard courts. Perhaps it is a hint of things to come. “I feel very humble to be in such a select group,” Barty said. “To be honest, I don’t really feel like I belong with those champions of our sport. I’m still very much learning and trying to refine my craft ... and learn every single day and get better and better. It’s amazing to be able to have this experience and this opportunity on three different surfaces and be really consistent across the board. Ultimately that was one of the biggest challenges that Jim [Joyce, her childhood coach] set out for me when I was young ... to be a complete player and be really consistent across all surfaces and be able to play on all surfaces.” It stands to reason that this confirms her versatility. Not only in her precise serve, backhand slices and driving groundstrokes, and her flexibility to change a point’s pace at will, but also her capacity to adapt to different conditions. Danielle Collins acknowledged as much during the trophy presentation following her final loss. “I really admire you as a player and the variety of your game,” she said. “Hopefully I can implement some of that into mine.” The fruits of this variety are evident in a plentiful assembly of statistics. Barty’s 2022 win-loss record now stands at 11-0. The 25-year-old is also the fourth female player in the Open era with a 100% winning rate in major finals (of a minimum three titles) after Virginia Wade, Jennifer Capriati and Naomi Osaka. This triumph is the fifth time a slam has been won with 30 or fewer games conceded (Williams lays claim to three of these and Iga Świątek the other). On the all-time fewest-games-dropped charts, she is now tied in eighth spot with Martina Navratilova, Stefi Graf and Mary Pierce. Over Barty’s seven matches her serve was broken three times – the fewest breaks conceded by a women’s singles slam winner since 2016, bettering Garbiñe Muguruza (five, 2017 Wimbledon), Naomi Osaka (five, 2018 US Open), Serena Williams (six, 2016 Wimbledon) and Emma Raducanu (seven, 2021 US Open). She is virtually unbreakable. And yet there remains room for improvement. In none of her major titles has she faced an opponent ranked in the top 10. She is the third player in the Open era to have avoided this particular challenge. As she has said many times, and did so again on Saturday, she is still “learning” and “refining”. The major she has yet to win is the US Open. The assumption is that it is hers for the taking. However her long-time coach, Craig Tyzzer, is adamant it is not unless officials change the balls. Wilson balls are used for both men’s and women’s events at Flushing Meadows but, unlike in the other majors, the men’s version is heavier-duty with a fuzzier yellow-felt coating. At last year’s US Open, from which Barty exited in the third round, two bolters reached the final in British qualifier Radacanu and unseeded Canadian Leylah Fernandez. “The US Open really needs to change the ball for the girls,” Tyzzer said. “The fact they still use a different ball for guys and girls, it’s a terrible ball for someone like Ash … the ball itself is so light. “It was the only tournament last year and really for two years where she uses gut racket [most powerful strings] but I had to change her to a poly [polyester] just to get any sort of control of the ball. If they keep that ball the same, no one like Ash will win that tournament. “I think you see the result at the US Open, it was two players who you go, ‘wow, that was two different players won that’. There’s no surprise when the ball is like it is.” The titles Barty already has under her belt came, she said, at “all very different stages of my life”. “To be able to have this feeling and experience this a few times over, I just understand how fortunate I am to be able to experience that, because not many people get to do that,” she added. “It’s just been an incredible journey over this past 20 years of hitting a tennis ball, but particularly the last five or six years in this second phase of my career.” • This article was amended on 5 February 2022. An earlier version incorrectly stated that Ash Barty had not beaten an opponent ranked in the top 20 in winning any of her major titles.The windowbox rosemary is covered in late-January flower. The Bengal crimson rose is still showing bud. Unfurling flower. Even the lavender has bloom. It has been 15C this month. Welcome to the warming. The Bengal rose was a gift from Howard from Great Dixter. A skinny stem just three years ago, now a rampant, vibrant bush, flowering through, full of leaf. I hope it soon gets a rest. There are four vigorous hellebores in pots. Different styles in different sizes. They are making me happy. Particularly the deep purple. We are isolating, waiting on negative PCR tests before being released. I gaze longingly out past the window box, past the delicate rosemary flower, over the back gardens. I wave at Kala holding a neighbour’s big ginger cat. I am impatient to tidy. To clear the nasturtium corpses extravagantly draped over her grass and her neighbours’ walls. To dig the last fallen sunflower stems. I notice one of her roses, too, still has crimson bloom. The roof terrace is our outside space. The size of a smallish bedroom; I walk around it like in a scene from Porridge. A miniaturised exercise yard with an exercise bike facing out. I stop to stare at the flowers. To wonder about the semi-dormant spring bulbs. Too anxiously scanning for new life breaking through. It is in these times when realise how much access to the plot has come to mean to me. I wonder how the contractors are doing. When they will finish the work. When we can get a feel for the new soil, the new space. Until then, I obsess over the rooftop magnolia stellata, wondering which furry buds will become flowers, which will be leaf. Soon enough we’ll be back walking over Hampstead Heath. Looking out over London. Scanning for comforting signs of early spring. After all, I tell myself, February is only a few days away. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comMany of us are conducting the bulk of our work virtually. But the sartorial etiquette of Zoom meetings is still tricky. Rocking up as you would if you were taking the bins out feels out of step. But then dressing up – clothes or face – as you would if you were having a real-life meeting doesn’t always translate over the screen. A coral lip balances things out. It immediately elevates an otherwise pedestrian look. It ups the ante of your traditional nude, but it’s not as full wattage as orange or red. And it makes your face look happy. 1. Anastasia Beverly Hills Matte Lipstick £21, anastasiabeverlyhills.com 2. Carolina Herrera Nude Couture Lipstick in Nude Cashmere £25, harrods.com 3. Rose Inc Lip &amp; Cheek in Anemone £23, spacenk.com 4. Gucci Beauty Rouge à Lèvres Matte Lipstick £35, selfridges.com 5. Jimmy Choo Matte Lipstick in Coral Sunset £50, jimmychoo.com 6. Jones Road Lip and Cheek Tint in Bright Coral £30.50, jonesroadbeauty.com I can’t do without… There’s more than a famous name to this new product range Avid followers of beauty will have seen the hype around Chanel No 1. So why the big deal? For 100 years, the only number we’ve associated with Chanel is 5. So this is a turn up for the books. Then there are the many years’ of research behind this curated line up. This includes makeup (a second skin-effect foundation and a sublime lip and cheek balm), a fragrance and skincare, serums, a lotion, an eye cream, a genius non-stripping powder-to-foam cleanser and the soufflé like Revitalising Cream that smooths, plumps and disappears easily into the skin. These, I should add, are scented, however it is so beautifully formulated that unless you are very sensitive to fragrance, I can’t imagine it will be an issue. The key ingredient in the range is the red camellia, a hardy flower that can withstand both hot and cold climates. It is naturally rich in antioxidants, improves elasticity, smooths skin texture and, in the case of the Revitalising Cream, also forms a barrier against urban pollution. Luxury beauty brands aren’t known for leading the charge in sustainability, but the eco credentials here are impressive. Bottles and jars are made of recyclable glass (the cream is also refillable), labelling uses organic inks, and lids are created with recycled materials. A new name, painstaking research, proven formulations and a hefty nod to sustainability – that’s why it’s a big deal. Chanel No 1 Red Camellia Revitalising Cream, from £71, chanel.com On my radar… Smooth hair and skin, plus an early Valentine’s treat Hair apparent This smoothing product is from one of the industry’s best stylists. Tested at fashion shows, it comes with supermodels’ seal of approval. Sam McKnight Happy Endings Nourishing Balm, £24, sammcknight.com Romance is in the air Already considering a (generous) Valentine’s gift? You won’t go wrong with this sandalwood, fig and rose scent from this haute fragrance collection. Guerlain Santal Pao Rosa, £280, guerlain.com Skin deep Formulated with clinical-grade ingredients, this fade gel deals with discoloration and post-acne scarring while also restoring the skin barrier. Kate Somerville Eradikate Blemish Mark Fading Gel, £58, cultbeauty.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoIt is not uncommon for people’s fundamental rights to come into conflict. Democracies need legal frameworks and judicial systems that enable these conflicts to be resolved fairly and with civility. In the UK, the Equality Act 2010 provides a robust legal framework that protects people against discrimination and helps balance rights when they are in conflict. It protects people against discrimination based on nine “protected characteristics” – including sex and gender reassignment – and sets out important exceptions that allow for single-sex services, spaces and sports as a proportionate way of achieving a legitimate aim. The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is the statutory regulator of the Equality Act. Last week, it told the Scottish government that its proposed reforms to the Gender Recognition Act 2004, which allows trans people to change the way their sex is recorded for legal purposes, should be paused because the consultation on these changes has not adequately taken into account their impact on women’s sex-based rights. The Scottish government is proposing to move to a system whereby people can change their sex for legal purposes through self-declaration, instead of needing a medical diagnosis of gender dysphoria. The EHRC is right that these reforms have implications for sex-based rights that have not been considered. There is not yet enough case law to fully understand how the Equality Act and the Gender Recognition Act intersect, but enabling people to change their legal sex through self-ID could in practice have significant consequences for the threshold at which it is lawful to exclude those who are biologically male from female-only spaces, on sex discrimination and equal pay cases, and on data collection. Both trans rights and women’s sex-based rights should be robustly defended. It should be a source of pride that the UK was one of the first countries to enshrine legal protection against discrimination for trans people in 1999; no such federal protection exists in the US. Trans people can change their sex marker on many official documents, including their passport, without undergoing the legal process to change their sex. Trans people face unacceptable levels of societal prejudice as a result of their gender non-conformity, and waiting lists for trans health services are far too long: these very much need addressing. But because reforming the Gender Recognition Act will affect another protected characteristic, sex, it is critically important that any proposals to reform it in the UK are informed by proper consultation with all those affected. That has not happened in Scotland. Instead, Nicola Sturgeon has simply denied such a conflict exists. Women raising legitimate concerns that opinion polls show are widely shared have been tarnished as “transphobic” by Scottish politicians. This is politicians fomenting rather than diffusing contested debates. It has created a culture where people of the view that biological sex cannot be wholly replaced by gender identity in law – a belief itself protected by equalities legislation – get harassed out of jobs and visited by the police as a result of expressing lawful and legitimate views. Everyone loses: in a world where some people are bullied out of the democratic process of debate and consultation, it is impossible to build social consensus around the balancing of rights of two groups facing significant discrimination. The EHRC’s own 2018 response to the Conservative government’s proposals to introduce self-ID in England and Wales – now dropped – also underplayed their impacts on the Equality Act. In doing so, it failed its statutory duty to protect everyone at risk from discrimination and foster good relations between groups. Now under new leadership, the EHRC’s reassertion of its role as a fair and impartial regulator of the rights of both trans people and women is overdue but welcome. • This article was amended on 11 February 2022. In an earlier version the reference to individuals being “visited by the police” linked, as an example, to an article that was later removed by its publisher. The point is now illustrated with a link to an Observer opinion piece.How does Sunday start? With a little lie-in, but I have six children so there’s lots of dad-taxiing going on first thing. We’re pretty lazy. Whoever’s around will pop to Yardbird – the café in our village – for brunch. While on tour, family Sundays become precious – I always rush home on Saturday night. Do you work? I present a Sunday morning radio show. Before Covid that was always done live from a studio. Since the pandemic I’ve been pre-recording it from home. The bosses haven’t clocked that I’m still not coming in to do it. I’m keeping my head down and hoping nobody notices. A day to yourself? I’d see mates. Then go to a pub quiz with my brother, mum and dad. Dad does general knowledge, Mum’s on medicine, my brother and I do sports and entertainment. We’re a good team. Sundays growing up? We were playing out from 10 in the morning, kicking a ball about on the field. I’d come back starving and my parents would force-feed me Sunday dinner. I hated the vegetables, but if you didn’t eat your whole dinner you’d have to have the leftovers for breakfast. Plenty of nights I went to bed with cabbage squished into my pockets and tears in my eyes. A special Sunday? Presenting Sunday Night at the Palladium – in my business that’s the FA Cup Final. I flew home halfway through my honeymoon in the Maldives to make the gig. The comic entertainers of the 1960s and 1970s who hosted it are my heroes. To be on that stage, opening the show with a musical number? A dream. Sunday evening? Preparation for the week ahead starts early: bag packing, homework checking, hair washing. Everything is a military operation. Often I’m in bed before our eldest these days, watching stupid TikTok videos before I fall asleep. The National Lottery’s Big Night of Musicals is available on BBC iPlayerAustralia “will not hesitate” to ratchet up sanctions against Russia amid growing tensions over the military buildup near Ukraine’s border, a senior federal minister has warned. The finance minister, Simon Birmingham, said the Australian government was staying “in close contact with many allies, with countries across Europe and the United States” and directly with Ukraine to “provide what assistance we can”. The comments come as a Ukrainian diplomat in Australia accused the Russian ambassador of offering “false” and “strange” arguments for Russia’s troop buildup, as western countries step up their warnings to Moscow against invading Ukraine. The UK has offered to deploy land, air and sea forces to bolster the defence of Nato countries on their northern and eastern borders. The US has also promised to send a small number of troops to eastern European and Nato countries “in the near term”. Birmingham said Australia had been “very clear” that it would not deploy its military if war broke out in the region, but was involved in talks about what other assistance it could provide. He called on Russia “to remove its military buildup along the Ukrainian border, to de-escalate tensions and to engage comprehensively in diplomatic dialogue to avert conflict”. Birmingham noted that Australia already had sanctions in place against Russian figures – first imposed in 2014 and extended in 2015 – and was prepared to expand them. The sanctions list indicates the measures target Putin allies who had publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces to Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea. The existing measures also sanction defence companies linked to the manufacture of the “Buk” surface-to-air missiles used by pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine, believed responsible for the shooting down of Malaysian Airlines flight MH17 in 2014. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Those sanctions remain under constant review,” Birmingham told reporters in Adelaide on Sunday. “And of course, we will not hesitate to upgrade them and undertake further sanctions if that’s warranted should Russia escalate this situation.” The UK is expected to announce tougher sanctions on Monday. Western countries have voiced increasing concern about Russia’s buildup of more than 100,000 troops near the border with Ukraine but opinions differ on if, or when, Vladimir Putin plans a full-scale military invasion. The Russian president has made a series of security demands including a promise that Ukraine never be admitted to Nato, which the US has rejected. Russia has argued it is Nato that is fuelling the tensions. Volodymyr Shalkivskyi, the chargé d’affaires at Ukraine’s embassy in Canberra, said Ukraine was “grateful to its international partners, including Australia, for the unwavering support of its sovereignty and territorial integrity especially during these challenging times”. “As a sovereign country, Ukraine has every right to choose its foreign policy priorities and join any alliances it finds necessary,” Shalkivskyi said in a statement on Sunday. Russia’s ambassador to Australia, Alexey Pavlovsky, held a press conference in Canberra on Friday to hit back at the defence minister, Peter Dutton, for calling Vladimir Putin an ageing and irrational dictator. Pavlovsky said if that was “the level of analysis informing Australian policy then it is definitely a worrying sign” and argued that some western politicians had been “convinced and hypnotised by their own propaganda”. The Russian ambassador denied the troops were a threat, saying they remained on Russian territory. Pavlovsky instead characterised the buildup as a “a warning to Ukraine not to try any reckless military adventures, not to interpret the support they have from the west as carte blanche to do such crazy things”. The Russian ambassador also argued that the international investigation into the downing of MH17 – an incident that led to the deaths of 298 passengers and crew including 38 Australians – was “hijacked by a politicised agenda”. He cited what the called “discrepancies” in the evidence. But Ukraine’s representative in Australia dismissed those comments. Shalkivskyi said Pavlovsky’s attempts “to question integrity and credibility of the international investigation on MH17 with false narratives is aimed at generating confusion and distracting conversation from the Moscow’s role in this tragedy”. Shalkivskyi said the Russian ambassador “falsely portrays his country as a victim of the western propaganda and the Russian aggressive actions as a forced response to the alleged aggressive intentions of Ukraine and our international partners”. “In fact, this is Russia who violates norms of the international law and threatens its neighbours,” Shalkivskyi said in the statement on Sunday. Shalkivskyi said on Friday the Russian ambassador’s comments were “a game of words”, and any country would feel threatened if more than 100,000 troops were stationed at the border. But Ukraine’s leaders have also played down the idea that a further Russian invasion was imminent and have urged the west not to fuel panic, because of the potential economic damage. On Monday the Australian government encouraged any Australian citizens to leave Ukraine immediately due to the deteriorating security situation, and it has joined with the US and the UK in withdrawing the families of Australian diplomats. Australia is considering supplying extra liquefied natural gas to Europe and the government has said it is willing to help Ukraine to fend off cyber-attacks.Adam Rutherford begins this sharp and timely study of the science that dare not speak its name with an account of the professor who, in 2018, attempted to genetically modify the embryos of twin daughters, removing them from a woman’s womb and then reimplanting them. “China’s Frankenstein”, He Jiankui, had planned to give the children genetic immunity from HIV/Aids, a disease from which their father suffered. Though his efforts seem to have failed – the girls may not have that immunity and he was jailed for three years and fined three million yuan – the case provides one stark answer to Rutherford’s opening question: “If you have children, you will surely want them to live well. You hope that they are free from disease, and that they fulfil their potential … what are you willing to do to ensure this?” Ever since Mary Shelley wrote Frankenstein in response to the new sciences of physiology and galvanism, that question has haunted human imaginations. After Darwin and before the Third Reich, eugenics was a science that was embraced, as Rutherford notes, by “suffragists, feminists, philosophers and more than a dozen Nobel prizewinners … [and] was a beacon of light for many countries striving to be better, healthier and stronger”. The first part of Rutherford’s book is a history of these arguments; the second is concerned with the way this thinking is expressed in the present. Ideas of selective breeding are almost as old as philosophy. Plato proposed a utopian city state in which elite men and women would be matched for their qualities, and “inferior” citizens would be discouraged or prevented from breeding. In modern biology, such ideas were first explored and popularised by Darwin’s half-cousin Francis Galton and his follower Karl Pearson at University College London. Galton’s idea of “positive eugenics” carried with it those ever-present, class-based fears of the decline of civilisation (Darwin did not call it The Descent of Man for nothing). His theories of selective breeding counted among their disciples a young Winston Churchill; the creator of the welfare state, William Beveridge; and the birth control pioneer Marie Stopes, who feared the consequences of the working class “outbreeding” a social elite, and advocated the sterilisation of mixed-race girls. Rutherford traces a clear line from these racist theories – widely acted upon in US prewar sterilisation programmes – to the genocidal atrocities of nazism. He also shows that though the “doctors’ trial” at Nuremberg effectively banished the word “eugenics” from any curriculum, the science – and in some cases the politics that exploited it – persisted. The horror of using forced sterilisation to pursue racial purity did not end with the Third Reich; in Canada there is an ongoing class action in response to the coerced sterilisation of First Nation women, some as recently as 2018, while in the US, there is an allegation that up to 20 women underwent involuntary sterilisation in immigration detention centres in 2020. In China, meanwhile, there are credible reports that 80% of Uyghur women detained in the Xinjiang region have been sterilised by surgery or IUD. Rutherford is careful to separate those attempts at population control from the human genetics departments that have evolved with the fundamental aim of understanding disease at a heritable level. IVF embryos can today be screened for a number of genetic diseases; he makes the clear case that none of these interventions are eugenics, and all are tightly regulated across the world. Scientists have been manipulating and editing genes since the 1970s – initially viruses and then more complex organisms. Today, Rutherford suggests, “anyone with basic lab equipment can piece together bits and bobs from multiple species to build a new living tool with a specific purpose – such as to test for pathogens in the environment, or create vaccines”. Technology called Crispr created in the last decade can precisely seek out an individual bit of DNA to modify or delete or edit it, “potentially correcting a mutation that for all history until this moment has produced untold suffering”. However, the idea that scientists are capable of remodelling more complex inherited human traits is, he argues, as far-fetched and politically dangerous as ever. Those headline studies that claim to have “found the gene for” are almost never right. The inherited bits of DNA that might reveal a propensity to alcoholism or schizophrenia are not restricted to single genes but to the variants of multiple bits of DNA, which even then do not determine anything. As Philip Larkin noted in This Be the Verse, parents are pre-programmed to “fill you with the faults they had/ And add some extra, just for you.” The most pernicious of these claims inevitably involves the belief, resurgent in extremist political groups, that we might genetically select for IQ. In the largest studies, inherited intelligence has been associated with the variable interaction of more than 1,000 places in the human genome. That does not stop a few scientists and pseudoscientists repackaging Galton’s “positive eugenics” for the 21st century. Among the most prominent of these hucksterish voices is Stephen Hsu, a former physicist and administrator at Michigan State University. Hsu, who runs a genetic profiling company, has been vocal in promoting the possibility of selecting for intelligence and thereby creating a super race of humans with “IQs of 1000”. In 2014, Dominic Cummings saw a talk by Hsu, swallowed his thinking whole and regurgitated it in a breathless blog. Five years later, Hsu was pictured with Cummings outside 10 Downing Street, by which time the “new” eugenics had caused headlines and outrage after the notorious, secretive 2017 “conference” at UCL involving what Rutherford calls “fringe race-obsessed science cosplayers”. Rutherford makes the urgent case that we remain very far from any such competence and we should beware any politician that raises the idea. In trying to select for the hundreds of genetic variants associated with intelligence, might you be selecting against fertility or kindness or integrity? No one knows, Rutherford says, and it is likely no one will ever know. He ends his short, illuminating book with a useful suggestion. Rather than meddling at the edges of a science that we barely understand, why not concentrate resources on that triumvirate of inventions that have, over centuries, been shown to transform and improve human capacities beyond all imagining: education, healthcare and equality of opportunity. Control: The Dark History and Troubling Present of Eugenics by Adam Rutherford is published by Orion (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyCovid Johnson detailed what he meant by “getting the big calls right” in a Commons speech on 19 January. He listed the decision to focus on the booster campaign in December, not opting to use the European Medicines Agency for vaccine procurement, and investing early in lateral flow tests and “cutting-edge drugs”. He also claimed that the UK had the “fastest booster campaign in Europe” and was “first to emerge from the Omicron wave”. He did not refer to calls which were arguably bigger: the decision to prioritise hospitals instead of care homes in March 2020, the decision not to lock down in September 2020, the failure to procure enough PPE, and the decision to largely abandon public health measures such as contact tracing in March 2020. And other issues remain to be resolved – the NHS and the social care sector have at least 200,000 vacancies between them. Up to 20,000 people could have died because of the original decision to not lock down in March 2020, according to modelling by Prof Neil Ferguson at Imperial College London. During the second wave, Johnson prioritised Christmas and did not order a lockdown until 6 January, when almost 32,000 people were in hospital and more than 4,000 were being admitted every day. More than 80,000 people died within 28 days of a positive test between 1 October 2020 and 28 February 2021. When Johnson made his claims, the UK had delivered 53.99 boosters per 100 people – behind Iceland, Denmark and Israel, while Belgium overtook the UK two days later, according to Our World In Data. Independent fact-checker Full Fact UK said the PM seemed to define this as “reaching more than half our population before any other European country”, which was only accurate if Iceland and Denmark were not counted. With the BA.2 version of Omicron apparently outcompeting the original BA.1 sublineage, and nearly 5% of people in England testing positive for Covid, according to the Office for National Statistics, it’s not clear that the UK has yet emerged from the Omicron wave. Creating the vaccine taskforce instead of using the EMA, and the early authorisation by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, meant that the UK had given a first dose to about 30% of the population by 1 March, compared with about 5% for France, Italy and Germany, according to Our World in Data. But the UK has proportionately fewer people who have taken up the vaccine than Portugal, Denmark, Italy, Ireland, France, Norway, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Finland. James Tapper Test and trace The prime minister promised to create a world-beating testing programme near the start of the pandemic, and in his 19 January speech he appears to focus on the size of the programme, referring to England’s NHS Test and Trace scheme as “the largest in Europe”. The UK has performed substantially more tests than the largest four other countries in Europe. The latest figures show the UK had done 424.89m tests by 20 January, compared with 223.19m in France, 160m in Italy, about 99m in Germany and 79.8m in Spain. On the world stage, however, the UK lags behind 768m in the US and 709m in India. Proportionally, the UK is now doing 22.07 tests per 1,000 people – fewer than Denmark’s 34, Portugal’s 31 and Greece’s 22.75. And Denmark has performed far more tests per person, relative to population size, since the pandemic began. However, the purpose of testing and tracing is to be able to identify people who are likely to pass the virus on to others, and for them to isolate till they are no longer infectious. Its ultimate intention is to reduce deaths and serious illness. By this measure, the UK has done worse than some countries – there have been about 217 excess deaths per 100,000 here compared with 135 per 100,000 in Germany – but better than others such as the US, which has had about 314 per 100,000. James Tapper Brexit Johnson can claim to have “got Brexit done” by having signed a withdrawal agreement on 24 January 2020, making Brexit a legal reality. But disentangling the UK from the EU is far from finished and is proving anything but simple. Foreign secretary Liz Truss is still negotiating with Brussels over the Northern Ireland protocol. Trade between the UK and EU has been hit by new rules and regulations, many of which have been delayed and some of which still have not come into force because of fears of the extra delays they will cause. The UK is still pushing to retain links to key EU projects of economic benefit, such as the Horizon Europe research fund and the Copernicus Earth observation programme, but the EU is no pushover in negotiations with a state that has chosen to leave. Global Britain has not materialised in the way the Brexiters promised. And there is little sign that the Biden administration wants to do a trade deal with the UK that was supposed to be the cherry on the post-single-market cake, so limited new deals with Australia and New Zealand are all Johnson has to show for his efforts so far. What is frustrating even ardent pro-Brexiters is the lack of a Brexit plan. Joël Reland, a researcher for the UK in a Changing Europe thinktank, says: “The government seems to lack a clear idea of what it wants divergence from EU rules to mean. Freedom to remake EU rules has long been a dream of many in the Conservative party, but now that freedom has been won, there appears to be an as yet unreconciled debate over how best to make use of it.” Toby Helm The economy Britain’s economy suffered one of the biggest downturns of any major economy during the pandemic. The first lockdown in 2020 brought a drop in national income, or GDP, of almost 20%. This was the biggest economic contraction in 300 years and can be blamed on Britain’s lack of preparation after a decade of austerity and a feeble initial response to the crisis. In the second half of 2020, Boris Johnson and chancellor Rishi Sunak were quick to boast about a 17.4% quarter-on-quarter increase in GDP while ignoring the extent of the initial slump. In recent weeks, Johnson has argued that the UK remains the fastest-growing economy, but only by focusing on a particular annual figure. A measure of GDP from the fourth quarter of 2020 to the third quarter of 2021 gives a figure of 6.8% growth for the UK, compared with 4.9% in the US and 3.3% and 2.6% in France and Germany respectively. Following the same selective process Johnson used in 2020, this growth rate measures the strong recovery last summer against the low point during the second and third lockdowns. A comparison of the G7 rankings based on the most recent quarterly figures puts the UK in sixth, above only Japan. The US economy was already 1.4% larger than its pre-pandemic size in the third quarter of 2021, while the UK was 1.5% smaller. Phillip Inman Employment The prime minister recently boasted that employment in Britain stands at record levels. To support his claim he used figures that show the number of payrolled workers increased to 29.5 million, up more than 400,000 on the previous year. Tony Wilson, head of the Institute for Employment Studies thinktank, said it was frustrating to hear Johnson quote selectively from labour market figures, especially when the data was experimental and suffered revisions of 100,000 or more. More importantly, the data ignores a sharp decline in the numbers of the self-employed and those who have quit the labour market. “In all there are now 1.1 million fewer people in the labour force than we would have expected to see based on pre-crisis trends, and older people account for three-fifths of this participation gap,” said Wilson. Unemployment is a good news story. It has fallen to 4.1% – 0.1 percentage points above pre-pandemic levels. Yet this reduction mostly reflects people leaving the labour market. Vacancies remain at a record level of 1.1 million. Phillip InmanIt is assembly time at Clore Tikva primary school in Barkingside, Ilford and this morning the children have a special guest: the local MP, Wes Streeting. What, I wonder, do they make of this neat, energetic man in a crisp shirt and shiny shoes? Do they know who he is and why he’s here? Possibly not. But even if they don’t, amazingly, he has their attention. Unlike many MPs, who struggle to talk naturally to adults, let alone to children, Streeting knows just how to handle his crowd today, dressing his speech up as a kind of quiz, opening each question – What do MPs do? Where do they work? – to the floor before answering it himself. Somehow, he makes it all sound so exciting: the leaflets, the surgeries, even his long commute to the Palace of Westminster. “Sometimes I drive and sometimes I get the tube,” he tells them, as if this was the most thrilling journey in all the world. From a tiny chair at the side of the hall, I carefully consider Streeting, a man who at moments might belong to another age entirely. It’s not only that his crab apple cheeks and short back and sides give him the look of a kindly wartime grocer, the sort who might slip you a bag of illicit sugar. Some of what he says is also, to my ears, strikingly retro. Twice, he tells the children that he’s a Christian, the kind of admission made only rarely in politics these days (when Tony Blair was asked about his faith, Alastair Campbell is supposed to have said: “We don’t do God.”), while of his education, he explains: “I went to Cambridge, which is one of our best universities.” (What? Doesn’t the Labour party frown on such elitism?) When the children, who have spent so much of their short lives under the pandemic, tell him what they would do if they were prime minister – “people should be allowed to play in the garden, but only sometimes”, “everyone should wear their masks” – I have the feeling that he rather approves, for all that he joshes them for their strictness. But perhaps he can afford to be straightforward at this point. Out in the world, things are at last going the Labour party’s way, a dramatic change of fortune whose primary cause has, it seems, permeated even these young minds. “Does anyone know what party Boris Johnson belongs to?” Streeting asks now, his time nearly up. Lots of hands fly into the air and he picks out a little boy who cannot be older than five. “Is it… the Christmas party?” he says. Though Streeting knows better than to laugh, I can sense his delight and after we leave, this inadvertent joke, so perfect it might have been scripted, is the first thing we talk about. “It’s a good job you were there,” he says. “No one would believe it otherwise.” The morning is very cold and the way he bounces along, his hands thrust deep in his pockets, makes me think suddenly of an old Ready Brek ad. You could almost warm your hands on his boyish contentment. “Kids always ask the best questions,” says his chief of staff, Matt, shaking his head, and with this, they take their leave of me and head for Streeting’s house, around the corner. Standing with his compadre on the pavement, the grocer is gone. The shadow secretary of state for health and social care now looks like nothing so much as a sixth former who’s managed to bunk off school a bit early. Streeting and I talk properly a week later, in his office at Westminster, which he shares with Peter Kyle, the shadow secretary of state for Northern Ireland. There are two rooms. In one, where the friends sit next to one another at their respective desks, there is a poster of the 1997 election result – “This is what winning looks like,” Tony Blair has scrawled in magic marker next to a map of Britain that’s almost entirely red – and not one, but two, photographs of the late Tessa Jowell. In the other, used for meetings, there is an espresso machine and a coffee table on top of which is John Bew’s biography of Clement Attlee and Odd Couples, a book by the Labour peer, arch Europhile and one-time Labour reformer, Giles Radice. Yes, I have entered the centrist zone. Streeting arrives a little out of breath, but with his tail up; yesterday, Christian Wakeford, the MP for Bury South, defected to Labour from the Tories and everyone is still high on the thrill of it (or not, as we shall see). What’s the atmosphere like? Is it as febrile as it sounds? “I think he [Boris Johnson] will go,” he says. “It’s a case of when, not if. But I don’t know what’s happened to the Conservative party; it’s not the Conservative party I recognise. For one that has a reputation for being ruthless, they’re underestimating how radioactive he is. Every day he remains in office, the contamination spreads.” Some on the left are appalled by the welcome Wakeford has received from Keir Starmer. But Streeting couldn’t care less. “I’m not at all put out by the things he [Wakeford] has said in the past. His defection tells us that the Conservative party has changed for the worse, and the Labour party has changed for the better, and I hope this will bring people who voted Conservative to look again at the party under Keir. To the purists, I say: get with the programme. We’re winning the argument.” By his telling, the left is firmly in the descendent now: “There are a bunch of people who were relatively recent joiners to the Labour party who didn’t understand its history or traditions or how you win elections. A lot of people have left who were never really committed to it and frankly, a lot them were barnacles on the boat. The people who denied there was a problem with antisemitism. The people who didn’t understand why voters were affronted by the Labour party. We’re better off without them, bluntly. There has always been a problem with elements of the left, particularly the far left, who revel in their self-righteousness, who love telling voters how disappointed they are in them.” The party needs Tory voters if it’s ever to win an election and he accepts this. Unlike some, he doesn’t think Tories are bad people. His own politics come from his mother, who is on the left, but his beloved paternal grandfather, a former merchant seaman and one of the biggest influences on his life (Streeting’s Christian faith can be traced to him) was a Tory, as is his father. “My dad is like my one-man focus group: a Sun-reading Essex Tory. I’m interested to know what he thinks about Labour now. He sells cars for a living, so he talks to the general public a lot and he picks up the mood.” Streeting is a rising star and increasingly tipped as a future Labour leader. But his current ubiquity belies how difficult his first years in parliament were. Jeremy Corbyn was elected leader only months after Streeting became the MP for Ilford North in 2015. “At first, I took solace in the things he said about kinder, gentler politics, about party democracy. I thought, we’ve got a leader who’s well to the left of me, but it will be OK because he’s talking about pluralism; we’ll get through this. What I didn’t anticipate was how bad things would get. We got all the downsides without any of the positives he promised. I found it soul-destroying. “I was horrified by the antisemitism. My constituency has a significant Jewish population and in 2019, I had lifelong Labour voters literally crying on the doorstep. I couldn’t have looked at myself in the mirror without knowing I did everything I could to tackle it. But in the end, it wasn’t enough. We weren’t able to deal with it because we had a leader who was unable to deal with it. The sad thing is that since Jeremy Corbyn has ceased to be the leader of the Labour party, we’ve seen his true colours in terms of how he conducts himself, what he says, who he associates with. People ask: why isn’t he in the Labour party? [Starmer has refused to reinstate the Labour whip to Corbyn.] The answer is simple: because he chooses not to be. All he has to do is apologise and he can’t even do that.” (Corbyn maintains that the scale of antisemitism in the party was exaggerated for political reasons.) But things are, he says, different now. How he loves his job! After he was diagnosed with kidney cancer last April, he had every opportunity to reassess his life; that could have been the moment to throw in politics. In fact, the opposite happened. “I keep saying to my partner, Joe [Dancey, a political consultant]: I’m living my best life.” His experiences have turned him into the patient’s champion, one who simply will not allow the government to use the pandemic as an excuse for the now terrifyingly long NHS waiting lists, of which he also has first-hand experience, given that his post-operative scan is running two months late. “It’s supposed to happen after six months; I’m assuming it will happen after nine or 10. Joe has given me quite a hard time this week. You’ve got to get on the phone, he says; if you weren’t shadow health secretary, you would. He’s got a point.” Streeting’s analysis of the NHS is that it is great in a crisis, but unacceptably poor pre-diagnosis and post-treatment. “On my last day in hospital, all the nurses were consumed with a patient who was having a very severe mental health episode. There was just no one else available for the rest of us.” Advice as to how things would be at home was thin on the ground. “I was frightened when I was diagnosed. Because of the pandemic, I went into the hospital alone. I don’t think I’ve ever felt as lonely at any point in my life as I did then. But one of the few times I really cried over all this was when I went home. I couldn’t get into bed. It was too painful. Poor Joe was Googling YouTube tutorials. In the end, we were saved by an Australian physio who’d made a film for women who’d had caesarean sections.” What’s the solution, though? He talks of reform, big and (relatively) small; if social care has to be completely overhauled so, too, does access. Why isn’t more online booking available to GP patients? Why can’t we use tech to refer ourselves to specialists in other clinical settings? “It’s crazy and inexcusable that we can’t,” he says. Streeting, who is 39, grew up in a council flat in Stepney, east London. His parents were teenagers when he was born and their relationship didn’t last, though when people describe him as the child of a “single mother”, it doesn’t give the full picture: his father was always around and, as a teenager, Streeting went to live with him. His early life wasn’t easy. His mother was often broke; when she couldn’t afford to top up the electricity meter, the flat would be in darkness. He received free school meals. “I still shudder at the insecurity we felt then,” he says. “Prosperity felt so distant. But I am sensitive when I talk about this. I don’t want to say something that leads to my mum feeling embarrassed and I will always challenge notions of what it means to be poor. I have a different perspective on public services to most middle-class professionals on the left. My memory is of my mum being treated like dirt on the bottom of a shoe by people in the DSS office. That has always stayed with me.” He dislikes what he calls “the patronising middle-class claptrap on the left about being the saviours of the poor”. What people want, he says, is a sense of control and agency and the tools to make a better life – a form of “scaffolding” that, ultimately, he found he had. “Growing up with my mum, often I’d be the only person at home. She would spend a lot of time talking to me. She treated me almost like an adult; she used to get mildly rebuked by my dad and my grandad for that. But she gave me a degree of responsibility beyond my years; my own sense of agency and even my self-confidence, I get from her.” On his mother’s side, his grandfather was a criminal who had convictions for armed robbery; his grandmother, caught up in these activities, was in prison while she was expecting Streeting’s mother (she shared a cell with Christine Keeler). But he was always encouraged “to read, to work hard and do well” by his parents and his grandfathers, as well as by his teachers. Education was, for him, everything. Family life was complicated. “I’ve got five brothers, a sister and a stepsister, and I always joke with them that I spent 10 years as an only child and they were the happiest years of my life.” Why did he go to live with his dad? “Lots of reasons. I felt… my mum was going through a lot of upheaval in her life and her relationships and home life was quite disruptive. I went to live with him for what was meant to be a short-term period, but I felt a lot more settled and secure there and in the end I chose to stay, which is probably the hardest conversation I ever had with my mum. It must have been hard for her, but she was good about it.” He is, I think, someone who has a strong sense of what he needs in life. A teacher in Tower Hamlets suggested he apply to Westminster City school and from there, he won a place at Cambridge. But he knew he was bright early on. “My reading age was always high. I loved school. School for me was often an escape from conditions at home. I didn’t like the long school holidays because home wasn’t always a great place to be.” (Though he was bullied at school for his cleverness.) He remembers the letter from Cambridge landing on the doormat. He’d been waiting for the post every day. “It was like Willy Wonka and the golden ticket,” he says. “I was jumping for joy. I was crying tears of joy.” He will never, he says, apologise for the fact he went to Cambridge. Someone once suggested that he leave off the details of his university education on a leaflet. “Get lost! Why the bloody hell should I be ashamed of that? I’m one of 1% of kids on free school meals who made it. Most parents in my constituency, whether white working class or from the Bangladeshi community, are ambitious for their kids. What they see in me, they want for their own children.” Was Cambridge a culture shock? “No, I loved it,” he says. He laughs at what he calls his “precociousness”. What he could not pay for with a student loan, he funded with long hours in customer service for Comet during the holidays (he knows a lot about appliance hotlines). He has never really suffered from social anxiety, though his accent has, he admits, changed over the years. “If you’d spoken to me in primary school, I was like something out of the cast of Oliver!. But my grandad always tried to teach me to speak properly, and so did Mr Latimer, one of my teachers, who warned us we might be judged on the way we spoke in the future. Even now, I’ve got a Radio 4 Today programme voice and a TalkRadio voice.” It was at Cambridge, too, that he came out, having long struggled to reconcile his sexuality with his faith. “I’d thrown my dad off the scent by having girlfriends,” he says. “So he was pretty shocked and fearful in the way that parents are. Would my life be difficult? Would I be discriminated against? It took me years to accept I was gay, so it wasn’t unreasonable to give my dad a few days to come to terms with it. I know we all want the Disney coming out where everyone breaks into chorus, but life isn’t like that. We need to cut people a bit of slack.” After university, Streeting was elected president of the National Union of Students. He followed this with stints at the thinktank Progress and at Stonewall, the LGBT rights charity, where he was head of education. Does he think that Stonewall, widely criticised for its lobbying tactics and zealous interest in trans rights, has lost its way? For the first time, his caution is palpable. He talks, as he did in a recent BBC interview with Nick Robinson, of compromise; it’s the job of politicians, he says, to provide a table for people on both sides to get around, a place where they could discuss, say, the question of what happens to trans prisoners. Difficult questions should not be “taboo”. Does he believe in biological sex? “Yes, of course,” he says. Does he think it’s helpful for his colleague David Lammy to accuse women with concerns in this area of being “dinosaurs” who were “hoarding” their rights? For a moment, he is silent. Then he says: “One of the things that men have always underestimated is the sense in which women have felt like they’re being told to be quiet, which is why in this context it is incendiary.” Since he spoke to Robinson, he says, he has been pleased to find that some of his female parliamentary colleagues have felt able to come and talk to him about their concerns. It’s interesting to contrast this part of our conversation with his openness about his faith. Twenty years ago, I tell him, a journalist would have been more interested in his sexuality than his religion, but now it’s the other way around. He thinks this is probably right. “One of the things that upsets me a bit is that often, what flashes through the minds of people who are not religious when one of our politicians says they are is anxiety. They think: does that mean they are going to oppose a woman’s right to choose or same-sex marriage? But I take a pretty secular outlook on rights under the law.” Does he go to church? “My grandfather brought me to understand that you don’t have to go to church to have a relationship with God. The last time I went was midnight mass on Christmas Eve, but I do go throughout the year and we have a chapel at the Palace of Westminster and there have been times when I’ve gone there to pray about things I’m worried about.” Is his faith a comfort? “Yes, it is.” Before I go, we talk about his hinterland, that strange territory so few politicians seem to have. His seems quite expansive. He likes opera, though Joe organises their tickets – “I love Tosca and the one with the riddles [I think he means Turandot]” – and then there are box sets: he is a fan of Vera, the crime drama starring Brenda Blethyn. “That’s a bit embarrassing. Maybe don’t write that down.” He took Joe to see Deacon Blue in Southend for his birthday. “I had a UK garage phase in the sixth form, but at heart I’m an indie boy. Britpop was the greatest for me, growing up.” You’re such a goody two-shoes, I say, because, let’s be honest, he comes out of everything a bit too well. But, no. “I’m really not the Mary Poppins of the Labour party. I’ve got some horror stories.” Like what? I ask, picturing Theresa May running through a field of wheat. With some gusto, he embarks on a long, funny and very elaborate account of teenage drunkenness, a day of shame that saw him vomiting on several passengers on the tube and which climaxed with his father having to hose him down on the front doorstep. “It did my street cred a lot of good at the time,” he says, his eyes sparkling just a little at the memory of that very first and highly influential focus group.The ghetto blasters date this picture to the early 1980s, that noisy few years when urban streets thudded with mixtape basslines from almost portable machines like these, usually carried on the shoulder. Mary Ellen Mark took the picture of the two boys, in Seattle, on assignment for Life magazine. The story was about the then relatively new phenomenon of large numbers of teenage children living on America’s streets. Seattle was chosen because it had just been voted the nation’s “most liveable city”. Mark, who died in 2015, thought of herself as a documentary photographer rather than a photojournalist. The distinction, she believed, was that she was not shooting news; her skill was “to be able to pull things from reality, to see what’s strange and real”. Her Seattle story focused on a group of teenagers, some as young as 13, who had run away from home and were surviving selling drugs or by being preyed upon for sex. The lives she witnessed were so disturbing that she stayed involved with them in different ways. She tried to adopt one 13-year-old girl, Tiny, who was being sexually exploited, to remove her from the place; when that did not succeed, Mark worked with her husband, film-maker Martin Bell, to make a documentary that drew attention to these children’s lives. Streetwise was nominated for an Oscar in 1984. She stayed in touch with Tiny and the other kids throughout her life. Mark’s photograph of the boys on the street is included in an exhibition of 20th-century street photography by women called A Female Gaze. The Seattle photographs became emblematic for her, of a kind connection that she was always looking for. “It’s interesting,” she said later in an interview. “I don’t have kids. I never really wanted kids [but] I’ve always been interested in teenagers. It’s when you can really talk to a person, being that age and out there and very raw.” • This article was amended on 1 February 2022 to refer to a 13-year-old girl as being “sexually exploited” rather than as “a sex worker”. A Female Gaze: Seven Decades of Women Street Photographers is at Howard Greenberg Gallery in New York until 2 April“Just pat her on the bottom and send her on her way.” When, as rarely happens, Boris Johnson is forced to cooperate with women in authority, it may help that, as he’s occasionally mentioned, he possesses a fair few insights into female behaviour and woman-management, some of them perhaps gleaned from his father. Though it must be painful, given his attitude to women in the workforce, to be forced to deal with them at all. He once depicted female employment as “an ever-growing proportion of British women [who] have been ‘incentivised’ or socially gestapoed into the workplace”. When can he stop acting as if Sue Gray is his equal? Isn’t it humiliation enough that Johnson, Big Dog, a man who publicly identifies as the Incredible Hulk, should already have been thwarted by Lady Hale, then denied revenge on another female adversary, Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards? Just last week Stone was again acting as if Hulk could be defeated by a woman, saying it is “bonkers” she can’t investigate the funding of his dodgy refurb. “The madder Hulk gets, the stronger Hulk gets,” Johnson once warned fellow leaders. But the Hulk never had to deal with a police investigation, albeit heavily compromised, by three female officers. True, one is Cressida Dick, but add deputy assistant commissioner Jane Connors and commander Catherine Roper and that’s still an entire troika of nightmare “girly swots” (as Johnson describes conscientious people of either sex). DAC Connors, who expressed sadness about people “flagrantly” ignoring Covid rules, is certainly a contender for Johnson’s signature insult. Not long after declaring his proroguing of parliament illegal, Lady Hale pointedly applied it to herself. Which is the kind of thing that happens when the professions fail to learn from Johnson’s example that the correct approach to hiring women, allowing for occasional lapses, is not to do it in the first place. Even the young, blond, cheatworthy ones will end up old, like the “sweaty old peeresses”, “old bag” and “kind of woman who owns fifteen cats” referred to in Johnson’s novel Seventy Two Virgins, a fast-moving catalogue of sexist and racist slurs, set in Westminster. Like David Cameron, Johnson likes to boast about the female prime ministers who outwitted men like himself, while ensuring his own administration is modelled, thus ruling out further such anomalies, on admission arrangements at his old school. Any Tory female visibility in the Commons and cabinet should not, as became clear in reports about No 10’s lockdown lifestyle, be interpreted as evidence of progress. The most arresting aspect of the covertly photographed drinks/meeting at No 10 is, for example, less the refreshments than the quaint sex ratio, apparently 16 to three. Two of the women being the girlfriends of Matt Hancock and Boris Johnson. The latter’s insistence that these garden drinks were “people at work” conveys his confidence that an appearance of institutionalised sex discrimination will always be less shameful than booze-related rule-breaking. Written accounts of the No 10 work/booze timetable also depict a sex monoculture you’d probably blame on the prep school culture that created Johnson if that hadn’t, in comparison, been thrillingly diverse. The narrator of King Solomon’s Mines, published in 1885, at least acknowledges to his schoolboy readers that “there is not a petticoat in the whole history”. That is, except for a female fiend and “she was a hundred at least, and therefore not marriageable, so I don’t count her”. It’s still one more petticoat than you get in a Johnsonian “quad”. Questioned about the non-existent female membership of his inner cabals, with their idiot nicknames and boxing-glove accessories, Johnson has protested, like Cameron before him, that he is doing his best, helpless to correct the shortage of female candidates as accomplished as Gavin Williamson, as trustworthy as Hancock, as authoritative as Dominic Raab. After elected women were sidelined in the national Covid response, including almost entirely from public briefings, a sniggering Johnson told the parliamentary liaison committee: “It’s certainly true that I would have liked to have had more female representation in the press conferences so far.” Though not enough to do anything about it. “And, erm, you know, er, what can I say?” Keen Johnson students would have heard the echoes, here, of the Spectator column where, along with the bum-patting tip, he offered this to future editors: “You will receive threatening letters from female journalists, urging you to have more female bylines, starting with their own, and I would not dream of advising you there.” For Johnson, the persistence of women who are neither flattering nor shaggable has never stopped being hilarious. But his long-diagnosed “woman problem”, as this common-or-garden prejudice is usually euphemised, has recently taken on, thanks to difficulties entirely of Johnson’s own making, a delightful new meaning. If it’s too much, judging by last week’s evasions, to hope for poetic justice, in the shape of his subjugation by the sex he has patronised for half a century, the mortification alone is joy. While Johnson was either snogging female colleagues or declaring them unpromotable, other professional women prevailed. Now the Hulk has to answer their questions. Probably his misogyny runs too deep to allow Johnson some reflection on the possible benefits if he hadn’t presided over a frat house from which unwanted women could be summarily ejected. But if so, it will have made any impertinence on the part of middle-aged women (who may even own cats) all the more personally agonising. How agonising? Hard to say, but he once compared the horror of being overtaken by a female driver to “being treated as though you were an old woman by a young woman”. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistJust on the evidence of his new book, Ro Khanna is one of the broadest, brightest and best-educated legislators on Capitol Hill. A graduate of the University of Chicago and Yale Law School who represents Silicon Valley, he is by far the most tech-savvy member of Congress. At this very dark moment for American democracy, this remarkable son of Indian immigrants writes with the optimism and idealism of a first-generation American who still marvels at the opportunities he has had. Even more remarkable for a congressman whose district includes Apple, Google, Intel and Yahoo, Khanna is one of the few who refuses to take campaign money from political action committees. Once or twice in a “heated basketball game” in high school, he writes, someone may have shouted “go back to India!” But what Khanna mostly remembers about his childhood are neighbors in Pennsylvania’s Bucks county who taught him “to believe that dreams are worth pursuing in America, regardless of one’s name or heritage”. His book is bulging with ideas about how to transform big tech from a huge threat to liberty into a genuine engine of democracy. What he is asking for is almost impossibly ambitious, but he never sounds daunted. “Instead of passively allowing tech royalty and their legions to lead the digital revolution and serve narrow financial ends before all others,” he writes, “we need to put it in service of our broader democratic aspirations. We need to steer the ship [and] call the shots.” The story of tech is emblematic of our time of singular inequality, a handful of big winners on top and a vast population untouched by the riches of the silicon revolution. Khanna begins his book with a barrage of statistics. Ninety per cent of “innovation job growth” in recent decades has been in five cities while 50% of digital service jobs are in just 10 major metro centers. Most Americans “are disconnected from the wealth generation of the digital economy”, he writes, “despite having their industries and … lives transformed by it”. A central thesis is that no person should be forced to leave their home town to find a decent job. There is one big reason for optimism about this huge aspiration: the impact of Covid. Practically overnight, the pandemic “shattered” conventional wisdom “about tech concentration”. Suddenly it was obvious that high-speed broadband allowed “millions of jobs to be done anywhere in the nation”. The willingness of millions of Americans to leave big city life is confirmed by red-hot real estate markets in far-flung towns and villages – and a Harris poll that showed nearly 40% of city dwellers were willing to live elsewhere. “The promise is of new jobs without sudden cultural displacement,” Khanna writes. He suggests a range of incentives to spread tech jobs into rural areas, including big federal investment to bring high-speed connections to the millions still without them. This is turn would make it possible to require federal contractors to have at least 10% of their workforces in rural communities. The congressman imagines nothing less than a “recentering” of “human values in a culture that prizes the pursuit of technological progress and market valuations”. A vital step in that direction would be a $5bn investment for laptops for 11 million students who don’t have them. The problems of inequality begin at the tech giants themselves. Almost 20% of computer science graduates are black or Latino but only 10% of employees of big tech companies are. Less than 3% of venture capital lands in the hands of Black or Latino entrepreneurs. If redistributing some of big tech’s gigantic wealth is one way to regain some dignity in the digital age, the other is to rein in some of the industry’s gigantic abuses. Data mining and the promotion of hate for profit are the two biggest problems. Khanna has drafted an Internet Bill of Rights to improve the situation. Throughout his book, he drops bits of evidence to suggest just how urgent it is to find a way to make the biggest companies behave better. “Algorithmic amplification” turns out to be one of the greatest evils of the modern age. After extracting huge amounts of data about users, Facebook and the other big platforms “push sensational and divisive content to susceptible users based on their profiles”. An internal discussion at Facebook revealed that “64% of all extremist group joins are due to our recommendations”. The explosion of the bizarre QAnon is one of Facebook’s most dubious accomplishments. In the three years before it finally banned it in 2020, “QAnon groups developed millions of followers as Facebook’s algorithm encouraged people to join based on their profiles. Twitter also recommended Qanon tweets.” The conspiracy theory was “actively recommended” on YouTube until 2019. And then there is the single greatest big tech crime against humanity. According to Muslim Advocates, a Washington-based civil rights group, the Buddhist junta in Myanmar used Facebook and WhatsApp to plan the mass murder of Rohingya Muslims. The United Nations found that Facebook played a “determining role” in events that led to the murder of at least 25,000 and the displacement of 700,000. The world would indeed be a much better place if it adopted Khanna’s recommendations. But the question Khanna is too optimistic to ask may also be the most important one. Have these companies already purchased too much control of the American government for any fundamental change to be possible? Dignity in a Digital Age: Making Tech Work For All Of Us is published in the US by Simon &amp; SchusterWith that, we’ll end our live coverage for today. Here’s a recap of today’s major news developments: NSW again hit a grim milestone as it recorded its deadliest day of the Covid pandemic so far, with 52 deaths. 2,663 people are in hospital, with the state reporting 13,524 new cases. NSW also saw its first confirmed cases of the Omicron subvariant “son of Omicron”. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet announced a $1bn support package for businesses, with Treasuer Matt Kean lamenting a lack of federal support. Victoria has seen hospitalisations dip, while reporting 10,589 new cases, 20 deaths and 889 people in hospital. Queensland reported 8,580 new cases and 13 deaths, as premier Annastacia Palaszczuk announced schools will resume on 7 February, with a mask mandate. The Australian defence force is set to help with flood relief in Coober Pedy, South Australia. Tasmania recorded one death and South Australia two deaths. Western Australia reported 20 cases, while the NT reported 849 new cases. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese accused the Morrison government of leaving business behind during Omicron wave. Hillsong founder Brian Houston announced he is stepping down as leader of the church as he defends criminal charges that allege he covered up his father’s child sexual abuse. So, lost a little in the morning furore around his other comments, deputy PM Barnaby Joyce also doubled down on his claim people are “hoarding” rapid antigen tests. Joyce told Sky News it was a “matter of fact” that some people were buying more tests than they needed. There are certainly other big issues at play, but if you deny that RATs are being hoarded at all, to deny it would be, I’d have to lie. Because people are, businesses are. And that’s just like, people hoard toilet paper and hoard other things. I don’t know why they do that. But are you going to say that doesn’t happen as well? Of course it does. This is the second time Joyce has claimed people are hoarding the tests, and faced a fierce backlash, with many accusing him of deflecting the government’s responsibilities to supply the tests. Joyce said he “apologises” for people feeling frustrated, but turned again to blaming individuals, rather than being held accountable for the shortage. Well, if they’re frustrated, I apologise for that. But the issue is if they say they’re frustrated, because people are holding them, well, that’s a problem you have to take up with the people hoarding them. And if you are still basking in Ash Barty’s triumph yesterday (as I assume many are), I’d highly recommend Emma Kemp’s take on Barty’s magic: I want to return to this morning’s NSW Covid update, where treasurer Matt Kean took a swipe at the federal government for not “stepping up” and contributing to the state government’s small business support package. As he was introducing the package (which you read about at this link), Kean said he was “disappointed” the federal government didn’t contribute. I’m very disappointed, I was hoping to make this announcement standing next to the prime minister today and the Treasurer (Josh) Frydenberg. But they’re not to be found. These are not just NSW businesses, they are Australian businesses … that pay their taxes to the commonwealth government, Australian businesses that are doing it so tough at this time. So what we want to see is rather than the commonwealth government stepping aside, we want to see the commonwealth government stepping in like the NSW government is doing to support small business and in so doing supporting our national economy because that’s in everyone’s interest. Thanks Cait for keeping the blog alive today, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, to dive through the news. And with that, I am going to hand you back to Mostafa Rachwani whose capable hands will steer the ship across the evening. I am off to get boosted! Hillsong founder Brian Houston has announced he is stepping down as leader of the church as he defends criminal charges that allege he covered up his father’s child sexual abuse. In a statement made on Sunday, Houston said he made the decision after consulting with the church’s leadership and legal counsel. “The Hillsong Global Board feel it is in my and the church’s best interest for this to happen, so I have agreed to step aside from all ministry responsibilities until the end of the year. From AAP: A Sydney man has escaped serious injury after his balcony fell while he was standing on it in the city’s east. Fire and Rescue NSW says the second-storey verandah of the residential terrace in Bondi’s Botany Street collapsed on to a parked car around 9.30am on Sunday. Firefighters used a ladder platform truck to assess the structural damage to the property and then a shoring technique to support the roof of the home. After securing the scene around the caved-in balcony they were expected to eventually allow the occupants to return to the residence. The man was treated at the scene by ambulance officers for minor injuries. New Zealand has reported 103 new cases of Covid. Currently, 11 people are in hospital. 94% of the population aged 12 and over have had two doses of the vaccine. The Morrison government - which has been under pressure over shortages of rapid antigen tests during the Omicron wave - has gone on the attack over Anthony Albanese’s free RAT policy. The Labor leader told the ABC’s Insiders program today that the free rapid antigen tests would be subject to “limits based upon the health advice”, including a cap on the number of tests a person could receive each month, in order to “control supply”. Albanese said: What you’ve had from this government is a ‘let it rip’ approach when it comes to the market delivering and the market hasn’t delivered. A statement issued by the government this afternoon tried to claim Albanese’s comment represented a “backflip”. The statement - attributed to the health minister, Greg Hunt, and the industry minister, Angus Taylor - says: He is a weak leader who doesn’t know what he stands for … Under the slightest pressure to explain what he intended, Mr Albanese’s vague, sound-good pledge has collapsed to simply endorsing the Government’s program which in the first five days has delivered two million RATs, through 2600 pharmacies and to 467,000 concession card holders. The federal finance minister, Simon Birmingham, fronted the cameras in Adelaide to accuse the Labor party of “thought bubbles”: It sounds like it’s a great big hoax, and it’s a policy that is falling apart at the seams. Let’s pause for a moment of analysis: the federal government has been under significant heat over RAT shortages amid accusations it failed to properly plan for “living with” the virus. It’s unclear how much this will influence the coming election, due by May, but generally the fierceness of a government response is a good guide as to how much an issue is biting with the general voting public. Birmingham was also asked about the friendly fire the federal government received from the NSW Coalition government today, with the state treasurer, Matt Kean, expressing disappointment that the commonwealth had not chipped in funding for an economic support package. The federal finance minister defended the level of economic support the federal government had provided to date, and contrasted the NSW announcement with the one made by the South Australian Liberal government a day earlier “without any fuss, without any demands of the commonwealth.” Parts of the NT are reportedly struggling with serious food shortages due to the flooding in SA. The tennis and wider sporting world has delighted in Ash Barty’s grand slam triumph after the world No 1 became the first local to win the Australian Open women’s singles crown in 44 years. Barty beat American Danielle Collins in straight sets on Rod Laver Arena to become the first Australian to triumph at Melbourne Park since Chris O’Neil in 1978. Men’s tennis great Rod Laver posted a photo on Twitter with Barty, Evonne Goolagong Cawley, O’Neil and Judy Dalton and hailed the 25-year-old’s “special” achievement. Australian icebreaker RSV Nuyina has returned to its home port of Hobart from Antarctica after discovering a giant underwater canyon and an undersea mountain on its maiden voyage. The previously unknown canyon, more than 2200m deep, 2000m wide and at least 55kms long, was discovered after the ship departed Casey research station, following its refuelling operation. Environment minister Sussan Ley said on Sunday the “spectacular start” for the state-of-the-art icebreaker had “turned a 39-day commissioning and resupply mission into a voyage of international discovery”. Samples from the canyon could drastically add to our understanding of how quickly glaciers in Antarctica are melting due to global heating. The data from this and other mapping efforts on board Nuyina will also feed into global efforts to map the world’s oceans by 2030. Water from the canyon was sampled using a conductivity, temperature and depth instrument used to measure changes in water properties, including ocean temperature and salinity near glaciers. With AAP The Australian defence force is set to deliver 20 tonnes of food and supplies to Coober Pedy in South Australia where grocery shipment routes have been affected by flood waters. Inland floods this week damaged rail infrastructure in South Australia and cut food supply lines to the Northern Territory and Western Australia. Shortages of food and essential supplies are now a concern in Darwin, Western Australia and remote towns including Coober Pedy. Hillsong church leader Brian Houston has stepped down from his role while he defends a charge that he allegedly covered up child sexual abuse allegedly committed by his father Frank Houston. More to come. On top of the 849 new cases, there are 121 people in hospital. Of those eight people on oxygen and three people are in ICU. The lockouts for Alice Springs, Amoonguna, Yuendumu and Yuelamu will end today as scheduled. Gunner says from Tuesday people do not need to do a rapid antigen test in the week they arrive, neither locals nor travellers. Chief Minister of the NT Michael Gunner is speaking now. He says lockdowns and lockout have lost their effectiveness. “Omicron is too infectious and moves too quickly”. We are expecting NT health authorities to give an update soon The Health Services Union has welcomed comments from Anthony Albanese on Insiders that aged care workers would see a pay rise under a Labor government. HSU national president, Gerard Hayes said: The great unresolved crisis in aged care is wages. Until the commonwealth government commits to pay aged care workers a decent wage this crisis will only get worse. Today we see a clear difference emerge between the major parties. Mr Albanese’s declaration of support for the HSU case to lift aged care wages is hugely significant. In the short term it will lift the spirits of aged care workers. But in the longer term we need to lift wages to allow more workers to stay in the industry and stem the short staffing crisis. We’re into our third year of this pandemic and an exhausted aged care workforce who can earn more stacking shelves in a supermarket are barely holding on. WA has recorded 20 new cases, 19 of which are linked to known clusters. More to come. Here are the latest numbers from around the country, which today recorded at least 88 coronavirus deaths: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 584 In hospital: 62 (3 people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 52 Cases: 13,524 In hospital: 2,663 (182 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 849 In hospital: 121 (3 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 13 Cases: 8,580 In hospital: 745 (41 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 2 Cases: 1,633 In hospital: 289 Tasmania Deaths: 1 Cases: 594 In hospital: 20 (1 person in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 20 Cases: 10,589 In hospital: 889 (111 in ICU) Western Australia Cases: 20 Along with schools, the Queensland government is also encouraging workplaces to go back from 7 February. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk: As long as you’re wearing masks indoors, it is safe to gradually return back to work. So, of course, speak with your employer, speak with your supervisors. If you’re part of that vulnerable group, you may decide not to be returning to work at the moment before we get through this wave. So very good advice there for people, but I’m quite sure that employers will be speaking with members of their staff to have a safe return to work. Thank you Mostafa! Of the 13 QLD deaths in the last 24 hours, two of them were aged in their 60s, four in their 70s, 3 in their 80s, three in their 90s and one over the age of 100. Of them five were unvaccinated and eight had two doses. CHO Dr John Gerrard said the number of hospitalisations had reduced overnight. We now have a total of 745 people in hospital being treated for Covid-19. Now, that’s a substantial decrease over yesterday when it was 833. So we have gone from 833 to 745. Of course, we shouldn’t be paying too much attention to a single day, but that is a very substantial decline. So it’s hard not to feel that that is a real phenomenon that we’re observing.” Similarly, the intensive care admissions have declined in the last 24 hours. We have gone from 53 patients in intensive care down to 41. 41 in Queensland public hospitals, and 14 of those patients in Queensland public hospitals are ventilated. And with that I will hand the blog back over to Cait. Palaszczuk has announced Queensland’s back to school plan, saying school will return from Monday 7 February. The premier said masks will be mandatory in high schools, and “strongly encouraged” from year 3 upwards, adding that masks would be made available at schools. Teachers will be able to remove their masks when teaching, and students can remove them when seated. Unlike in NSW, students will not need to take regular rapid antigen tests. RATs will only be provided for students that develop symptoms. Palaszczuk said there was no strong evidence for regular testing: Now, there is no health advice by the chief health officer or by AHPPC that staff or students need regular testing. On top of that, many parents have raised with me concerns about how they would administer these tests to their children. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has stepped up to give a Covid update, saying the state has recorded 13 deaths overnight, all in people aged over 65. 8,580 cases were recorded, with 745 people in hospital and 41 in the ICU. Good morning, Mostafa Rachwani with you for a little while this morning, beginning with the Country Liberal Party, which has just confirmed it has received a letter of resignation from Senator Sam McMahon. In a short statement, the party says the senator’s correspondence will be addressed at the next central council meeting : The Country Liberal Party would like to confirm that we have received a letter of resignation from Senator Sam McMahon. The senator has been advised that her correspondence will be referred to at the next Central Council meeting to be held on the 26 February 2022 for consideration. I am just going to hand you over to Mostafa Rachwani who will take you through the next little bit while I eat some lunch! Wayne Phillips has both feet firmly on dry land as he acts out cutting a whale loose from fishing gear. The 51-year-old head of marine sciences at SeaWorld in Queensland oversees the park’s marine rescue team – four cutters, a coordinator, a captain and a videographer – who untangle humpback whales that have become bound up in rope and net. The cutters, he explains, are armed with a gaff – a graphite pole similar to a fishing rod but topped with a reverse knife that doesn’t cut into the whale if it connects – and work in pairs to combat muscle fatigue. Premier Steven Marshall announced the two deaths were men in their 80s. There are 289 people in hospital. The 1,633 positive cases were reported on Sunday. On Insiders, Anthony Albanese refused to say if he would raise the rate of JobSeeker. Spokesperson for the Antipoverty Centre, Kristin O’Connell has these comments in response: Unemployed people received another slap in the face today when Anthony Albanese said every federal budget should “consider” whether we are in a position to improve the JobSeeker rate. For many of us, callous comments like these have a devastating affect on our mental health. I would ask the opposition leader if he “considers” whether he is in a position to pay for basic necessities on a month-to-month basis, or whether he plans a budget to make sure he can. There is no excuse for our government to force us to live in poverty ever. For any reason. He and every other major party politician are treating our health, our ability to live, as an optional extra when it should be non-negotiable. Unemployment payments at half the poverty line means eight out of 10 people regularly skipping meals. Why is the opposition leader willing to accept this? Andrews said they are expecting tens of thousands of extra enrollments. Obviously we’ve had to recruit to deliver this commitment and we are delivering it in full despite the challenges. We are in the process of recruiting another 6,000 early childhood teachers and educators, and 5,000 construction jobs as we build new classrooms, upgrading the sector so we can double the work and at least have double the benefit for our Victorian community. Andrews says all 79 local government areas from this week will be delivering five hours of three-year-old kinder. The important thing today - a little while ago we promised we would basically double kinder and early childhood education across our state, that we would offer support places to save families thousands of dollars each and every year and we go to five hours of three-year-old kinder. All international evidence shows you if you invest in two years of early-childhood education rather than just one, then you change the life opportunities, you change the lives of so many young people as they get older. This is all about brain development, socialisation, education beginning much earlier. It is great for parents, great for families, great for people to get back into the workforce. It is really obvious. Andrews: 889 people are in hospital, significantly down from 953 yesterday, and a seven-day average of 995. 111 people are intensive care, down from 114 yesterday. 35 are on a ventilator, down from 39 yesterday. And sadly I have to report that 20 Victorians with Covid-19 have passed away, 10 of those in the last two days. We, of course, send our sympathies, condolences and best wishes to their families. This will be an incredibly difficult time for them. In terms of case numbers, 6,110 self-reported positive rapid antigen tests. A further 4,479 people received a positive PCR result. Andrews: Just on childhood vaccinations, 5,396 little ones got their vaccine in state-run centres yesterday, plus, of course, GPs will have done that work, too. 243,883 kids aged 5 to 11 have at least one dose to date. That is good, strong performance in a relatively short period of time. We thank every parent and every little kid for going along and getting vaccinated. Andrews: 63% of Victorians over 70 have had a third dose, 46% in their 60s, and 54% in their 50s. All of those numbers are building, but we do need to do more and do need to do better in terms of matching our second dose, two-dose performance with our third-dose performance. 23,863 doses were delivered yesterday at state sites, plus more that will have gone on in community pharmacy and also in GP practices, and we thank them for the partnership. Premier Daniel Andrews is peaking in Victoria now. More than 2 million Victorians have had a third dose, but still 2.1 million are eligible and have not yet had a third dose, so, again we appeal to all of those Victorians who are eligible. I think it’s only a matter of time before the relevant federal agencies confirm that this is three doses, but it is not two plus a bonus. It really is three doses to be protected not just against really critical illness, but to be protected or minimise the likelihood that you get it and give to the people that you love. From AAP: Matilda, Levi and Theodore have all made their debut in the top 10 of the most popular baby names in NSW for 2021. Amelia and Oliver remain the most popular names for the state’s newest residents, as recorded by the NSW Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages. There were 90,059 babies born in NSW last year, 14 more than the 90,045 who arrived in 2020. Olivia, Charlotte, Isla, Ava, Mia, Grace, Chloe, Ella and Matilda joined Amelia as the most popular girls names of the year. For boys, Oliver was followed by Noah, Jack, Henry, William, Leo, Lucas, Theodore, Levi and Thomas. At least 60% of Australians eligible for a Covid booster have received one, according to new government data. However, an analysis of government figures by Guardian Australia shows the booster rate could be as low as 50% once new, expanded eligibility criteria are taken into account. And, despite new record highs in daily vaccinations, the rollout is still lagging at least a month behind the “ideal” schedule. This is likely due to the continued expansion of eligibility criteria by federal and state governments. The ABC has cut away from the Ash Barty presser, so I will bring you the end of it a bit later. We are expecting the Victorian government to give an update at 11am. Barty is asked what it means to be like Cathy Freeman or Evonne Goolagong: I am not at their level, Evonne and Cathy are exceptional people and they have paved the path for so many of us and I am still in a category of trying to follow in their footsteps and do the best that I can. But to be a small part of an amazing legacy that they created is really cool and I’m trying to create my own pathway and guideline of what they have done for us, as a culture and for our heritage, they are absolute superstars. Any messages to young people considering taking up tennis or doing something like what you did? Absolutely give it a go! That’s the important thing about giving it a go, trying everything, multiple things, and I played a lot of sport and I was younger and fell in love with tennis so if I can encourage any young boys or girls to pick up a racquet and have a go, that would be brilliant. Ash Barty is speaking now in Melbourne. Tasmania has recorded one Covid death, bringing the state’s total to five since the state reopened. Twenty people are in hospital and one is in ICU. 594 cases were reported, which is about 100 less than Saturday. Marshall says people should not travel to the area: We, of course, want to send a very strong message to all South Australians that unless you need to be travelling in the north of South Australia, please stay away. This is a very dangerous situation. The Department of Infrastructure and transport is doing everything they possibly can at the moment to create safe passing access to the north of the state and then further into the Northern Territory but it remains very, very difficult. If you do need to travel, you need to make sure that you are fully provisioned because people can be stranded at very, very short notice. But my key message to South Australians today is do not travel unless you need to be travelling at the moment. We are just jumping to South Australia where Steven Marshall has just announced the Australian defence force will help residents in Coober Pedy with flood relief. We have been successful at working with the Australian defence force for an emergency drop of essential provisions into Coober Pedy, and that could occur over the next 24 hours. We’re very grateful for our friends in the Australian defence force who have been helping South Australia ... (with) our response to coronavirus and now to these extreme weather events. Kean: In addition, we know the commercial landlord sector is doing it tough because of relief they are providing small businesses so it’s worth supporting our commercial landlords by providing them extending the commercial landlord grant, up to $3,000 for those commercial landlords that have provided rent relief to small and medium businesses across NSW. Kean: We are expanding the small businesses fees and rebate package by $1,000, taking it to $3,000. Money can now be spent on rapid antigen tests, we will cover 50% of the costs of rapid antigen tests. Money will come online by March to ensure that we don’t put additional pressure on the supply of rapid antigen tests in the market. It will come online at a time when there are enough rapid antigen test to ensure they are affordable and accessible to everyone in the community. Treasurer Matt Kean is up now. Today I’m announcing the most comprehensive business support package in the nation. This is to help our small business sector to get through the other side so they can support the economy. It includes money to be spent to support businesses. We will pay businesses that have a turnover of less than $50m 20% of their payroll, up to $5,000 each week for the month of February. They have to demonstrate that they’ve experienced a decline of 40% turnover for the month of January and expect that ... to continue for February. Chant is now talking about “son of Omicron”. To confirm we have confirmed some of the BA.2 variant but there is likely to be more. We have had four sequences identified as BA.2. For clarity, this is a sub-lineage, a sort of breakaway ... from the Omicron variant. We know that it is circulating in countries and we have seen it grow significantly – for instance in Denmark, it is now the dominant over BA.1. We are seeing its prevalence, the number of proportion of BA.1 grow in some other countries so we think it may have some growth advantage over the BA.1, over the original Omicron. But at the moment we don’t see that it is presenting anything different clinically in terms of the severity or its response to vaccine but will obviously be watchful, monitor the situation closely. Also, we’ve been using, just to explain, we’ve been using the pathology tests that look for S gene dropout but this variant contains its – retains its S gene so that’s why we need to make for the special genomic sequencing to get a handle on its distribution. Kerry Chant says there will be a change in reporting times. I just want to alert the community and the media to the fact that we will be changing and adjusting our cutoff periods on the first, Tuesday the 1 February. This means the reporting period information will go from 8pm close-off to a 4pm close-off. The reason for that is that we are transitioning our public reporting to allow our epidemiologists and surveillance officers and data analysts that have been working day and night to move into a more sustainable footing. Chant: Of the 52 people who died, three were in their 60s, 11 people were in their 70s, 26 people were in their 80s, 11 were in the 90s, one was aged more than 100 years old. 31 of the 52 deaths were aged care residents, 21 died in aged care facilities, 31 died in hospital, and no one died at home. And of those 31 people, just two had received booster doses. Twenty had received two doses of vaccine, two and received one dose and seven were not vaccinated. Again reinforcing the importance of boosters. One person who died aged under 65 was a gentleman in his 60s – he had received two doses of vaccine and had underlying health conditions. Chant: We’ve got 37.4% of children who have had their first dose, and 40.8% of the eligible population have received the boosters, and I thank those people are coming forward. We currently have 2,663 people in the hospital, including 182 people in ICU, of whom 73 are ventilated. We’ve had 13,524 positive test case results returned, and that includes 6,032 positive rapid antigen test and 7,492 PCR tests. Now, 7,492 positive PCR tests were returned from 50,771 PCR tests. Sadly today we are reporting the deaths of 52 people with Covid, 33 men and 19 women. Dr Kerry Chant is up now. Getting vaccinated will be part of living with Covid, as it is with other infectious diseases such as the flu. I just want to stress to the community, being up-to-date with your immunisations for Covid involves having that booster dose. So people should consider those three doses essential to being up-to-date with your vaccination, and for some, those with underlying conditions which suppress the immune system actually need to have four to be considered up to date. So please check what is right for you and get vaccinated. Perrottet says they are extending the support to landlords who are providing rental relief. This has been a successful program over the last two years. When I’m speaking to businesses across the state, I am noticing that some of that communication has fallen away between landlords and tenants. I want to encourage landlords and tenants today to get in contact with each other. We have provided the opportunity for rental relief in this period of time there is also support there for landlords and tenants alike. What has helped the state over this period of time is that we have worked together. We have looked out for each other. If we continue that over the course of 2022 that will ensure that our businesses will get through. Perrottet is now announcing a financial support package for businesses. Our budget is the strongest in the nation. By being able to do that, we have enabled to deploy our financial might to help businesses get through the difficult times of lockdown, and now we are doing that again. So today’s announcement for small businesses with a turnover of less than $50m, and if you have had a 40% downturn over the summer period, we will provide 20% of your wages bill, to a maximum of $5,000. We know this will help many small businesses who have been doing it tough. Perrottet says boosters are key to keeping everyone safe. If you take a step back from everything over the last two years, our health response has been strong, our economic response has been strong, and that is because of the efforts everybody has made across the state. So please, one last push, people can continue to go and get that booster shot, make an appointment, make that resolution, that appointment today, and ensure that you keep safe during this period of time. Perrottet is up now. He sends condolences go to the family and friends of the 52 people who have died from Covid within the last 24 hours. One point before I talk about the financial package I am announcing today, which I would like to make, there is a sustained push here in our state for boosters. Today we have about 40% of the eligible population in New South Wales who have received a booster shot. There are many appointments available right across our state, we know that just a week ago we had capacity for an additional 100,000 bookings in our hubs alone. We are expecting NSW premier Dominic Perrottet to address media any minute now. The New South Wales government will unveil a $1bn support package for businesses after a summer of exploding Covid-19 infections caused by the Omicron variant. But the scaled-down, jobsaver-style payment for small- and medium-size businesses will be capped at half of what was offered during the Delta wave of infections in 2021, after the federal government refused a request from the NSW government to split the cost of the package. Our political editor Katharine Murphy has just made this important point on Insiders about whether Australia is prepared for this year and schools returning. We could be in for another significant wave of infections as kids return to school and basically infect their parents. In terms of preparedness, again it is all running slightly behind the fact ... I don’t think people have really got their heads around this. The booster program is running well behind where it should be. Compared to the massive sprint for people to get vaccinations here and our high vaccination rates, boosters are running behind schedule. Albanese: I want to run a Hawke-style cabinet government, one which gives responsibility to ministers to reform and part of driving reform in this country is to boost productivity through microeconomic reform, look at how we get growth, look at how we get more national consistency, and you can’t do that if there is no structure to drive it. Speers: Will you stick with it or will you go back to Coag or would you have some sort of hybrid in between? I would stick with having a national cabinet process. It worked well at the beginning before the prime minister walked away from it, essentially, and we walked away from more national consistency, but we also need to have federation reform, and Coag played an important role in that. The sort of productivity benefits that come from microeconomic reform through a national consistency through removing duplication – all of that seems to have disappeared. Speers: Are you saying we should be spending less or more? It was entirely appropriate for the request to step up and spend and to stimulate the economy during the pandemic, just as it was during the global financial crisis. What’s not appropriate is the pork-barrelling and waste that we’ve seen. What is not appropriate is the fact that the commonwealth didn’t put in place any mechanism, for example, on jobkeeper, to ensure that money didn’t go to people who didn’t need it, that were increasing their profits. That is something like $20bn at least has gone to that purpose. Albanese says Labor will boost aged-care funding, but cannot specify by how much. There has been a boost. Two things they haven’t done: One is to tie that funding of actual delivery of better healthcare for aged-care residents in terms of some of the regulatory measures required that were recommended by the royal commission, but the big missing piece in this workforce, we still don’t have a commitment to have a nurse in a nursing home. Speers: So you would do that? We still don’t have a commitment to increase in the number of other care workers in aged care, and we still don’t have a commitment to increases in wages and conditions so that aged-care facilities are able to attract the staff. Insiders’ David Speers: Do you need to boost health funding? Albanese: Quite clearly there will be a need for increased health funding, but there is a need also to look at the particular areas of funding. GPs, for example. One of the reasons there is so much pressure on the hospitals is we have GP shortages in terms of training, we have GP shortages in terms of some of the changes that they’ve made to the Medicare schedule that have had an impact in our regions. Albanese says everyone should be able to get free rapid antigen tests. Not unlimited. You would have limits based upon the health advice, David, but the health advice and the economic consequences are very clear – if you don’t get good health outcomes, you get worse economic outcomes. That’s the lesson of this pandemic in its third year. Anthony Albanese is on Insiders right now. He was asked by who exactly would be able to access free RATs under a Labor government. He says it would be on a basis of need. That means, for example, is that if you’re a teacher or you work at a medical centre – I visited a medical centre in Townsville. The people who work at that medical centre need to be tested every day because they are coming into contact with patients coming into the medical centre. David Speers: They are not getting that at the moment? They are not. There is no supply. Everywhere I’ve been around this entire country, there has been an issue with a failure of supply and that is creating major issues. An aged-care facility – you have aged-care facilities shut around the country because there aren’t enough rapid antigen tests available for the staff, and that is having enormous consequences, David. Stephanie Oatley recalls a day in late December when she needed to get a whole unit of young people experiencing homelessness tested for Covid. “We had a young person who started showing symptoms and a second young person got an itchy throat,” says Oatley. “In the van they hopped. There was only one place open … They got there at 9am, and waited for nine hours.” Contrary to Barnaby Joyce’s position, the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, emphasised in an interview this morning that it’s more important to put businesses and workers before the budget position. Speaking on Sky News before Joyce, Perrottet was asked why Scott Morrison did not want to be part of the economic support package to be announced by the NSW government today. Perrottet replied: Look, I mean, as a former treasurer, I have always advocated for some federal funding as we’ve gone through the ... the Delta and the Alpha variants in the past. Perrottet pointed out that the lockdowns of those earlier waves put businesses in a difficult position and many people had lost their jobs. The premier said the Omicron wave was a different “phase” but that didn’t mean people weren’t hurting. He said there was no doubt that over the summer period confidence had dropped and many businesses had suffered. We’re announcing [this package] today and I think that will provide that support for businesses who had a very difficult January ... and we’ve always said in our state that we’ll put businesses and workers before the budget. That’s been our success in New South Wales over the last two years. When we come through all of it want to make sure that we’ve kept everyone in work, we’ve kept businesses open and the strength of the New South Wales budget position and our economy going into this pandemic has allowed us to ensure that we can invest to get everyone through. Pressed by Sky News interviewer Kieran Gilbert why Morrison had not chipped in, particularly with the looming election, Perrottet said: Well that’s really a matter for them to make a decision on. I know our treasurer has been in contact with [them]. Gilbert: What’s your understanding as to their reason? I don’t have an understanding but what I know is that from the state’s perspective, we will always provide that financial support to have businesses’ back, to keep people in work. It’s not just a health pandemic in terms of those issues. It’s also one that affects businesses and affects the economy. NSW has again hit a grim milestone as it records its deadliest day of the Covid pandemic with 52 deaths, up from the 49 recorded on Saturday. Victoria has recorded 20 deaths, down slightly from the 31 lives lost on Saturday – which was one of the state’s deadliest days. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, has denied the federal government is “penny pinching” by not contributing to new support packages to help businesses through the Omicron wave. The NSW government is expected to announced that it is committing more than $1bn in economic support for businesses, particularly targeted to small to medium businesses, with some $700m of this package earmarked for a new jobsaver-style scheme, the Nine newspapers report. Joyce, in an interview on Sky News this morning, was asked why the federal government was not stepping up to the plate, in contrast to its approach during the Delta wave. He said: The Morrison government has paid billions and billions and billions of dollars out from jobseeker, jobkeeper, stimulus to the airline industry … payment towards obviously even concession card holder RAT tests – it goes on and on and on. So I don’t think it’s penny pinching. I’m quite happy to look at the amount of money that the commonwealth has put forward towards New South Wales, not that I’ve got a problem with the NSW, but I’m quite happy to look forward to comparing how much we’ve put forward to NSW, Queensland and any other state and what those states have put forward themselves. Asked whether $1bn was a drop in the ocean, especially with a federal election looming, Joyce said: “Drops in the ocean all add up.” He argued the government could not “keep putting things on the credit card” and had to make “hard decisions”. You’ve got to get to a point where you say, well, we’re going to live with this [virus] and we’ve got to move on because the more we pay out on Omicron and Covid campaigns is less money for NDIS, less money for defence, less money for education, less money for health. This is not an unlimited supply, unlimited supply of money … If every time someone turns up and says I want money you give it to them, you’re going to go out the back door. Last week Joyce apologised for saying “people are not dying” during the Omicron wave. Welcome to Sunday. Before we get into it I want to say good morning to everyone, but especially Ash Barty – who became the first local to win the Australian Open single title in 40 years. Among active players, only Barty and the sport’s four ‘GOATs’ – greatest of all-time contenders – Serena Williams, Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic have snared majors on clay, grass and hard courts. “I feel very humble to be in such a select group,” Barty said in the jubilant aftermath to her 6-3 7-6 (7-2) win on Rod Laver Arena on Saturday night. “To be honest, I don’t really feel like I belong with those champions of our sport. “There’s still work to be done, without a doubt. I’m still very much learning and trying to refine my craft and trying to learn every single day to get better and better. Backing up this incredible win was Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis who beat Matthew Ebden and Max Purcell to win in the men’s doubles final. In non-tennis news, more than 1m rapid antigen tests are being delivered to NSW schools, according to the Australian. More than 3,000 schools and 5,000 childcare centres had already received their tests, NSW Premier Dominic Perrottet said. The federal health department has detected a “very low number” of cases of the BA.2 sub-variant known widely as the “son of Omicron” in more states and territories. The sub-variant has been detected in more than 40 countries and there are concerns it may be more contagious than Omicron. In politics, prime minister Scott Morrison has re-stoked debate about border security by issuing a stern vaccination warning to US rap star Kanye West. The 22-time Grammy winner has scheduled an Australian stadium tour in March but is widely known for his anti-immunisation stance and is yet to indicate whether or not he’s vaccinated. “The rules are you have to be fully vaccinated,” Morrison told reporters on Queensland’s Sunshine Coast on Saturday. “Those are the rules. They apply to everybody, as people have seen most recently.” And women could hold the key to getting insecure men to try eating less meat, according to a new study about vegan food. Men who view meat consumption as a central tenet of their masculinity are a particularly hard market for vegan fare, and according to recent research, women could be the answer to broadening their horizons. While they feared their mates would make fun of them for eating a vegan burger or showing up to a barbecue with a round of plant-based patties, if their girlfriend took them to a vegan restaurant, those fears dissipated. “It was very interesting the importance of romantic relationships, some of the men were saying ‘if she likes it I’ll do it’. There’s a lot of soft power in the decision as to what kind of food men would select,” Curtin University sustainability professor Dora Marinova told AAP. Let’s get into it! With Australian Associated Press.Waiting for Russia to invade Ukraine feels a bit like Waiting for Godot. In this edgy reworking of Samuel Beckett’s masterpiece, Russia’s leader, Vladimir Putin, is cast, appropriately, as the restless Vladimir while the US president, Joe Biden, is the bowler-hatted Estragon, frequently dozing off. The play’s central conceit is that the mysterious Godot, expected at any moment, never actually arrives. After Russia agreed last week to keep talking, Ukraine’s citizens have reason to hope the crisis will turn out to be a comparably vacuous non-event – a peculiarly Putin-esque contribution to the theatre of the absurd. The border standoff, which commenced in earnest in November, has lasted so long that the tea leaf-reading Biden reckons Russia “has to do something”. This penetrating Mystic Meg analysis is not necessarily correct. No one, perhaps not even Putin, knows whether “something” will happen today, next month, or never. Continuing the existentialist theme, even the definition of “invasion” is endlessly debated. Biden anticipates a D-day-scale Russian operation. But many analysts expect any attack to be fast, covert and asymmetrical, using special forces, sabotage and cyberwarfare, as in the Donbas in 2014. While this slightly surreal waiting game continues, it’s possible, and instructive to assess what damage has already been done – and which individuals and countries are winning or losing so far in Ukraine’s phoney war. For example, Annalena Baerbock, Germany’s brand-new foreign minister and co-leader of the Greens, has had a good war to date. Ignoring chauvinist sneers about her inexperience and gender, she faced down Sergei Lavrov, her grisly Russian counterpart, when they met recently in Moscow. In contrast, her boss, Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz, is having a miserable time of it. His prevarication over what anti-Russia sanctions Berlin may support, and his blocking of arms supplies to Ukraine, has raised wider questions about his competence – and about German leadership in Europe. Having long resisted American pressure to scrap the newly completed Nord Stream 2 gas Baltic pipeline from Russia, Scholz last week appeared to cave. It’s been an unlucky beginning for Angela Merkel’s less popular successor. France’s Emmanuel Macron, facing a spring presidential election, is struggling to reconcile his vision of European “strategic autonomy” with the reality of continuing dependence on Nato, amid offstage jeering from Britain’s Boris Johnson. “We will never give up dialogue with Moscow,” Macron declares. But his bridge-building is repeatedly undermined by Putin’s recidivism, symbolised by the 2020 poisoning of opposition leader Alexei Navalny. Undeterred, Macron continues to pursue “de-escalation” and a “European solution”. Yet how real is that? Putin insists on dealing with the US, not the EU, which he disdains and has deliberately bypassed. The so-called “Normandy format” talks finally resumed in Paris last week. But Brussels, sliding towards irrelevance, is the big loser so far in the undeclared war for Ukraine. The opposite may be said, surprisingly, of Nato. Obituaries were written for the 30-member alliance after last year’s Afghanistan humiliation. Macron famously declared it “brain dead”. Yet now, thanks to master-strategist Putin, Nato is experiencing a mini-renaissance. “Frontline” east European states have scurried under its protective umbrella, appealing successfully for more troops and weapons. There is revived talk of membership for Finland and Sweden. Even more improbably, Putin’s Beckett-like inscrutability has changed Washington’s calculations, as analyst Paul Taylor noted. “Putin’s grandstanding has dragged the US back deeper into European security, just when two successive American presidents had tried to pivot Washington’s strategic focus toward China,” Taylor wrote. This is a big plus for Moscow’s ally, President Xi Jinping, who feels the same way about Taiwan as Putin does about Ukraine. Other authoritarian regimes are also enjoying the drama. The heat is off Iran’s mullahs. And who among western leaders is focusing on mayhem in Myanmar, Yemen or Tigray – or on resurgent Islamic State terror in Syria and the Sahel? Ukraine’s unlikely president, Volodymyr Zelensky, formerly an itinerant thespian and comic, eschews a bowler hat – but is playing well to foreign audiences in the role of valiant underdog. Concerns about official corruption in Kyiv, democratic deficits, and Donbas intransigence have been brushed aside by the likes of Liz Truss, the UK foreign secretary. In her simplistic analysis, it’s about freedom versus tyranny. Truss, a jet-setting Margaret Thatcher imitator, is not having a good war. Like her predecessor Dominic Raab during the Afghan withdrawal, she went walkabout as the Ukraine crisis peaked, blundering around in Australia when she and the baying, terminally distracted Johnson should have been leading the charge to keep the peace in Europe. What of the principal architect of this protracted imbroglio? The US-based Russia expert, Fiona Hill, says Putin is winning without firing a shot. “He has the US right where he wants it,” Hill wrote. A “master of coercive inducement”, he was advancing his overall aim to evict America from Europe to belatedly avenge the Soviet Union’s defeat. Maybe. It’s true Putin has succeeded in forcing the US to focus on Russia’s security concerns, including future missile deployments and Nato exercises. He will keep up the military and diplomatic pressure for now, to see what concessions and freebies he can get. But Washington will not agree to freeze Ukraine out of Nato or remake Europe’s post-cold war security structures, and Putin surely knows it. Meanwhile, his aggressive tactics have rallied the fractious western democracies and stiffened opposition to his regime. While a watching world is waiting for Putin, Biden is threatening to sanction him personally, as urged in this space last week. Like a thief in the night looking to see what he can grab, Russia’s leader makes a pariah of himself and his country on the global stage. War or no war, real or imaginary, that look likes defeat.The circumference of Nimo Abdi Duh’s upper arm measures just 12cm and, while the number means nothing to her, it does to the health workers treating her. Nimo, two, like so many children in the arid lowlands of Ethiopia, is suffering from malnutrition. “We have been affected by the drought,” says her mother, Shems Dire, looking anxiously on. “We don’t have milk to give to the children. My child is sick due to lack of food, and this happened because of the drought … Our cattle have been harmed by the drought. We have lost so many. “We pray to Allah for rain.” In a country already grappling with humanitarian strife brought on by civil war, aid workers and local officials say that another crisis is slowly unfolding, as severe drought plagues much of southern and north-eastern Ethiopia. By mid-March, it is estimated that more than 6.8 million people in the affected regions are expected to be in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. According to Unicef, almost 850,000 children in those areas will be severely malnourished this year due to a combination of drought, conflict and economic downturn. “We have had the failure of three consecutive rainy seasons,” says Gianfranco Rotigliano, Unicef’s country director. “If in April the rain comes, things will get better. But, if not, then we will have something that is comparable to what we saw in 1999 or 1993 to 94.” Those years brought drought-provoked crises to Ethiopia that saw millions go hungry, and some die from starvation. Now, to help get essential supplies to those who most need them, Unicef is appealing for £23.7m, for, among other things, water trucking, the rehabilitation of wells and child nutrition. If that money isn’t raised, Rotigliano warns: “As they say in west Africa, ce sera la catastrophe [it will be a disaster].” With an estimated 4.4 million people facing critical water shortages, the lowlands of Ethiopia’s south-eastern Somali region and parts of Oromia are thought to be most severely affected by the drought. Abdi Farah Ahmed, from the regional health bureau in Jijiga, Somali, says the lack of rainfall – which locally came on top of a locust invasion – caused crops to fail, livestock to die, and malnutrition to rise. Many people had left their homes, he adds. According to a survey in December, more than a fifth of under-fives in Somali are suffering from global acute malnutrition. Abdi Farah says the number of those suffering from severe acute malnutrition (SAM) was also rising. Last year, the average number of people admitted to regional healthcare services with SAM was more than 9,000, he says. “But in December 2021, the number of new SAM cases admitted at the health facilities was 11,588. This means a rise of 18.5% [on the previous month],” he adds. Zainab Wolie, a mother of seven children from Saglo village in the Somali region, says she had been hit hard by the lack of rainfall. She used to sell some of her goats to supplement her income, but she lost almost half of them to the drought. “We depend on our cattle. We lost many of them. Who knows, people may also die next? I haven’t seen such a drought before … Five years ago, there was drought in our area, but at least we had food. But now we don’t have enough food for our family,” she says. She is far from the only one to have suffered the loss of livestock. The land of Saglo is strewn with the carcasses of animals who died in the drought. Cows, sheep, goats, camels and donkeys have perished – and their owners are struggling to survive in their absence. “The situation is desperate,” says Ayes Mohammed, a mother of five from Gebiass village in Somali, who has lost 20 cows and 80 goats and sheep to the drought. “Goats and sheep do not make it. For the cows, there is still some hope if we get fodder soon. I worry about my children. I feed them borrowing food from the neighbours for the last 10 days. But today, I am glad that the government distributed food in our village. I got 20kg of rice and 20kg of sugar.” For Abdirahman Ali Hussein, a healthcare worker in the Korahey zone of Somali, it is clear that the government is not, however, going to be able to deal with the problem alone. The drought is also affecting parts of the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ Region in the country’s south-west, and Afar in the north-east, scene of much of the recent fighting between Tigrayan rebel forces and federal government troops. “The government is trying to supply everything but there is overload,” says Abdirahman. Health services were under severe pressure due to the increase in malnutrition and internal migration. “For example, for one health centre we’re [supposed to be] receiving 25,000 people,” he says. “But now with this drought sometimes you can see 40,000 to 50,000 people.” From nutritional support for children and breastfeeding mothers to essential medicines, food, and water, “we need to scale up everything”, he says. People “are suffering, and they need urgent support for everything”. Rotigliano, who was recently in the Somali region, urges donors to give money now before the crisis deepened even further. “When you have the pictures of the children who are, you know, three years old and they weigh three kilos, then everybody is putting the money upfront – but do we really want to get there?” he says. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Four months after getting sick with Covid, Anne-Héloise Dautel couldn’t eat anything at all. “I just wanted to vomit, I was gagging at everything around me,” she said. “I couldn’t even stand my own smell. I was showering five times a day.” Coffee, toothpaste, shampoo and roast meat were the worst. By the time she went to hospital, she weighed just 46kg. Severe weight loss and kidney failure are some of the impacts of smell and taste distortions which leave people unable to eat or drink things they loved, like coffee or bacon, because they smell like rotting flesh or sewage. The loss of taste or smell was identified as a Covid symptom very early in the pandemic, and there is growing evidence that a substantial number of people go on to develop long-term distortions to their senses. AbScent, a UK-based support group for people with taste and smell disorders, occupied a tiny niche before the pandemic, with 1,500 members. Now it has 76,000 worldwide. Scientists at the Karolinska Institute in Sweden last week published a study that found nearly half of the infected people it studied in the first wave had experienced distorted smell, a condition known as parosmia. A third were less able to detect smells, according to the pre-print, which has not yet been peer reviewed. The Office for National Statistics estimates that more than 500,000 people in the UK have been suffering Covid symptoms for more than a year. “There’s been an explosion of these kinds of syndromes and symptoms,” said Simon Gane, a consultant rhinologist at the Royal National Ear, Nose and Throat and Eastman Dental Hospitals in London. “It’s much more widespread than before.” Many sufferers of parosmia and dysgeusia – the distorted sense of taste – began to experience the condition weeks or months after recovering from Covid, he said. Some had developed a total loss of smell – anosmia – and had started to recover it. “I felt I was losing my brain. They taught me to try to remember how to smell,” said Dautel, a 32-year-old architect who lives in London and spent 10 weeks at a hospital in Rennes, Brittany, being treated alongside stroke patients. Ellie Phillips, a TV and radio presenter, had Covid in January 2021 then started to notice problems four months later. The 34-year-old abandoned her lockdown habit of going for coffee, then the odour of oil in a frying pan also became unbearable. Her friends thought she must be pregnant – many women develop aversions to types of food during pregnancy – and then at a wedding reception she was confronted by a bruschetta laden with melted cheese. “It was like sewage and rotting flesh,” she said. “I’ve smelt open cancer wounds – that’s the closest thing I can say. I was literally sick in the toilet for 20 minutes. I was too embarrassed to tell my friends. When I got home things got progressively worse.” Phillips lost a substantial amount of weight while doctors tried to diagnose her illness. Now she is surviving on high-calorie protein shakes intended for cancer patients having chemotherapy. Other cases are equally distressing for sufferers. Christine Dowling’s 16-year-old granddaughter cannot even drink water. Jane Cooper, an artist and marketing director, finds shampoo smells like rotting fish and rice like white spirit. For weeks she thought an animal had died in her flat. An NHS worker developed parosmia two months after losing her smell through Covid. “One of the hardest parts is being intimate with my partner as he doesn’t smell how I remember,” she said. “I couldn’t even bring myself to say this to him as I know how upsetting this would be.” Many have turned for support to Chrissi Kelly, who founded AbScent after trying to recover her sense of smell after a viral infection in 2012. She has funded and conducted research into the condition with Dr Jane Parker at Reading University. Their most recent paper pinpointed 15 molecular triggers in coffee that trigger parosmia. “Our olfactory sense is there to alert us to potential danger, and people with parosmia search for words like sewage, burning, electrics to describe it,” said Kelly. “When you question them more closely, they use those words to signify the greatest amount of disgust. “But the impact goes much deeper. Often people don’t believe them, employers don’t believe them. But think about how important smell is to communicate.” Dautel said she almost died after leaving her gas hob on. “My partner came back from a run and started screaming at me to get out of the flat.” But smaller things can be dangerous too. “Morrisons are getting rid of the expiry date on milk and say people should be doing the sniff test. But it smells rotten to me anyway.” There is no known cure, and although some parosmics find smell training can be helpful, it is not clinically proven. Dautel remains upbeat. She has started to enjoy food again, 15 months later, and has been trying to describe the indescribable smells she experiences. “It’s been a really long process, but today I ate chicken,” she said. “I’d never have been able to do that six months ago. And it was enjoyable. So there’s hope.”If the great campaigners for free speech of the past, such as Baruch Spinoza or Mary Wollstonecraft or Frederick Douglass, were alive today, “they would surely declare the 21st century an unprecedented golden age”. So suggests Jacob Mchangama in his new history of free speech. It’s a claim that might raise a few eyebrows. This, after all, is an age in which, from China to Saudi Arabia, dictatorial rulers imprison and kill political opponents with impunity. An age in which governments in formally democratic nations such as India use the judicial system to try to silence critics. An age in which more than 1,400 journalists have been murdered in 30 years. An age in which governments across the globe desperately seek ways of curbing speech on social media they consider dangerous. And in which, in the west, there is a constant debate about “cancel culture” and the erosion of academic freedom. Mchangama, a leading campaigner for free speech, is not trying to dismiss the reality of contemporary censorship. He is suggesting, rather, that in historical terms, we have never been more free to speak our minds. But this leads to a paradox. The very fact that, certainly in the west, we live in far more open societies has led many to be sanguine and dismissive of the threat that restrictions on speech can impose upon us. The very success of historical struggles can obscure the lessons of those struggles. Historically, the demand for free speech was at the heart of the fight for social justice. From the challenge posed by freethinkers in 10th-century Islam to the abolitionist struggle in 19th-century America, from the suffragette movement to campaigns for liberation from colonial rule, there has long been a recognition that democracy, social justice and free speech go hand in hand and that censorship was a weapon wielded by the powerful to stymie social change. Today, though, the issues seem more confusing. Much censorship, particularly in liberal democracies, is imposed in the name of protecting not the powerful but the powerless or the vulnerable: laws against hate speech, for instance, or restricting the scope of racists or bigots. And where once the left was clearly opposed to censorship, many now support restrictions in the name of the progressive good. As the left has vacated the ground of free speech, the right and the far right have become encamped upon it. This has further distorted the debate, the cause of free speech coming to be seen as the property of the right, making many on the left even more wary of the idea. One of the ironies, though, is that many arguments used today to defend speech restrictions as protections for the powerless are often the same as those once used by the powerful to protect their interests from challenge. When the US abolitionist newspaper editor Elijah Lovejoy was murdered in 1837 by a pro-slavery mob in Illinois, a southern newspaper blamed him for his own death, as he had “utterly disregarded the sentiments of a large majority of the people of that place”. A century and a half later, we heard the same arguments in calls for the banning of The Satanic Verses or in claims that the Charlie Hebdo cartoonists were responsible for their own deaths, because they, too, had “disregarded the sentiments” of many Muslims. Or take hate speech. In the 1950s, there was a major debate about the wording of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, one of the seminal documents of human rights, adopted by the UN in 1966. The draft proposal sought to prohibit “any advocacy of national, racial or religious hostility that constitutes an incitement to violence”. The Soviet Union wanted to delete the reference to violence and make any form of hatred illegal. Such a move, warned Eleanor Roosevelt, chair of the drafting committee, “would be extremely dangerous” as “any criticism of public or religious authorities might all too easily be described as incitement to hatred and consequently prohibited”. Half a century on, Roosevelt’s warning seems highly prescient. Instances in which the expansion of speech has facilitated the spread of obnoxious or dangerous ideas are well-documented: from the newly invented printing press giving fuel to witch-hunts in early modern Europe; to newspapers playing a major role in whipping up the racist frenzy that led to lynchings in 19th-century America; to the media’s role in the 20th century in fomenting hatred against Jews in Germany and Tutsis in Rwanda. Yet we can also see from the historical record that while it is necessary to legally curtail incitement to violence, trying to combat hatred more broadly through censorship can be both ineffective and dangerous. One of the deepest-held beliefs about the dangers of free speech is the Weimar myth: the belief that unrestrained freedom of speech allowed the Nazis to spread their poisonous ideas in 1920s Germany and that restrictions on speech and the suppression of antisemitic propaganda would have stalled the rise of Hitler. In fact, the Weimar republic, while constitutionally supportive of free speech, possessed what we would now call hate speech laws and powers to shut down newspapers. Hundreds of Nazis were prosecuted under these laws. Between 1923 and 1933, the viciously antisemitic newspaper Der Stürmer was either confiscated or tried in court on 36 occasions and its editor, Julius Streicher, twice jailed. Many scholars argue that despite such laws Weimar courts were unduly lenient towards hate-mongers and that judges sympathised with Nazi aims. Other studies suggest that such leniency was the exception, not the rule. Wherever the truth lies in this debate, the primary failure in preventing the rise of Nazism was not legal but political. And this is true of hatred and bigotry today. We often forget, too, that the victims of censorship are more often than not minorities and those fighting for social change. From Indian climate change activists being charged with “promoting enmity between communities” to British police charging feminists with “hate crimes”, censorship in the name of “preventing hatred” is widely used to target social activists. We are the inheritors of centuries of struggle against restrictions on what we are able to say. If we forget the lessons of those struggles, we are in danger also of letting the gains of those struggles slip away. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columistFor 40 years this Brighton apartment, set on an elm-shaded, stucco-fronted square in the city’s upper reaches, was the home of opera director John Cox, who used it as a bolthole while he was working at Glyndebourne. A creative crowd, including David Hockney, (his boldly graphic designs for The Rake’s Progress are a Glyndebourne perennial) mingled in the garden, screened by a heady curtain of white wisteria. When the season ended, Hockney’s parting gift to Cox was the art deco fireplace, which brings a dramatic flourish to the sitting room. Today, the ground-floor apartment has a suitably theatrical new owner. Gary McCann, a rising star of opera design (he has productions opening in Venice, Bologna and Bilbao) bought the apartment from Cox in 2016. It has remained “pretty much unchanged” since then, says the historically minded set and costume designer, who describes the architecture as a “Frankenstein’s monster” of eras. “It was converted in the 1920s. There are elements of early Victoriana mixed with the 1980s.” There is also no central heating and sea gales make the sash windows rattle. “But I like all those layers of the past; that sense of continuity,” says McCann cutting a vintage dash in his trademark, three-piece tweed suit and pocket watch, moustache waxed and twirled. “When I go to the barber’s I ask for a Nicholas II. I describe my style as a cross between an Edwardian gentleman and a World War II dispatch rider,” he continues, gesturing to the swirling 1940s motorcyclist’s coat hanging next to his collection of bowler hats, displayed like props in a period drama. In another neat twist, it was Cox who gave McCann his first operatic break. “I’d had a steady but tortoise-like career working in theatre. But in the mid-2000s, I needed work so I wrote to Cox who I’d met when we lived near each other in Greenwich. He offered me a job on Fidelio at Garsington. We became friends after that. When he decided to sell this place he asked if I’d be interested in buying it.” There is a stage set feel to the eccentric layout. From the tiny, angled hallway, the rooms fan out ahead, offering tantalising glimpses. It was Cox who installed the saloon doors, which open with a swagger on to the narrow bathroom with its faded, chequerboard Lino floor. The kitchen opposite has the original electric cooker and rustic surfaces. The large bedroom overlooks the pear tree in the garden; at the front, the sitting room, illuminated by three bay windows, still has the plush brown 1980s carpet: “It’s the one thing I don’t like.” Over time, McCann has tweaked the colour schemes – from dark greys to soft maritime blues and greens. There is not a stick of new furniture or art here. “Everything came from junk shops,” he says, pointing out the 1930s pottery and midcentury sideboard and the peach-tinted art deco mirror that complements Hockney’s fire surround. Cox bequeathed the early Anglepoise lamp and the elaborate fire screen, with its orange tree motif: “It’s Arts and Crafts, but the mix works well,” says McCann. Combining antique and modern “with a dramatic twist” is what McCann excels at. “I’ve always liked mixing references to classical architecture with contemporary elements – it adds an edge without alienating audiences.” One broadsheet critic described a recent production of the comic opera Der Rosenkavalier as a “swirling, gargantuan” feast of baroque plasterwork, as the “best production in 50 years”. His 1980s childhood, growing up on a council estate near Belfast during the height of the Troubles against a backdrop of “crude but scenic” protest murals and bomb explosions, has also seeped in to his productions. “Quite often there will be images of destruction in my sets; things have been damaged or compromised. I like to convey the sense that beauty is fragile.” Like characters from one of his productions, a cast of military types gazes down from the sitting room walls. McCann found the gilt-framed portraits at markets in Berlin and Vienna, where he has designed productions for the State Opera: “All these people had extraordinary lives. So you could say I’ve created my own ancestors – even if I do feel they’re judging me sometimes.” One RAF officer is by AR Thompson, a war artist who painted the murals on the Queen Mary. There are two versions of the same aristocrat: confident and youthful in 1904; corpulent and time-worn after the First World War. “Telling stories is my job, so I was intrigued by the narrative behind the paintings.” In the bedroom is a dark landscape is of Ashington, Northumberland. The mining village, with its slagheap and terraces, was the birthplace of the 1930s Ashington Group of self-taught painters, most of whom were miners. In 2007, McCann designed the “pared-back Brechtian” setting for Lee Hall’s stage version of their story. The Pitmen Painters transferred from sell-out runs at the National to Broadway. Nearby, the low, chrome-framed bed is another Coxian legacy. McCann thinks that the headboard – made from an old panelled door – may have come from a Glyndebourne set. One day McCann will redo the apartment and make it “more coherent”. But he will tread lightly. “It will take me a long time to plan because there’s so much character here. You can’t just rip it out and put in a bog-standard kitchen. I need to conserve its atmosphere of something that will last forever.” One element will never change. The Hockney fireplace is, as he says, “embedded in the DNA of this place”.MPs will be asked this week to end the “shocking” practice of making cystic fibrosis patients in England pay prescription charges for the drugs that they need to stay alive. The condition is the nation’s most common inherited, life-threatening disease and affects more than 7,000 people. Prescription charges, first introduced in 1952, were abolished in 1965; then, when they were reintroduced in 1968, exemptions were made for those suffering from long-lasting ailments such as cancers, diabetes and epilepsy. But children with cystic fibrosis were not expected to live to adulthood and so the condition was not exempted. As a result of new medicines and the creation of special physiotherapy regimes, cystic fibrosis patients now live well into their 40s. “Medicine and society have moved on, so should the exemption list to reflect modern-day experience,” said Paul Maynard, the Conservative MP for Blackpool North and Cleveleys, who will call for an end to prescription charges for the disease at a special Commons debate on the illness this week. “As someone who has a long-term medical condition – epilepsy – it has always amazed me that adults with cystic fibrosis have to pay for their prescriptions whilst I do not.” Cystic fibrosis is triggered when a person inherits a mutated gene from each parent. This affects the behaviour of chloride ions inside the body, which become disrupted and impair the ability to produce healthy digestive juices, sweat and mucus. Bodily fluids become thick, sticky and clog up lungs, digestive tracts and other organs. Sometimes enzymes from the pancreas cannot reach the stomach, so patients cannot digest food. “Patients have to take a significant number of drugs every day just to stay alive and also need hours of physiotherapy and exercise,” said Becky Kilgariff, head of information and support at the Cystic Fibrosis Trust. Often patients find it very difficult to maintain jobs and some live with extremely strained finances, she said. Recent cases highlighted by the trust include that of Danielle, who has struggled with the sudden recent increase in her energy bills and was having to decide between putting on her heating or buying food. In another case, a patient called Tom required intravenous antibiotics that could only be given in hospital. This disrupted his work and affected his income, threatening his ability to pay for food and heating for his young family. In both cases, the trust was able to help through its winter hardship support fund but its staff argue it is deeply unfair that – on top of the problems affecting patients – they still have to pay prescription charges for the drugs they need to stay alive. In some cases, patients are able to buy an annual pre-payment certificate costing £108, but financial vulnerability still means that for many the cost poses a significant burden on their day-to-day living. “It is shocking that people who have a lifelong and life-limiting condition still have to pay for the drugs they need every day due to rules that were drawn up when people with cystic fibrosis weren’t expected to live beyond childhood,” added David Ramsden, the trust’s chief executive. “We are seeing how people in our community are facing tough economic choices as the cost of living increases, and it is the time to make this change.” Crucially, people in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland do not have to pay prescription charges and campaigners say it is time the government stopped penalising people in England, especially those with cystic fibrosis and other long-term ailments that are not on an outdated exemption list.Every night my boyfriend and I have been sitting on the sofa and hungrily watching strangers break up. Couples Therapy is a docu-series filmed in the New York office of elegant psychoanalyst Dr Orna Guralnik as she deftly sieves the lumps out of four relationships. Once you have got over the bogglement at the idea that these couples have agreed to be so vulnerable in front of this many cameras, knowing every eye-roll and revelation will be seen by millions (including their dads, bosses and exes), you can relax into the radical entertainment. And some time after that, perhaps in bed, or when flossing your teeth, questions might appear. Questions like, “Do I interrupt like she does?” and, “Could that guy not perhaps take his awful denim cap off inside?” and, “How can any of us hope to understand each other when we can’t even understand ourselves?” The structure of a couple is one I am familiar with and fascinated by. Why (I ask myself fondly, 18 years into a relationship that could not be more traditional if it wore a blazer and drank real ale) do we choose this partnership, generation after generation, morning after morning? Two strangers leaning against each other like two cards trying to make a shelter. I think often of the tree that grew around a bike, evolving into something monsterish and beautiful that would never ride again. When the bike was left chained there in 1914, the tree treated it like a wound, scarring and scabbing itself around the frame – now the bike is more than 7ft from the ground, and the tree a living metaphor for every long-term relationship on this bended, burning earth. I like it, I suppose. Is that enough? As some people are beginning to question the benefits of monogamous coupledom (and happier to discuss their mental health) it’s becoming more common for young people to visit couples counsellors, previously assumed a sort of hospice for those in the death throes of a cooling marriage. One 2017 survey put the number of millennials who had attended couples counselling at 51%, and in 2018 counselling charity Relate reported a 30% increase in UK clients under 40 in four years. Part of this shift is due, surely, to the way shows such as Couples Therapy (and Esther Perel’s podcast Where Should We Begin? which similarly invites an audience into real-life therapy sessions) have pulled back a curtain on the previously shadowed practice of therapy, one still stained by ideas of shame and failure. And how we lap them up! How we love to watch! What joy is greater, in the first winter of 2022, than wild swimming in the frosty depths of another couple’s disappointments? Is there anything better than watching a marriage transform into a white ball of blood and fur from the comfort of your living room? There is the therapist, there is the couple, there is the relationship, and there is me, drinking Lady Grey with a raw sort of glee. Was the husband or was he not (and here I’ll quote directly from episode one, featuring linen-shirted antihero Mau) entitled to “zero responsibility” for the birthday orgy his wife of 23 years had planned for him, and as much “spectacular, enthusiastic and genuine” sex as he wanted, without putting in “any work on his part”? When Dr Guralnik earnestly said it was “hard to meet him” I shrieked into my biscuit. But the questions each show left me with kept reverberating. How can a person manage the psychological bruises left by historical trauma in order to maintain a trusting relationship? How important are feelings when they knock against facts? The biggest thing I’ve taken away from being a voyeur to other people’s therapy sessions, though, is the knowledge that listening is difficult, and successfully communicating feelings we can’t even articulate to ourselves almost impossible. Not everyone can or should have therapy, but what I’m left with after a rich but exhausting binge-watch of Guralnik being wise and fabulous, is the realisation that we should all be taught how to listen. How could life be, if talking was not the only communicative skill applauded and prized? Rather than simply being a mirror, hearing as a passive state, I would relish the chance to learn how to listen in a way that allowed me to hear the subconscious whirrings, understand my own lingering soundtrack, hear what somebody is really trying to say. You glimpse, in soft moments, a world where we could understand ourselves enough to show real empathy for others, or one where we can really try to know the people we say we love. It’s funny – though the cameras initially seem horribly invasive, after a while their focus reminds the viewer how important it is to pay attention to the person who isn’t speaking. How what’s being said is affecting them, and how they might misunderstand it; what memories, politics, judgments are also playing in their ears. Beneath that horrifying denim cap. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanThe judges met, in private, over a two-day period in May, for what might seem like a minor task: to choose the fifth member of an elections board in rural Spalding county, Georgia. But the meetings were by no means routine. There is no record of their vote or their discussions. The interviews with Democratic and Republican applicants were conducted in private, via Zoom calls. And the position was only vacant because of a new law, specific only to Spalding county, recently introduced by the area’s two Republican state lawmakers. In the end, the judges chose a Republican, someone who had never served in a government position related to elections, to be the fifth and deciding vote for the Spalding county board of elections and registration. Almost immediately, that Republican, James Newland, cast that deciding vote to cancel Sunday voting – a historically heavy turnout day for Black, largely Democratic voters. It was just the latest blow to the county’s Democrats, and another loss for a party that is losing control of election boards across the state as Republican laws make GOP takeovers possible. But what happened in Spalding county is also just a fragment of GOP efforts nationwide to take over the apparatus of American elections. Their goal? To secure party control at every level of government – from the White House to state legislatures and election offices, all the way down to the precinct level, by employing thousands of poll watchers to potentially call into question Democratic votes. Across the US, Republican legislatures have introduced more than 200 bills aimed at reducing local control over elections and restrict voting access, according to the States United Democracy Center. All of it is aimed at ensuring that Republicans will have control over voting and elections rules, in support of Donald Trump’s false claims of widespread voter fraud in 2020. And the Peach State is ground zero, thanks to its increasingly central roles – as a swing state, and as the center of bogus disputes over the 2020 election results. The turn of events in Spalding county might have come as a shock to locals – a majority Democratic election board, with three Black women, becoming majority Republican, with two white men and another of Cherokee descent, virtually overnight – but Spalding county is no outlier. In at least five other Georgia counties, local election authorities have been restructured in favor of Republicans. It’s all part of the same story: the nationwide push to place GOP officials in positions of authority over elections. “The news isn’t really covering it because it’s so local,” said Zachery Fuller, a political organizer and former Democratic candidate for office in Griffin, the county seat. “But when it happens to so many counties it’s the same thing, even though it’s different laws: it’s voter suppression.” *** At the heart of what happened in Spalding county is that new law, which itself is an example of the tactics Republicans are pursuing across the country to ensure they control elections. Passed in March, HB 769 changed the rules for determining the tie-breaking vote for Spalding county’s election board. The five-person board always has two Democrats and two Republicans; previously, Democrats and Republicans would often flip a coin to determine the fifth member. But Republican state representatives David Knight and Karen Mathiak introduced a law requiring that the fifth member be chosen by a majority vote of the county’s superior court judges. Those judges – Chief Judge Fletcher Sams, Scott Ballard and Benjamin Coker – advertised the position in the local press for 30 days. All three judges are white; Sams said he identifies as an independent, while the other judges did not comment on their political affiliations. In the end, the judges chose the inexperienced Newland over at least two Black Democrats, including Vera McIntosh – who had been removed from her position on the board because HB 769 also required board members to live in Spalding county, which she did not – as well as Elbert Solomon, a longtime Democratic operative here. “All they wanted to see was the fact that I was Black – because they couldn’t tell by looking at my résumé,” Solomon said. “I went to white colleges, I was an executive at Procter &amp; Gamble, even my last name wouldn’t tell you that I was Black. That’s all they wanted to know.” “I can’t help what people think but that’s ridiculous,” Sams said, denying that race played any role in the judges’ decision. “I was very impressed with at least one or two Democratic candidates, and they were seriously considered.” Regardless, the new law didn’t come out of nowhere. Ever since election day of 2020, Republicans in Spalding county have used alleged problems with voting to justify their efforts to replace Democratic election officials. On election day 2020, some voters had initially been prevented from casting their ballots on machines equipped with software from Dominion Voting Systems. Marcia Ridley, the county’s former Democratic elections supervisor, said it was a temporary software problem caused by Dominion, but soon the Republican secretary of state, Brad Raffensperger, was calling for Ridley to step down, citing “serious management issues and poor decision-making”. Knight and Mathiak joined Raffensperger in calling for Ridley’s removal, and less than two weeks later asked the state’s attorney general to investigate her for failing to properly post information about board meetings. It didn’t end there. After the election, local Republicans were up in arms over claims of mishandled ballots. Mathiak and a former Republican elections board member, Betty Bryant – who believes the 2020 election was “robbed” from Trump – both claimed they had heard from a person who had received 12 mail-in ballots. As a crowd gathered outside the board of elections, a Republican on the county commission recorded a video of the protesters, and posted it to Facebook. Later, he posted a picture of a ballot envelope that contained no ballot, apparently in an attempt to suggest electoral fraud. As the mood darkened, concerned for their safety, Glenda Henley, a former Democratic board member, asked police to escort election workers to their cars. Next, the crowds started showing up at previously sleepy elections board meetings. “We had so many people coming, and the audience would disrupt the meeting by shouting or saying ugly things,” Henley said. One particularly loud voice was Roy McClain, a shooting range coach with a lengthy military career who had replaced a previous Republican board member. McClain had ties to Mathiak: he had fundraised for her and appeared alongside her at numerous events. McClain “was always loud, always negative”, according to Henley. “When he came in, it was just turmoil, anything to disrupt the business of elections.” (McClain did not respond to a request for comment, nor did Knight or Mathiak.) Then, in April, just days before the end of the 2021 legislative session, Mathiak and Knight escalated the situation: they introduced HB 769. The bill caught some county officials off-guard, according to emails obtained by American Oversight. Former elections board members told the Guardian they had no prior warning that the bill was coming. But Solomon said the bill’s purpose was obvious. He and others had worked in 2020 to register new county voters, most of them African American – a get-out-the-vote effort that produced results and nearly led to the election of the Democratic candidate Daa’ood Amin as mayor of Griffin. “What happened is we increased registered voters here by 900 people in less than a year,” Solomon said. “We had a mayor’s race here and a Black person almost won – and only lost by 15 votes.” Demographics in Spalding county are changing, according to Solomon and Fuller: what was solidly Republican territory is now becoming more Democratic-leaning. “They see the writing on the wall,” Solomon said. *** If the new law was intended to increase Republican power, it worked: Newman was swiftly installed on the elections board. In an interview, Newman said he was chosen by the judges because they believed he would be an impartial tie-breaking vote – despite the fact that he is a self-proclaimed Republican – and rejected the notion that race played a role, noting that he is of Cherokee descent. Newland claimed the judges told him that they chose him “because I was the closest they could find, out of the people who applied to the job, to a neutral party.” As for why he voted to cancel Sunday voting, Newland claimed the county couldn’t afford a seventh day of voting. Even less neutral is the man appointed by the local GOP to one of the other two Republican board positions: Ben Johnson, a former election board member who resigned as head of the county Republican party to take the job. Johnson, a fervent proponent of the false belief that the 2020 election was beset with widespread voter fraud, also runs an IT firm, Liberty Technology, that does maintenance for the county’s computer equipment. Fuller calls it a clear conflict of interest for Johnson. “If his company has direct control over the servers for Spalding county and the city of Griffin, he can see all of the data from anyone who uses these public servers,” Fuller said. “[That] could be data collection used against voters to help organize – and that is data that other members of the board wouldn’t have access to.” Asked whether there was a conflict of interest, Mike Windham, the county’s IT manager, said, “Off the top of my head, no, but the optics are a little funny.” Johnson ignored repeated requests for comment, and at an election board meeting in early January responded to the Guardian’s questions by saying, “I don’t talk to fake news.” But Johnson’s beliefs are well documented on his Facebook page. A little more than a year after Donald Trump lost the 2020 presidential election to Joe Biden, Johnson posted about the “hours upon hours of video-taped ballot harvesting in Georgia, the phantoms all over, the dirty voter rolls, the withholding of subpoenaed materials, the list goes on”. In person, Johnson is generally known as an intelligent and capable member of the board of elections, according to current and former colleagues from both parties. But his social media posts show a different side than the calm and polite face he presents to election board meetings. Specifically, Johnson has taken issue with Dominion Voting Systems, which handles election software throughout Georgia and is the frequent target of conspiracy theories about voter fraud. Only last month, Johnson attacked Dominion at a board meeting, making a false claim that a judge in a Georgia lawsuit, brought by a Republican, had ruled that its software in Georgia was “illegal”. “[R]ight now, the judicial opinion is that the equipment we’re using is illegal, which blows my mind,” Johnson said. That’s not true. The judge has not ruled on the matter; a trial is pending. *** Then, last month, if all this turmoil weren’t enough, board members were hit with nearly 2,000 emails demanding yet another audit into the 2020 presidential election – despite three previous reviews, conducted by the Republican Raffensperger, which all confirmed the win for Biden. While it remains unknown who prompted more than 1,900 people, all from outside Spalding county, to join the email deluge, some clues can be gleaned from the demands themselves. The emails were form letters and include references to a notorious conspiracy theorist, Jovan Hutton Pulitzer, who was involved with the controversial and unnecessary audit by the Cyber Ninjas firm in Maricopa ounty, Arizona (which again confirmed Biden won there). According to Jim O’Brien, one of the two Democratic board members in Spalding county, the campaign has all the markings of an organized effort. It was a “cyber-attack intended to intimidate and harass”, O’Brien said. “I’d like to know if any local Republican officials knew about this.” Slowly, the sense is dawning in these communities that individual cases like Spalding county’s are not one-offs but are part of a pattern emerging nationwide. Henley, too, is concerned about the way things are going, and who is behind it. After more than six years on the board, she wants to know why the new law that allowed a Republican takeover in Spalding county was passed when it did, and who might be pulling the strings even higher up than the state Republicans who made it happen. “It was a sneak attack,” she said. “I think we were targeted, but I don’t have the evidence of what they were doing. I think it was even higher up. I think it’s more convoluted and embedded.”Alison, 38, gave birth to her son in June 2021 at a busy London hospital. “We had exemplary care during delivery, and the midwives looking after me during my antenatal care were likewise fantastic,” she recalls. “However, I didn’t see a midwife face-to-face between my nine-week intake appointment and my 30th week of pregnancy. Then I saw nobody again until I was 34 weeks pregnant, and the next time I was seen was at 38 weeks, even though you’re supposed to be seen weekly at that stage.” At Alison’s two-week postpartum check-up, she had to have her stitches examined in a chair as no other facilities were free. “The ward was so full they’d had to close the birth centre; labour and delivery was full, and I met two women labouring in the early stages of their induction in the hallway. The midwives that came to do home visits were rushed and left me in tears every time,” she says. All NHS staff she came into contact with throughout her maternity care were clearly overworked, Alison says, but doing their best. “There was just no availability on the system, no capacity.” Alison’s experience chimes well with my own. When an A&amp;E doctor explained calmly last June that I was suffering from early pregnancy malaise, I reluctantly decided to go back to the London hospital where I had given birth eight years before. My high-risk twin pregnancy had ended in premature birth at 24 weeks and tragedy – with one baby dying after a three-month battle in intensive care. Throughout my antenatal journey, crucial appointments had been cancelled due to staffing issues, with the result that nobody picked up on early signs of premature labour, until it was too late for intervention. My hopes of receiving better care this time, assuming the trust would be aware of my history, evaporated quickly. By nearly 15 weeks of pregnancy, I had still not been seen by anyone, with text messages supposed to inform me of appointments failing to arrive. When I queried why I had been given a date for a scan two weeks after the latest possible date such a screening could give a diagnosis of chromosomal abnormality, a clinic receptionist told me I should go private if I didn’t like my appointments. A complaint triggered an apology from the trust’s chief executive months later for protracted problems in the booking process, as well as an apology from the deputy head of midwifery for the receptionist’s “inappropriate” advice. By then, I had forked out hundreds of pounds for a private scan and private appointment with an obstetric consultant at the hospital. I was promptly referred for specialist antenatal monitoring on the NHS, and have received excellent care ever since, but plagued by the knowledge that my ability to pay had got the ball rolling. Kerrie, 31, a solicitor from Leicestershire, is one of hundreds of women who responded to a callout I launched via Community, the home of readers’ content on the Guardian and Observer’s website. I wanted to find out how others had experienced NHS maternity care in England over the past year, but I was taken aback by the sheer number of responses from virtually every corner of the country. Like me, Kerrie saw no other way but to shell out hundreds of pounds for private scans during her pregnancy last year, as her trust only offered her appointments outside the windows in which they could be performed. “Every scan was beyond the normal NHS care timescale. I couldn’t have an NHS scan for Down’s syndrome because I was only offered a date after 14 weeks of pregnancy, which is too late,” she says. “My only option was to go private, according to my midwife, who recommended a screening that cost £450.” All Kerrie’s midwife appointments also took place later than they should have. When there were concerns for her baby’s growth in her second trimester, she waited nearly two weeks for a scan that should have happened within 72 hours. Last summer the Care Quality Commission’s chief inspector of hospitals told a parliamentary inquiry that inspections had found that 38% of NHS maternity services “require improvement for safety” – more than in any other medical speciality. A report by the Commons health and social care committee on maternity safety in England subsequently concluded that staffing numbers are the most essential building block in providing safe care, and that progress is urgently needed as far as continuity and personalisation of care is concerned. But in many parts of the country the pandemic appears to have reduced NHS capacities for well-run maternity provision in the long term. Hollie, 30, from Staffordshire, who is expecting her second child, found that lack of continuity was precisely what made her antenatal care problematic. “It has been minimal and lacking, purely for the fact that midwives are understaffed and overworked,” she says. “In 30 weeks of pregnancy, I met my real midwife once, but saw four other midwives who knew nothing about me, so appointments were all a repeat of the last one. I rarely got a chance to voice my concerns.” Her local hospital stopped its childbirth services during the pandemic, so her nearest hospital is now more than 40 minutes away. “I’m being sent all over Staffordshire for appointments. I don’t drive and have a four-year-old – the whole situation is very stressful. Compared with my first pregnancy, I’m finding it incredibly difficult to get the support I need,” Hollie says. For some women, draconian Covid regulations in hospitals and serious staff shortages have led to highly traumatising experiences. Rachael, 31, from Deal, Kent, is still processing the birth of her son, Ollie, in June 2021. “I felt really let down,” she says, “although I am extremely grateful that Ollie was born safely with the help of hard-working professionals.” Her 33-hour excruciating labour was marred by disagreements between doctors and midwives, poor communication and agonisingly long waits in corridors due to capacity issues. “I felt brutalised. I was in so much pain. I don’t want to scare prospective mums, but it really wasn’t OK. I do feel that understaffing affected my care, communication, but also compassion.” Gemma, 34, from Woking, Surrey, gave birth to her second child in September 2020. Although she had significantly less contact with healthcare staff than in her first pregnancy, and was unnerved that many appointments happened over the phone, she found the care leading up to the birth OK. “The birth, however, was the single worst experience of my life,” she says. “Partners were not allowed in until active labour, so I was induced on my own. Staff refused to touch me to comfort me because of Covid, and due to understaffing I was left alone for hours, in the dark, without pain relief. I was crying for help, but nobody came.” Edyta, 37, a healthcare assistant from Rugby, had a similarly “appalling” birth experience. “The maternity ward was so understaffed it felt dangerous. On my first night on the ward, a nurse came and said, ‘I apologise in advance in case you’ll feel abandoned, but it’s just me and one healthcare assistant.’” Like nearly all those who got in touch, Edyta blames staffing levels, not staff. “There are not enough of them, and they are run into the ground. It has put me off wanting another baby for now, but if I was to have more in future, I would consider going abroad to give birth, where going private is cheaper.” Jon Skewes, executive director for external relations at the Royal College of Midwives (RCM), said: “Countless independent reviews of maternity services have cited staff shortages as a potential risk to safety and quality of care. The RCM has been raising concerns about this for over a decade, yet successive governments have chosen not to listen. There are massive pressures on maternity services and the wider NHS because of the pandemic. That has meant sometimes some services had to be adapted or restricted, such as fewer in-person appointments. All these decisions were made with a heavy heart because midwives know how important this is to women.” An NHS spokesperson said: “Despite pressures and the impact Covid has undoubtedly had on staffing, the NHS remains one of the safest places in the world to give birth and services have continued to see women and their babies throughout the pandemic. In addition, the NHS has invested a further £95 million this year to boost workforce numbers, training and leadership.”George Ezra walks into the Old Barge, the Hertford pub that’s been his lifelong local, and within three minutes his song, Budapest is on the stereo. “They’re so supportive here,” he says, with shy gratitude, as he stoops under a curtain into a back room. Ezra first came here after school, searching for a loo. At 16, he started working behind the bar. When friends come home for Christmas, this is where they meet, “and where we would have always met”. It still smells the same. (Currently: of yesterday’s log fire, a comforting contrast to the January damp.) Over the next few hours, locals stick their heads in to wave hello to their friendly neighbourhood pop star, drinking lime cordial and soda in crisp double denim, and he greets them all back by name. This is the approachable figure Ezra, who is 28, cuts in most settings, whether playing a radiant set at Glastonbury or warmly chatting about mental health on his podcast. A music college dropout born George Ezra Barnett, he emerged in 2014 as part of a cohort of middle-class British boys with acoustic guitars. Unlike most of them, he wasn’t lachrymose or ambition-crazed. Instead he had a good-weird sense of humour and a big voice, cultivated after this ardent blues fan became obsessed with the US blues singer Lead Belly. Ezra’s label sent him Interrailing to inspire his first album, Wanted on Voyage, and he famously saw much of Europe except Budapest, the name of his breakthrough single. That song set the George Ezra template: primary-coloured bonhomie, a yearning for escape, an awed insistence that he’d give up anything for a girl. For album two, Staying at Tamara’s, he Airbnb’d in Barcelona and came back with the rabidly catchy singles Shotgun and Paradise. Both of his albums hit No 1 and spent 336 weeks in the charts (and counting) between them: rare numbers that put you in the Sheeran leagues. Having always used trips as creative inspiration, Ezra intended to write album three as he walked from Land’s End to John o’Groats in the spring of 2020. Instead, he spent five weeks of lockdown alone in London before family and friends convinced him to move back to Hertfordshire. For two months, during that mood-spiking heatwave, he lived in a van on a friend’s farm. “It was dogs that needed walking and fields that needed mowing,” he remembers dreamily. He soon bought his own place. Being back has done him the world of good. He loves community: “When you can walk out your front door and the whole town feels like an extension of a back garden.” And though he knows this might seem weird – regressive or stuck – “I feel comfortable in the fact that I’ve moved on, and then some.” Ezra says change is beautiful, and it suits him. His strong features sit more comfortably on a man’s face. When his hair grew out during lockdown, he swept it back and realised this was his look. (He has laughably nice skin, another recent change: “I started washing! I said to my sister, ‘Washing your skin really makes a difference doesn’t it?’ She was like, ‘Fuck off, yes.’”) On his first two albums, he often sang about escaping and giving it all up; the transformations on his lovely third album, Gold Rush Kid, are less about tearing up the script than recognising a moment as it’s happening, and discovering contentment within it. It’s a steadier album, he says. The first time around, he relied on his travels for something to write about. Second time, he had seen the world – played New Year’s Eve in Tasmania – “and so then writing about crocodiles and dreaming becomes quite realistic”. This time, he says, it felt “honest and cool” to write about the everyday substance of his life: assignations in hotel rooms and bars, surrendering to a lover’s beauty on the dancefloor. On the big-chorused title track, he sings of “robbing the bank / Making a run for it and learning to dance” – winging it, basically. He had been thinking about the opportunists who rushed west in the 1850s and “understood it as people deciding: over there is something worth pursuing and it’s finite, so go and get it”. Ezra writes to reinforce the things he needs to hear and he has realised that this is the attitude he wants to cultivate towards his career and his life: “Remember: enjoy this.” It is odd to hear that George Ezra – who wrote the lyric “bikini bottoms, lager tops, I could get used to this”, and sang it with a giddy whoop – needed that nudge. But his earlier, bright exterior concealed a bleak mindset. “In the past, when I’ve been the most intimidated and the most scared, it was really easy to tip over into nihilism and go, ‘Fuck it, it’s all going to end anyway, so what does it matter?’” he says bitterly. Perhaps that outlook has benefits, he considers. “But I don’t think I ever got there in a good way.” He is a surprisingly careful conversationalist, taking long pauses to risk-assess any admission. I press him for examples of how he would self-sabotage, but he says it wouldn’t do him any good to go into detail. But he admits he almost let this mentality total his career. In 2020, Ezra insisted that he wanted to quit music, telling his manager: “I don’t identify with it, I don’t understand it, I find it really hard to get my head around why I would pursue what I associate with being quite stressful – because the last album was unenjoyable at times, by my own doing.” Ezra had become “the kid who just says yes,” he says – a punishing identity that gave him a perverse kind of validation. “The diary would be bursting – you could almost see it pulsating. And I lost control, and therefore I started to try to control the things that didn’t need controlling.” He gives the example of spending three hours packing hand luggage: “Dude, you could throw some underwear in that bag, a few T-shirts and a toothbrush and you would be fine.” (As we chat, he often gives himself a second-person talking-to.) “ But this thing could be on display at a museum.” He also has Pure O, a form of OCD that involves intrusive thoughts without the physical compulsions. He used to lose weeks to them. During the first lockdown, he found a therapist and practised transcendental meditation, which helped. Now the thoughts might loop for just 30 minutes. He has stopped trying to stop them, “because that’s where I used to wind myself up,” he says. When life opened up again, Ezra got back to writing with his long-term collaborator Joel Pott (formerly of 2000s indie band Athlete), and rediscovered the pleasures of music that his yes-man persona had trampled. “The reason you do this is because you love it,” he tells himself. “And maybe that’s the payoff, that you get to pursue something you love – but as a result, you’re gonna feel it acutely and care too much at times.” (Pott praises the “good people” around Ezra, who told him he didn’t owe anyone anything.) Given Ezra’s renewed joy, it may seem counterintuitive that death looms over Gold Rush Kid. He cavorts with her on Green Green Grass, another insatiable earworm. On the twinkly closer Sun Went Down, he repeats, with real warmth, “I could die now.” It’s not the old nihilism but a sense of peace that comes from knowing he is giving life his best shot, of accepting himself in this moment. While Ezra likes his first two albums, he loves this one. “It doesn’t sound like anything but myself,” he says. The first five tracks are classic Ezra – as bright and buoyant as a new pool inflatable. But then it takes a ruminative shift – the album’s most striking song, I Went Hunting, beautifully addresses his past self-sabotage. It’s not a prelude to him becoming a tortured artist, he says – Ezra disdains artists longing to shed their pop fans and get serious – but the result of “a lot of self-reflection”. He’s chuffed when I single out his favourite line from lead single Anyone for You: “Remember me the way I am, not the way I was.” (Once a month, he prints selected photos from his phone and deletes the rest. “I feel like I’m dragging something along with me,” he says.) He struggles to identify those changes, partly because they’re ineffable, partly because he enjoys privacy. But he gives it a go. He’s discovered that contentment is different from happiness. On this album, he’s telling himself: “You’re all right. You’re not a villain.” Ezra still walked from Land’s End to John o’Groats with two friends for an upcoming documentary series, ultimately relieved he didn’t have to write an album at the same time. Walking 20 to 30 miles a day gave him the same feeling of peace as transcendentalmeditation, one that’s stuck around. There was another experience as well: he won’t discuss the specifics on record because he says he hasn’t figured out how to communicate it, but it showed him that the love in his life was inescapable. “I have these people around me, family and friends, that are there. The lesson was: what you don’t get, George, is that they just love you because of who you are. And don’t try to make sense of that because you won’t be able to. But accept it.” He thinks about it all the time. “It felt seismic, but really calm. I think that’s true of a lot of the last few years – these huge changes that actually just took one tiptoe to the left.” He has learned to look after himself – phone off at 9pm, light the fire, read – and found work-life balance. “I can actually plan meaningful interactions with friends around work,” he says, “which is the thing I’ve always envied in other people.” And no more yes-man. He told management: “Put things in front of me if you think they’re important, and only fight for them if you think they’re really important.” Still, he wants to give Gold Rush Kid a “fighting chance”, especially as he anticipates turning 30 and thinks about “drawing a line in the sand” at some point. “It’s the saddest thing I see in pop music when people just cling on to something,” he says. He isn’t retiring prematurely: he might release music more regularly, but cease touring. “I get a lot from it, positive and negative,” he says. “It’s an insane amount of adrenaline to experience and then to carry that with you.” Ezra is not the sort of pop star who gameplans their career five years in advance – the opposite, in fact. He definitively does not want to break the US. “It’s too big a place to consider mirroring what my work looks like in Europe and Australia,” he says. “To try to recreate that would kill me. I don’t need it.” He also wants children, which feels incompatible with a career at his level. “There are home videos of me as a child saying I want to be a dad,” he says. “I have to question people that are very famous and pursue that after having kids. It’s lost on me. It sounds selfish.” The most he will look to his future career is to suggest that being adored by the nation’s children means his songs will ultimately become “throwback party classics”. Any kids that didn’t already know him soon did if they followed Joe Wicks’s lockdown PE lessons. Ezra’s mum, a primary school teacher, told him Wicks said he couldn’t play music on the videos because of copyright. She suggested that Ezra let Wicks use his songs for free. So he did, then donated the royalties to the NHS. “It was just a good thing to be able to do,” he says. What does it say that pop stars are having to donate to the NHS during a pandemic? He pauses. “There’s a lot I don’t understand,” he says, sadly. “The amount that I don’t understand intimidates me to the point where it probably doesn’t serve me to speak about it because I don’t know where to start. But then I’m like, is that the point? Are you made to feel like you don’t understand when really you do? “And that’s the thing I found hard about the last few years,” he says, with a sudden ragged breath, “is actually feeling… helpless in some way.” He says the last part in the smallest voice, and we’re both surprised to find he is crying, his grey-blue eyes now red. “Sorry!” he says quickly, and regroups. “There’s a lot of confusing stuff going on in the world. It’s sad, you’re right, why are fucking pop stars donating to the NHS?” Ezra says he hasn’t generally made political statements because he doesn’t feel qualified – although he recalls his parents, Labour party members, taking him on marches – and not because his fanbase is so broad. He casts aspersions as he gestures around the Old Barge. “I love this pub. It is empty of an evening and it shouldn’t be,” he says emphatically, referencing the fear over Omicron. “Not that it should be busy, but they’re not helped. If people shouldn’t be going out, tell them to close the doors and help them through that time.” He laments that “making the world an intimidating and confusing place is a really convenient way of pitting people against one another”. It runs counter to his worldview. He comes back to the walk, on which they regularly met “two types of farmer: people that live hand to mouth, up at 4am on Christmas, and they were lovely, pointing us in the right direction. We also met men who wear gold rings on their little fingers and live in big houses on the farms, and they were lovely, and told us which direction to go. It’s why he loved Gogglebox so much, he says, “because it’s good to be reminded you’re all the same in many ways.” Ezra’s music has always expressed his faith in collective goodness: we’re all right together, we’re just human; as he sings on the song Gold Rush Kid. “You’re just like everyone, you’re holding on.” Has that belief been shaken in the past two years, when it’s often seemed as though we aren’t all in this together? “I don’t think so,” he says. “Getting out and walking the country and meeting people – it just isn’t true. I get terrified that everyone’s out to get each other. For the most part, they are – until you step out your front door.” The single Anyone For You is out now; the album Gold Rush Kid follows on 10 June on Columbia Records If you’d like to hear this piece narrated, listen on Saturday to The Guardian’s brand new podcast, Weekend. Subscribe on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts.There can’t be many things more cheering on a dark January night than having to tell someone they’ve won a prize, and when I telephone Astrid Goldsmith to give her just such a bit of good news, her reaction is everything I hoped it would be. For a while, Goldsmith, an animator who lives in Folkestone where she makes stop-motion films in her garage, struggles to speak in full sentences. She is just so thrilled. “That is the greatest compliment,” she says, when I tell her that her story, A Funeral in Freiburg, the winner of this year’s Observer/Jonathan Cape graphic short story prize, brings to mind the work of that genius Posy Simmonds. “I love her tone. I always have.” Goldsmith’s entry is based on a real event: the funeral of her paternal grandmother in Germany in 2015. “The outrage had been percolating for a while,” she says, with a laugh. “But I only came to write it after my first baby was born, while I was breastfeeding: I drew it all on one of those trays with arms that invalids use in bed.” Her story revolves around the difficulties involved in organising a Jewish funeral service in a place – Freiburg, in the Black Forest – where the rabbi has been imprisoned for embezzlement, and the Jewish cemetery is full. The woman in charge is, very difficult, refusing even to believe that Gisela Goldschmidt was really Jewish (at the age of 18, Astrid’s grandmother fled Germany for Zimbabwe, only returning after the war was over). Her rules and regulations, not to mention her insistence on the performance of certain rituals, infuriate the Goldsmith family. But what choice do they have? It is a case of her way, or no proper funeral at all. Our regular judges – Dan Franklin, the publisher of Jonathan Cape’s graphic novel list, Suzanne Dean, the creative director of Vintage, Paul Gravett, who runs the Comica festival, and yours truly – were joined this year by Alison Bechdel, the acclaimed author of (among other graphic novels) Fun Home, and by Samira Ahmed, the journalist and presenter of BBC Radio 4’s Front Row. Our decision was unanimous. Goldsmith’s rich, funny, plangent story isn’t only beautifully drawn; its subject, though highly particular, also has a universality that speaks to the past two years, a period during which too many of us have had to organise funerals at a distance. “It is weird,” says Goldsmith, who studied for an MA in animation at Norwich art school, and has worked in it ever since. “Death is so raw and emotional, and yet you’re also greeted with this bureaucracy. If you’re lucky, the people helping you through will be great. But our experience really wasn’t; when we went back to Germany for the stone setting a year later, it was just as bad.” There is, she says, a lot more to be said about the whole experience, and her hope now is to make A Funeral in Freiburg the beginning of a full length novel: “After someone dies, there’s so much bad behaviour, however good people’s intentions. It fell to me and my dad to drive to Germany to remove everything from my grandmother’s flat and distribute it to her family – and either everyone wanted something, or no one did.” Animation and the writing of a graphic novel are, she thinks, pretty similar in that they’re both extremely labour intensive. “But this is the first piece I’ve made that is truly personal,” she says. It captures something that is quite complicated: the territory that lies between a secular upbringing and a Jewish identity, and how the two might (or might not, in the case of A Funeral in Freiburg) fit together. The standard of the entries this year was very high – though it was striking how many of the stories had to do with anxiety, isolation and a longing for travel; the pandemic finds its way everywhere – and for this reason, we decided to anoint two runners-up. We loved Tat Effby’s Cancer Sells!, an uproarious satire on publishing’s obsession with illness memoirs (and reality stars) that for Samira Ahmed brought to mind the work of the late, great French cartoonist Claire Bretécher; and there was a lot of admiration, too, for A Wolfgang Crowe’s mournful and disquieting story, Andrew, a story of two loners that is clearly (and wonderfully) influenced by Daniel Clowes. Congratulations to both of them, too.Offering yet further proof that the future of cutting-edge horror is female, British actor turned writer-director Romola Garai’s impressive feature debut, which won enthusiastic applause at FrightFest last year, is a moody, brooding chiller that goes from slow-boil creaks to rapturous, hallucinogenic madness. Set largely in a decrepit building whose mouldy walls mirror a creeping moral malaise within, Amulet plays adventurously with subversive sexual politics and reconfigured horror tropes, conjuring a heady parable rich in ritual and intrigue, built upon sturdy subtextual foundations. The Romanian actor Alec Secareanu, who proved such an engaging screen presence in Francis Lee’s God’s Own Country, is Tomaz, an ex-soldier from an unnamed, conflict-torn country, now struggling to survive in squalid London. In his dreams, Tomaz is haunted by fable-like visions of the past: unearthing an amulet while stationed in a remote forest; meeting a fleeing woman who collapses in desperation; taking her in, giving her shelter and promising to help reunite her with her daughter. Meanwhile, in the destitute present, Tomaz meets Sister Claire (Imelda Staunton), who offers refuge in return for his help repairing a dilapidated house. Here, Magda (Carla Juri) cares for her invalid mother, who dwells “on the top floor”, a groaning figure living in the shadows beneath the roof, evoking the Victorian-gothic spectre of Jane Eyre and the paranoid psychodrama of Andrzej Żuławksi’s unhinged 1981 masterpiece Possession. Garai says that inspiration for Amulet came from reading about how the perpetrators of war atrocities would mentally “recategorise” their crimes when returning to civilian life, making normal that which was clearly aberrant. In Amulet, the blurring of perceptual lines between aggressors and protectors is a recurrent motif, leaving the audience constantly uncertain as to how to react to each of its three central characters, all of whom have their secrets. The casting of Secareanu is particularly astute. His expressively melancholy face draws us into Tomaz’s traumatised world, his lonely visage in sharp contrast to the almost sardonically sincere expressions of Staunton’s sinisterly smiling nun. As for Juri, she carries herself in a manner that flits from childlike innocence to something altogether more edgy. A scene in which Tomaz takes Magda dancing reminded me of a memorably disturbing interlude from Rose Glass’s Saint Maud. Like the housebound horrors of Jennifer Kent’s The Babadook and Babak Anvari’s Under the Shadow, Amulet traps its central characters in an enclosed location in which they must confront their deepest fears and most guilty secrets. Interestingly, Garai cites the films of Ben Wheatley and Peter Strickland as stylistic touchstones, a connection that chimes with her own intertwining of the domestic and the demonic, everyday reality and otherworldly ritual. Cinematographer Laura Bellingham, who did such atmospheric work on Corinna Faith’s hospital-based horror The Power, works wonders within the confines of the Victorian pile in which the story plays out, aided by the carefully colour-coded production design of Francesca Massariol, whose impressive CV includes Deborah Haywood’s Pin Cushion and Bassam Tariq’s Mogul Mowgli. Garai clearly has a fondness for the physical special effects of David Cronenberg body-horror classics such as Shivers and The Brood, lending a tangible oomph to the film’s occasional jump scares (an encounter with something horrible in the bathroom gave me a genuine start) and injecting a much-needed element of solidity into the impressively bizarre finale – a head-scrambling amalgam of the nightmarish weirdness of David Lynch’s Eraserhead and the trippy existential ecstasy of Ken Russell’s Altered States. A terrific score by feature first-timer (and renowned theremin player) Sarah Angliss completes the picture, mixing sampled Renaissance instruments with women’s voices that draw upon “the wails of female Scandinavian herders” (yes, really) to create a soundscape that seems alien and familiar. Working in close harmony, Angliss and sound designer Nick Baldock mirror the architecture of this sometimes jaw-dropping story, turning the house into a character with its own distinctive pulse, and ensuring that the audience’s collective heartbeat is cranked up a notch.Republican state lawmakers across the United States have proposed – and in some cases passed – legislation that they say keeps the government from interfering with doctors who want to prescribe ivermectin and hydroxychloroquine to help prevent and treat Covid-19. But those treatments have not proven effective at preventing or treating Covid and infectious disease experts see the bills as examples of rightwing lawmakers politicizing medicine – a trend that is increasing as the pandemic wears on in America into its third year amid an increasingly fraught political atmosphere. And so it goes with the latest suspect Covid-19 treatment that has become about more than just a drug, but rather about whether to trust established public health organizations or doctors who stray from their guidelines, and podcast and cable news hosts. “We really need to have the politicians step aside and let scientists and public health officials make the decisions on what is going to be beneficial in preventing and treating Covid,” said Sunil Parikh, an associate professor of epidemiology and infectious diseases at the Yale School of Public Health. Kansas is one of at least 11 states, according to Buzzfeed, where Republican lawmakers have proposed, and in some cases passed, legislation to limit medical licensing boards’ ability to take action against providers who prescribe ivermectin and hydroxychloroquine, another drug that has not been shown to be effective against Covid but nevertheless promoted by some politicians on the right. “We are leaving it up to medical professionals like it should be, not bureaucrats trying to maintain a single message,” said the Kansas state senator Richard Hilderbrand, the chair of the committee that sponsored the legislation. The Kansas bill requires a pharmacist to dispense a prescription for hydroxychloroquine sulfate and ivermectin and states that it protects pharmacists or prescribers from liability for prescribing the drugs for Covid-19. Hilderbrand said he introduced the bill in part because the Kansas Board of Healing Arts was going after doctors for prescribing medication for off-label use. Fellow Republican state senator Mark Steffen, an anesthesiologist and pain-management specialist, disclosed during a recent hearing that the board had been investigating him more than 18 months over comments he made while serving as a county commissioner, according to the Washington Post. Ivermectin is an anti-parasitic treatment mainly used for animals but approved in different doses to treat some parasitic worms in humans – but not for preventing or treating Covid. In addition to Republican lawmakers, promotion of ivermectin has come from public figures such as comedian and podcast host Joe Rogan, who said he used the drug to treat himself when he became sick with Covid, and the Fox News hosts Tucker Carlson and Laura Ingraham. But Parikh said there have been no trials that “in most scientists’ minds show any evidence of ivermectin being beneficial” for the prevention or treatment of Covid. “The drug doesn’t work against Covid – full stop,” said Dr Michael Saag, a professor of medicine and infectious diseases at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. “There are countless studies – randomized, well-conducted clinical trials – that show no benefit, so why would you want to use a drug that doesn’t work?” Regardless of ivermectin’s efficacy against Covid, Saag said legislation such as the bill in Kansas is unnecessary because doctors can still prescribe it for off-label use, even if it doesn’t work. “Any physician in the United States has the ability to write a prescription of a drug for a purpose that has not been formally approved by the FDA,” Saag explained. Steven Stites, the chief medical officer of the University of Kansas Health System, sees legislation in Kansas as problematic not only because it provides doctors authority they already have, but because it removes providers and pharmacists from liability for prescribing or dispensing hydroxychloroquine and ivermectin. “You have taken the risk away from the doctor. You have taken the risk away from the pharmacist, so that means the two people who are completely trained for this type of question have now had their risk removed, so the patient holds the risk,” said Stites. “The least informed, least trained person in the room now holds all the risk.” Hilderbrand, the Kansas state senator, said lawmakers planned to remove the language in the legislation that shields doctors from liability and the portion that requires pharmacists to fill prescriptions for the drugs. When asked about the assessment that the drug has not been proven effective against Covid and could be dangerous, Hilderbrand said, “where is their evidence that it doesn’t” work? “If the doctor and patient think that is the best course of action on a novel virus, then they should have that opportunity,” said Hilderbrand, who represents a district in south-eastern Kansas. There are ongoing studies of ivermectin’s ability to treat Covid at the University of Minnesota and Duke University. Parikh said he hoped studies demonstrate that ivermectin can be effective with Covid, “but we have not seen that”. He also points out that there are new treatments that have proven effective in treating Covid, like Paxlovid. What does he expect to happen if the trials at Minnesota and Duke show that ivermectin is not effective against Covid? “If these studies were done well”, Parikh said, “and really do show in these settings that ivermectin is not impactful … I just can’t see any reason to continue this debate.”Have the Winter Olympics caught you cold? Just like the Jamaican bobsleigh team (their first appearance since 1998) the Games are back as the biggest global stars on snow and ice descend on Beijing in pursuit of all things gold, silver and bronze. The timings are not the most sociable for viewers in the UK – with most days’ events starting about midnight and finishing about 3pm – but there is a lot to get excited about. Here’s our armchair guide on what to follow, when and why snowboard cross might be your new favourite sport. When do the Games start? The opening ceremony is a Friday night affair on 4 February, with 3,000 performers and Beijing 2022 organisers promising a cauldron-lighting that is “unprecedented in the over 100-year history of the Olympic Games” at the National Stadium, affectionately known as the Bird’s Nest. However, events will start before the opening ceremony, with curling and luge kicking things off on Wednesday, before Alpine skiing, freestyle skiing and ice hockey (including a huge women’s match between the defending Olympic champions, the USA, and the world No 3s, Finland) get going on Thursday. How many athletes are GB sending? Team GB has 50 fully vaccinated athletes – nine shy of the 2018 total – with the speed skater Ellia Smeding given the final berth last week. All are expected to follow strict Covid protocols: they have to to stay and eat in designated locations and have been instructed to minimise hugs, high-fives and handshakes at all times, although commemorative condoms in their hotel rooms suggest authorities are anticipating some rule-breaking. In slightly less tantalising developments, the GB athletes have been offered temporary mobile phones because of fears they could be spied on by the Chinese government. Britain has joined the USA, Australia, New Zealand and Canada in refusing to send any official diplomats over China’s record of human rights abuses. How many medals are GB hoping for? Seven, which would surpass the record haul of five, won at Sochi 2014 and Pyeongchang 2018. “British athletes have the potential to win between three and seven medals at the Olympics, and between five and nine medals at the Paralympics,” said UK Sport’s chief executive, Sally Munday. Which Britons should we watch out for? The first opportunity for GB medals will most likely come on 8 February, day four of the Games, when the Scottish curlers (and childhood friends) Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat will attempt to turn their world mixed doubles title into some Olympic hardware. Izzy Atkin will also be in the mix for a medal in the first Olympic women’s freeski big air final. Dave Ryding, a 35-year-old from Chorley in Lancashire, became the first British skier to win a gold medal in the 55-year history of the Alpine World Cup last week and he will go for men’s slalom gold on 16 February. But the reigning snowboard cross world champion, Charlotte Bankes, and the Sochi 2014 freestyle skiing silver medallist, Gus Kenworthy, are GB’s best hopes, after defecting from France and USA respectively. What else is worth watching? The American skier Mikaela Shiffrin, a double Olympic gold medallist, is set for a showdown with her Slovakian rival Petra Vlhova in the women’s slalom on 9 February. A similar battle will commence on the figure-skating rink between Japan’s Yuzuru Hanyu and USA’s Nathan Chen. The pair are fierce rivals: Hanyu has said he is planning to attempt the hallowed quad axel jump in Beijing, while Yale student Chen is hoping to sneak the gold before preparing for his exams in May. How can I watch it in the UK? Coverage is shared between BBC and Eurosport, with more than 300 hours of live action on BBC One and Two, and plenty more options online and on the red button. Eurosport subscribers can beam Beijing into their homes online or via their own app, while Discovery+ offers the choice to watch every event live. What will the Guardian’s coverage be? Sean Ingle and Bryan Armen Graham will don their hats and gloves to report live from the Games and you can sign up to Martin Belam’s daily newsletter via email to keep you up to date with all the best action, plus a few quirky stories you may have missed. And you can join our team of writers online for outstanding rolling coverage in our live blog, which will feature everything from video highlights to analysis to the latest interviews and reaction.British capitalism is in trouble. The UK stock market, populated by too many legacy companies with scarcely a major hi-tech company in sight, has been the worst performing among advanced countries since 2000. Brexit has deepened the crisis. Our companies, vulnerably cheap by international standards, have become easy prey for takeover merchants from all over the globe who are rarely benign stewards. Too few great new companies are coming through to take their place. Yet, by the criteria of the political right, the UK should be a capitalist beacon. Regulation in Britain – from the world of work to product standards – is light, applied weakly and is too often close to non-existent. Companies and capital are taxed modestly by international standards. But, stubbornly, the growth rate shrinks as investment and productivity stagnate. Could it be, pray, that the dominant rightwing intellectual paradigm is wrong? Endlessly inventive, the right has found a convenient new villain to blame – “woke” or “stakeholder” capitalism. It may be that the woeful economic trends are longstanding and deep-seated, but don’t let that get in the way of a good new culture war. Last week, the Adam Smith Institute crystallised the complaint in a paper, Capitalism After Covid, which added stakeholder capitalism to the state as culprits in chief. Governments, intoned author Matthew Lesh, have failed in their pandemic response while the private sector has done brilliantly. This “state failure” removes the case for more government involvement in the economy, post-Covid. Instead, capitalism must be given its head, but not a woke capitalism that “stabs itself in the face” by wanting to address “racial justice or environmental protection”. Capitalism must ruthlessly put profit and shareholders first, which is its sacred duty, not sacrifice profit to appease stakeholders in the trivial search for good headlines – the road to perdition. Too many companies are following woke Unilever and sacrificing profit and performance for lofty talk of pursuing sustainability and social purpose, personified, said a leading critical investor, Terry Smith, by trying to argue that the purpose of Hellmann’s mayonnaise was to further healthy eating. Lesh won kind headlines in the Mail. But his thinking is fossilised in the 1980s and singularly fails to address today’s facts and arguments. Has state failure been so complete? Opinion in 27 countries has become more trusting of state competence in handling the pandemic, according to Cambridge’s Centre for the Future of Democracy. In pandemics, you need collective action and state leadership. Yes, there have been weaknesses – but offset by astonishing successes. In Britain, for example, the speed at developing and rolling out vaccines was because of smart collaboration between clever public procurement, universities, notably Oxford, the NHS and purpose-driven companies such as AstraZeneca. Equally, economics is wrestling with the gaping shortcomings of the simple free market views that Lesh champions. Not least, as the 2021 winter edition of the Oxford Review of Economic Policy asks: “Capitalism – what has gone wrong, what needs to change and how can it be fixed?” Radical uncertainty besets economic decision-making; we need better designed institutions to win the gains from cooperation and individuals are much more complicated than economic automata responding to price signals. Economic models that ignore all this (such as Lesh’s) argue successive contributors, lead to a degraded capitalism, stagnating living standards and rising populism in response. Witness Britain in 2022. Companies shape and are shaped by the society of which they are part and this includes the evolving preferences of shareholders. The Investment Association annual 2021 review reports that 49% of the £9.4tn of investment funds under UK management are pledged to promote the environment, social cohesion and good governance (ESG in the jargon), reflecting the wishes of their millions of savers. Founded in the 1880s, Unilever’s purpose was “to make cleanliness commonplace and lessen the load for women”. Today’s investors want it to continue with an updated purpose – making “sustainable living commonplace”, the principle reason it is a great company. Unilever, and the growing number of companies like it, are only responding to their shareholders’ priorities. McKinsey Global Institute declares that stakeholder capitalism, in which companies carefully manage the trade-offs between their varying stakeholders, is the key to long-term value creation. It is the future of business. This is not a sacrifice of profit in woke appeasement of useless consumers, employees and wider societal pressures, as Lesh characterises it. Stakeholder capitalism is a recognition that any company is a social organisation that needs engaged workforces, loyal customers, supportive shareholders and strong brands, all of whose claims have to be managed, alongside financial priorities. Mock the idea that Hellmann’s mayonnaise has a purpose, but consumers care about the health of what they eat and will do more in future. Purposed brands, as Unilever’s own data shows, outperform their non-purposed rivals. And that means profit. Are companies good enough at explaining these realities and trade-offs, at explaining why they consider what they are doing is so material to their long-term profitability and why they feel compelled not to ignore climate change or Black Lives Matter? Lesh attacks the entire framework without recognising the huge current debates about how stakeholder companies and their investors can do better. Companies are asking how they can better explain to their shareholders their best guess of future trends and explain why engaging workforces and customers is so worthwhile. Investors are becoming better at calling out greenwashing and soft corporate baloney. It’s called “materiality”, to borrow the buzzword of the hour – think relevance, significance. Ignore these material pressures beyond immediate financial demands and companies get into profound trouble. British capitalism suffers from a long history of making easy money through being the first to industrialise and possessing a global empire. As a result, the culture of innovative risk-taking and the institutions to support it, along with a sophisticated conception of the company, are cruelly under-developed, as Adam Smith would have been the first to recognise. The value of the institute that proselytises in his name is that it is a useful fool, setting out so revealingly why its 1980s thinking is so wrong. And why so many in business, investment and academia are right to figure out new ways to reset capitalism and better capture its undoubted dynamism to serve the common good. • Will Hutton is an Observer columnistAustralia and England engineered a grandstand finish to the Ashes Test in Canberra, as England nearly ran down the biggest fourth-innings chase in women’s Test history before a collapse left them scrambling to survive at nine wickets down. The gap between the teams in the end was 11 runs, with the last-gasp draw leaving Australia leading the multi-format series on points 6-4. Those dramatic final hours came after losing most of the third day to rain, encouraging Australian captain Meg Lanning on the fourth and final day to declare at 216 for seven late in the second session. Lanning set England 257 to win from 48 overs, an equation that should have been relatively straightforward for Australia to protect against tired players on a wearing pitch with no fielding restrictions. But England launched into that chase like it was a one-day international, Tammy Beaumont making the early running with 36 from 42 balls, before Lauren Winfield-Hill started stepping down the pitch to take on the bowling and make 33. England made 52 for the opening stand and 42 for the second wicket, before captain Heather Knight combined with vice-captain Natalie Sciver for the major partnership of the day. Knight’s epic 168 not out in the first innings had her team in the match, and she added another 48 in even time in the second innings, driving crisply through the covers despite suffering leg cramps. Sciver climbed into a series of pull shots to keep the score racing along. At one stage they had reduced the required total to 91 from 90 deliveries, and looked the goods to get them. Lanning, meanwhile, was vacillating, sometimes with six fielders on the boundary, sometimes with three. Australia looked to have no idea where help might come from. It was teenage quick Darcie Brown who delivered it, crashing into Knight’s front pad for an lbw decision that was upheld on review. Sophia Dunkley was given out the same way the very next ball, but her review showed the ball clearing the bails by a hair’s breadth. Dunkley made the most of her reprieve, battering 45 from 32 balls, including a couple of sixes off the bowling of Annabel Sutherland, while Sciver ploughed on. The required target dropped to 53 off 66. But Sutherland slowed the rush by bowling around the wicket, warned for negative bowling down the leg side, before resorting to high bouncers that Dunkley couldn’t hit. Then the leg-spinner Alana King bowled an over conceding one run to Sciver. Needing 44 from 54 balls, Sciver took on Sutherland with the pull shot again and was well caught by Lanning at midwicket for 58. Wicketkeeper Amy Jones only had to find singles for Dunkley, but instead slogged across the line at Sutherland for Beth Mooney to take an even better catch diving forward at deep midwicket, broken jaw and all. England’s lower order kept swinging, needing 24 runs from 28 balls, but Katherine Brunt was caught behind, Anya Shrubsole was run out, and Charlie Dean top-edged a sweep shot. King on debut and Sutherland in her second Test were nerveless. When the ninth wicket fell with 13 balls to go, last pair Kate Cross and Sophie Ecclestone blocked out the rest. Australia will have things to look at in the postmortem. Across a declaration-setting innings, their batting went at 3.38 per over. Tahlia McGrath, who lit up the first T20 with her 91 from 49 balls, walked out on the fourth morning with the game set up for a finisher and made 34 from 67. Only Ashleigh Gardner’s run-a-ball 38 and Jess Jonassen’s 14 from six balls adhered to the brief of fast runs to push the chance of a result. Regardless of how England attacked the target, there was a lack of boldness in Australia choosing only 48 overs to bowl. All of which must be seen within the constraints of a four-day Test, where any time lost to rain severely affects the integrity of a contest. The finish that will be replayed and feted relied on both captains and both teams being willing to take a punt. Ideally Tests in the future won’t need such interventions, if they are played over five days as the men’s matches are. This episode underlines again how good the format can be.A whistleblower who exposed illegal working conditions in a factory making Amazon’s Alexa devices says he was tortured before being jailed by Chinese authorities. Tang Mingfang, 43, was jailed after he revealed how the Foxconn factory in the southern Chinese city of Hengyang used schoolchildren working illegally long hours to manufacture Amazon’s popular Echo, Echo Dot and Kindle devices. Now, after spending two years in prison, he is appealing to the higher courts to clear his name. He has taken the difficult decision to talk publicly, despite being aware of the risks of reprisals, because he believes Amazon and its founder, Jeff Bezos, have a responsibility to support his appeal and that the Observer also has a responsibility to highlight his case. Tang, who is married with a nine-year-old son, said his father – who died while he was in prison – would have wanted him to speak up when he saw young workers being abused. “My father always taught me that I should be a good person and, because I followed my heart and believed that justice should be served, I reported the serious violations at Hengyang Foxconn. Yet my imprisonment has caused such great harm to me and my family,” he told the Observer. He described how he was beaten by his interrogators, handcuffed in stress positions until he could take no more and signed a confession to the crime of infringing trade secrets. “I refused to sign seven times, and they got angry and handcuffed me to the bottom of the iron frame, unable to stand, squat, sit; only bending, half squatting all night. In the early morning, I could not stand any more,” he said. “I think Amazon should give me an explanation, tell me if I really deserve to be sent to jail? If not, Amazon should give me an apology, along with its partner, Foxconn, to assist me to appeal for a redress, and provide compensation.” Amazon did not answer specific questions put by the Observer, but a spokesperson said: “We do not tolerate violations of our supply chain standards. We regularly assess suppliers, using independent auditors as appropriate, to monitor continued compliance and improvement – if we find violations, we take appropriate steps, including requesting immediate corrective action.” Illegal working practices at the factory were first revealed in an investigation by the Observer and the US-based China Labor Watch in 2018. A year later, a second investigation found that Foxconn had tried to solve its subsequent recruitment problems by drafting in schoolchildren to work illegal overtime. Internal Foxconn documents passed on by Tang formed the basis of the second investigation. Amazon sent its own staff into the factory to investigate the labour law breaches and Foxconn was forced to pay more than £165,000 in compensation for underpaying workers making Echo and Echo Dot devices in Hengyang. Meanwhile, Foxconn brought in the Chinese authorities to investigate the leak. Tang was charged, convicted and jailed for two years. He said he believed Amazon acted correctly in addressing the illegal working practices but that it should have intervened on his behalf in line with US law offering protection to whistleblowers and guaranteeing their freedom of speech. When Tang’s 80-year-old father learned of his son’s imprisonment, he was taken ill and although his family asked for a temporary release on compassionate grounds, the request was refused. “My family wanted to give me a chance to see my father for the last time, so they delayed the funeral by three days. This is my biggest regret and the main reason why I would like to keep appealing,” he said. Tang worked for Foxconn monitoring supply levels and had access to the factory computer system. He said he came across information showing how Foxconn was using temporary workers and schoolchildren to cut costs. “I was also clear about how the student workers were physically punished and assaulted by their teachers. I believe these things are wrong and illegal,” he said. He said workers regularly exceeded the limit of 36 hours of overtime in a month, with some on the assembly lines exceeding 100 hours a month during busy periods. Tang said Foxconn had promised to improve working conditions after the first investigation but its own internal documents suggested managers were planning to expand the illegal use of workers. “Not just me, many other colleagues believed this is wrong,” he said. “I read a report written by a security guard at Hengyang Foxconn; basically, it talked about how a teacher verbally and physically assaulted a non-cooperative student in front of everyone, and the student cried.” After talking to colleagues about what was going on in the factory, Tang contacted China Labor Watch and agreed to share some of the company documents, which he photographed using his mobile phone. After the story broke, he said, Foxconn’s management launched an investigation, laid off most of the temporary workers and students, and offered rewards to workers who helped to recruit new staff. People he spoke to in the factory told him managers were furious. Unknown to Tang, they started to review CCTV footage to try to identify the mole. On 16 August 2019 he was arrested for the first time. “I was very scared, because I had never experienced anything like this; especially after I was handcuffed, I began panicking,” he said. He was questioned for two days before being released and returning to work. A month later, he was arrested again at the factory and taken into custody. He said that before his arrest he saw a foreigner whom he believed to be one of the Amazon staff going through his desk drawer and checking the pockets of his uniform on his chair. Tang claims the statements used to convict him were obtained by the use of torture and should not have been admissible in evidence. In a written account of his treatment, he wrote: “While I was detained in the police station for questioning, I endured tremendous physical and mental stress. The officers at the police station used corporal punishments and violence during the interrogation to force me to change my statement and say that I did commit the so-called criminal activities. “The police officer battered me multiple times during the interrogation, he repeatedly slapped and hit me in my face and in the back of my head. “I was also tortured during the interrogation process when I refused to collaborate and admit to their baseless accusations.” He said his interrogators repeatedly handcuffed him in stress positions. “I could not stand up because my hands were chained on to the little desk that connected the two armrests, I could not do anything but suffer through such grave pain,” he said. He said he signed a confession after being handcuffed to a bed overnight and because he feared he would be beaten again. Tang said he initially received a sympathetic hearing from the police when he explained that he had only acted to expose illegal activity in the factory and said he understood they were simply doing their duty. He said the charge of infringing trade secrets requires the company to have suffered a loss but Foxconn had only been forced to refund what it was required to pay by law. He said for that reason – and that he had acted to expose illegal activity – he refused to accept he was guilty of that charge and he insists the confession used to convict him was obtained illegally, by torture, by a senior officer aided by auxiliary officers and, for that reason, his conviction should be overturned. Tang said Amazon had members of staff in the factory who he believed were aware of what had happened to him. Although he admitted passing on company documents, he believed he was acting to prevent law-breaking. “Because I believe the cause of all [this] is that I exposed Hengyang Foxconn’s illegal activities, I believe I am not guilty,” he said. In a letter to Bezos – who is worth an estimated £137bn – Tang urged him to ensure that workers’ rights were protected. “Although the price was too high for me, I think the price I paid will all be worth it if only this situation can be brought to your attention and benefit the employees of all Amazon suppliers,” he wrote. “Finally, as your faithful admirer, as a former employee of your company’s client, as a victim, as a son, husband, father, I would like to ask the following of you. Please ask Hengyang Foxconn to face up to its own problems, apologise to me, and come forward and communicate with the local court to assist me in the appeal of my case, so that the court can finally revoke my guilty verdict.” China Labor Watch director Li Qiang also wrote to Bezos urging him to intervene on behalf of Tang. “CLW believes that Amazon has the responsibility to call for China to free this innocent volunteer, who provided the evidence of labour violations in an Amazon supplier factory, and thank him for helping improving workers’ conditions. All he did was report violations of workers’ rights in an Amazon supplier factory. He did not commit any illegal acts. “It is unacceptable and unfair that Tang Mingfang is serving jail time for trying to help Amazon improve the labour conditions in its supplier factory.” He said Bezos had not responded to his letter and Amazon had not offered any support for Tang.For a true chilli-head like me, it’s so exciting to see how the selection has absolutely exploded in recent years, from often just a single variety as a novelty, to literally hundreds on offer from across the planet. The nature of catalogues, however, where eye-catching photography is key to the sale, is that often the heavily promoted varieties have been chosen for their photogenic quality – for their quirky shapes and colours – rather than for non-visual characteristics, such as actual good flavour. Indeed, having personally run taste tests on hundreds of chilli varieties over the years, it does seem to me that many have been actively bred exclusively for their ornamental appeal. So if you are looking for amazing flavour, here are three that really stand out from the crowd. Ají limón, meaning “lemon chilli”, is a traditional variety essential to a whole range of Peruvian dishes, which I fell in love with while researching my master’s thesis in rural South America. With a bright, fruity flavour – as the name and intense yellow colour suggest – this variety is indeed surprisingly lemony, somehow providing spice and citrus in equal measure. They really are one of those keystone ingredients whose flavour is simply unsubstitutable. Despite the delicious fruit being incredibly hard to track down in the UK, the seeds are common in catalogues, re-branded under the English name ‘Lemon Drop’. Further south comes a totally different species of chilli from the tiny handful from which all other varieties descend – the Rocoto (Capsicum pubescens). Believed to originally hail from Argentina and Bolivia, this is the most cool-weather-tolerant species, producing square fruit that look like regular red or green peppers. They have an intense fieriness combined with unique, grassy, melon-cucumber notes, which explains why my Latin friends from all over the UK will make long trips to buy frozen ones in speciality stores in London. They’re incredible if you eat them stuffed (if you can handle their heat) and they tolerate our cooler climate well. Finally, let’s not forget Brazil, with it’s spectacular Biquinho. These are small, bright red, cherry-sized chillies with a medium spice level, matched by an incredible tropical fruit flavour. Think of a habanero chilli with the spice level dialled right down. They are traditionally served pickled whole in a sweetened vinegar, sometimes laced with the Brazilian sugarcane spirit cachaça. I think of them as a sort of a savoury maraschino cherry that works pure magic on cheese and cured meat. Now I know I am not supposed to focus on appearance here, but their teardrop shape, ending in a pointy tip, (biquinho means “little beak”) adds to the whole eating experience. The best thing about chillies is that a little goes a long way – in the kitchen and garden. Even if you only have a small spare corner of your greenhouse, or sheltered spot on a sunny patio, having a few of these plants can transform your dishes. Pick one of these unusually flavourful ones and thank me later in the year. Follow James on Twitter @Botanygeek449 runs. 14 wickets. What a day of Test cricket. What to make of all that then? Incredible, no? Spare a thought for Geoff Lemon who is writing the match report as we speak and has to cram all that beautiful chaos into something intelligible. He wouldn’t have it any other way and neither would we. That was a real pleasure to OBO, thanks for your company over the past five hours or so. Both sides will now somehow have to gather themselves for the ODIs which get underway on Thursday. We’ll be there for those of course. I’m off for a lie down. Maybe I’ll just sneak a glimpse at the highlights first... And sure enough here is Geoff’s report, a belter, just like the match. This made me chuckle: Have had a few messages intimating the same thing. Kate Cross did waft at a few in the penultimate over but she shut up shop admirably in the last. England now have to win all three ODI matches to snaffle the Ashes which is a big ask but there’s a chance. There wouldn’t be if Cross had got big ideas and hacked one up in the air or gone dancing down in search of glory... and missed one. England are on the ropes for sure, but there’s still an outside chance they could land a surprise knockout punch. Cricket eh. Bloody ‘ell. What to make of that final session? First of all, kudos to England for a valiant run chase, for a good while there they looked magnificent as they set about hauling down a record target. Australia then roared back and in the end they looked like they were going to snatch it back. A draw is a fair result but both sides might come to wonder how they each didn’t win that game. Please forgive me if I act a little strange whilst I catch my breath. I’ll post some of the reaction to that pulsating finish. England finished up on 245/9. The Ashes are still alive. Just. A full toss from King... Cross pats it back. That’s it - England survive! Match drawn! What a game. 1 ball to go... can England cling on? All the fielders are in. This is epic. 5 balls to go. Fielders around the bat. Lanning commanding her troops. Cross wide eyed. Loops one up. Cross blocks. And repeat. 3 to go. Dot ball. Cross blocks the first. 47th over: England 244-9 (Ecclestone 0, Cross 1) Pheeewf! Cross plays and misses a couple of times, the ball a gnats eyebrow from the edge. Six balls to go. Alana King will bowl it. 1 wicket needed. Here we go... 46th over: England 244-9 (Ecclestone 0, Cross 0) We’ve got 12 balls left. Can England cling on now? Can Australia find this final wicket? Can I still type and breathe?! Dean ct Healy b King 3 Another one! Australia are on the verge here! Just one more wicket needed. England need 13 runs off 12 balls. Kate Cross is the last batter. Incredible. Shrubsole Run Out by Alana King for 6. England Australia need 2 wickets. England need 13 runs. 45th over: England 240-7 (Dean 2 , Shrubsole 3) Charlie Dean the debutant is the new batter. What a situation for her to arrive at the crease. A stolen single. Shrubsole then straight drives down the ground but it is just a single. Great nerve shown by Sutherland. England need 17 runs from 18 balls. Australia need 3 wickets. Brunt ct Healy b Sutherland 6 (England 236-7) 44th over: England 236-6 (Brunt 4, Shrubsole 1 ) Very nearly a run out but Brunt just scrabbles into her ground and is home by a inch of willow. England need 21 runs off 24 balls! This is compelling cricket. Dunkley ct Mooney b King 45 (England 233-6) Caught in the deep, another catch by Mooney, this one even better, diving forward and scooping the ball off the turf. A great catch. Dunkley has played a fine knock and given England more than just hope. Anya Shrubsole is the new batter. 43rd over: England 222-4 (Dunkley 45, Brunt 1) Dunkley sees Jones perish and Brunt arrive at the crease but she goes about her business undimmed. A four flayed away through the off side follows a couple of runs snatched to mid-wicket. Jones’s wicket and seven runs off the over. Brunt will be on strike for the next. England need 25 from 30 balls. Jones ct Mooney b Sutherland 4 (England 224-5) Jones caught in the deep! We hear ya Scyld: 42nd over: England 222-4 (Dunkley 38, Jones 4) Missed stumping! Jones topples as the ball heads down the leg side but Healy can’t gather. Breathe. Five runs off the over. England need 33 runs from 36 balls! 41st over: England 219-4 (Dunkley 37, Jones 0) England need 38 runs to win. Australia need 6 wickets. Sciver ct Lanning b Sutherland 58 England (218-4) Nat Sciver is out! Caught at square leg, another pull shot but this time it is straight to the fielder and Lanning takes a sharp catch in front of her eyes. A twist! A twist I tell ye! 40th over: England 214-3 (Dunkley 37, Sciver 54) Just one off the next over, we had a REVIEW half way through, Sciver hit on the pad by King and the Aussies go up vociferously but the umpire doesn’t give it and sure enough it is missing the stumps comfortably. Where is this game going next? 39th over: England 212-3 (Dunkley 37, Sciver 53) Just one off Sutherland’s over as she reverts to some short stuff. Dunkley swinging away merrily but failing to connect. A breather of sorts. Kim Thonger returns: “This is beginning to feel like a Headingley 1981 moment... I don’t know whether to put the kettle on or chill a bottle of champagne. Eek.” Get that champers in the kettle and boil it up Kim! That’s my serving suggestion. 38th over: England 212-3 (Dunkley 37, Sciver 52) Eight runs off the over and the target is now below 50. Dunkley pulls one away and bi-sects (?) the fielders perfectly. The field is scattered like crows on a phone line. I don’t know if that imagery really works but forgive me, Australia are on the end of an ambushing here. 53 runs needed. 37th over: England 204-3 (Dunkley 31, Sciver 50) SOPHIA DUNKLEY HAS JUST SMASHED BACK TO BACK SIXES! Oh my life. Sutherland just stands and watches as the ball sails well clear of the boundary on each occasion. A massive 16 runs off the over. Lanning turns to Alana King for the next over. Strap yourselves in... Well played, a punchy and brave knock from one of England’s finest. ClapClapClapClapClapClap 36th over: England 188-3 (Dunkley 18, Sciver 47) Sophia Dunkley! Maybe that early scare has given her a clarity of thought but safe to say she is nailing this, a four smashed down the ground straight and then another hooked away square. My fingers are sweaty? 35th over: England 179-3 (Dunkley 10, Sciver 46) The field is spread, despite that last over the Aussie’ are still rattled. There’s 11 runs off this one. Dunkley biffing one down the ground that bounces awkwardly and past the fielder. Martin Knight parps up: “Jim, awake early after maybe just a tad too much wine last night, and boy wasn’t that third bottle glass worth it if this is the consequence… Cycled home last night to the sounds of England winning a T20 in style, and now woken up to this. Can’t we just make Mo Captain of Everything and Heather Knight Commander in Chief of the ECB and get on with it? 34th over: England 168-3 (Dunkley 1, Sciver 44) Cripes! DUNKLEY IS GIVEN OUT FIRST BALL, LBW TO BROWN... but there’s another review. This looks dead too - but NO! NOT OUT. Somehow sneaking over! Pheeeewf. Game on here. Brown looks very dangerous all of a sudden. Knight lbw b Brown 48 (England 166-3) England’s captain is out for the first time in the match! She reviews but the ball is straight and smashing into the stumps. Knight knew it really, it was a weary T-sign. Darcie Brown has the breakthrough. 33rd over: England 166-2 (Knight 48, Sciver 43) Seven off the over as Sciver smashes another boundary. Phil Walker texts to say he’s rushing home, Lord only knows where that scamp has been, he’s got adagio for strings blaring in the cab. Feels about right. 32nd over: England 158-2 (Knight 46, Sciver 37) THIS IS NOT A DRILL. The target is less than 100. Another pulled boundary for Sciver. I kid you not, a bell is tolling in Canberra. England need 104 more runs to win. Gulp. Here we go. Adrian Armstrong is enjoying this: “This is a delight - and a welcome reminder that there’s more to life than a timely tax return. One thing worth bearing in mind for the future: we’re being quietly thrilled despite, not because of, the four-day format. The last thing players or spectators want is administrators latching onto this match, whatever the outcome, as proof that women’s Test cricket ain’t broke. And with that, I return to tea, cheese, crackers, and a big daft smile.” Crackin’. 31st over: England 153-2 (Knight 46, Sciver 32) Six off Jonassen’s latest. Australia look a bit toothless and clueless here. Lanning looks shell-shocked. Drinks are called and that means we are down to the last hour of this game. 30th over: England 137-2 (Knight 41, Sciver 30) Big over for England! Ten runs from it. Sciver unleashes another meaty pull from the first ball. Next ball she squirts one off the under edge down to fine leg for four more. That’s the fifty partnership between these Knight and Sciver. They have both been fantastic. We’re nearly into the last hour. Join us. Join us. 29th over: England 137-2 (Knight 41, Sciver 21) Four singles from Jonassen’s over, be under no illusion - THIS IS ON. 28th over: England 133-2 (Knight 39, Sciver 19) We are firmly into one-day mode here at the end of this Test match, scampered singles, deft little dabs and crunching boundaries. Three singles off the over and Jonassen is coming back into the attack. 27th over: England 130-2 (Knight 37, Sciver 18) England have been going at a run a ball for the last ten overs! Great shot! Knight plays the reverse sweep off King and gets four. That’s 200 runs in the match for Knight, for no dismissals, yet. *Whisper it * England are surely now the only team that can win this game. 26th over: England 122-2 (Knight 30, Sciver 17) Knight gets a thick edge through the vacant slip region for another boundary. Another groan is audible. Safe to say it is antipodean. 25th over: England 116-2 (Knight 25, Sciver 16) Another six from the over. Another boundary to Sciver. Another reminder that if England haul this target down it will be the highest chase in women’s Test cricket. 24th over: England 110-2 (Knight 24, Sciver 11) England get six off Perry’s latest, Sciver is looking in good nick, crunching a drive through the covers. 23rd over: England 104-2 (Knight 23, Sciver 6) Three runs and a bonus no-ball off the over as an email ploops in from Kim Thonger: “Good morning James, may I say what a pleasure it is to watch an England batting unit go about their business confidently and competently? After a year of grimacing at the men’s team collapsing like ice cubes in a blast furnace, this is genuinely enjoyable, proper cricket.” That it is Kim, That it is. 22nd over: England 100-2 (Knight 21, Sciver 5 ) 100 up for England, notched up in style by the new batter, Nat Sciver, who pounces on a short one and swivel-pulls it away to the rope. England seem undeterred. We’re going to have some spin from the be-shaded Alana King. Winfield-Hill ct Haynes b Perry 33 (England 94-2) Gah! Fun while it lasted, Haynes again with a sharp grab at short mid-wicket. 21st over: England 93-1 (Knight 20, Winfield-Hill 33) What was in Winfield-Hill’s beverage?! She clouts McGrath for four first ball, rocking back and pulling her powerfully to the fence. And another one! This pull shot even more emphatic than the last. I swear I heard an Australian fielder groan as the ball whistled away to the boundary. At what stage will they start to get a tad twitchy? 20th over: England 83-1 (Knight 20, Winfield-Hill 23) Gardner to whirl away after drinks. Heather Knight looked to be a little ginger during the drinks break, perhaps a back twinge? She doesn’t look overly concerned though. She’s been on the field for all but an hour of this match. Great effort. Three from the over. 19th over: England 80-1 (Knight 19, Winfield-Hill 21) Busy again from England, sun out, the outfield is fast and life feels full of hope... the Aussies look a little flat, but that could all change very quickly. They’ll have a chance to gather themselves as it is drinks. 18th over: England 75-1 (Knight 17, Winfield-Hill 20) Five more off the over including a slog-swept boundary from Knight who is lighting up the crease at the moment. It is 4:47am. London is dark, cold and quiet. But I for one am AWAKE. 17th over: England 70-1 (Knight 12, Winfield-Hill 20) Ten runs off the over! This is great to see, England are definitely trying to give themselves a sniff here. Knight gets two boundaries away off McGrath. She is different class. 16th over: England 60-1 (Knight 3, Winfield-Hill 20) Another boundary and a couple, I reckon England fancy this y’know. 15th over: England 54-1 (Knight 2, Winfield-Hill 15) Knight strides to the crease, fresh off that incredible knock in the first dig. She’s away straight away with a couple flicked through mid-wicket off a full bunger. Beaumont played positively and will be slightly annoyed at the way she perished, it was there to hit but just leaning back on the stroke resulted in the ball going aerial and it was a fine grab by Haynes as it was travelling. Sharp grab by Haynes in the covers! Firm but uppish drive from Beaumont and she has to go. Australia have their first. 14th over: England 52-0 (Beaumont 36, Winfield-Hill 15) Half volley served up by Sutherland that is smeared through the covers by Winfield-Hill. That’s a fifty partnership between these two. Batted. 13th over: England 48-0 (Beaumont 36, Winfield-Hill 11) Not quiet for long though as Beaumont skips down to the first ball of the next over and whips it through the leg side for another boundary. Jonassen then drags down with the last ball of the over and it is duly dispatched for another four. Good stuff this from England, minimal risk, just putting the bad ball away and reverting some pressure back onto the Aussie bowlers. 12th over: England 40-0 (Beaumont 28, Winfield-Hill 11) Just a couple off it, things have quietened down a tad. 11th over: England 38-0 (Beaumont 28, Winfield-Hill 9) Just a single off Jonassen’s over. 10th over: England 37-0 (Beaumont 28, Winfield-Hill 8) A further 6 off the over, including a boundary through point for Beaumont. 9th over: England 31-0 (Beaumont 22, Winfield-Hill 8) Winfield-Hill gets in on the act now too! Back foot crunch for four off Jonassen - who keeps it tight thereafter. The floodlights at the Manuka Oval resemble giant spatulas. That’s all I’ve got on that one… though it is still a bit cloudy in Canberra so maybe the spatulas/lights could come into play as this game goes deep. 8th over: England 27-0 (Beaumont 22, Winfield-Hill 4) Beaumont really has the bit between her teeth here, she drives Sutherland imperiously for four, her fourth boundary and she’s on 22 from 26 deliveries. Are England going to try and haul this down? 7th over: England 23-0 (Beaumont 18, Winfield-Hill 4) A maiden to Ash Gardner to start us off after tea. Geoff ain’t ‘appy: The players are on their way back out. Finbar Anslow has been in touch. “Good morning James, (G’morning Finbar) 4.53 here in Northern Italy. Game looks pretty nicely poised, must confess I’m a complete newcomer to the woman’s game. As a West Countryman who should I be looking out for on the England side?” Good to have you aboard, I reckon send the whole team your good vibes down from Northern Italy, they might need it either way in this final session! Who’s up and dialled into this game? Let me know you’re out there where you think this Test is headed - on the email and the twitters Shout out to Hypocaust, Lord of the stats. And also to the ever brilliant Izzy Westbury who is bringing all her charm, insight and knowledge to the TV coverage. Fist bumps all round. 6th over: England 23-0 (Beaumont 18, Winfield-Hill 4) Jess Jonassen’s left arm tweakers for the last over before the break. Yikes - Beaumont tries to ramp her first ball but misses it... next ball she is almost pinned lbw to one that skids on. Saved by the inside edge. Then a short one is clubbed away for four to mid-wicket. It is not dull. That’s tea. 5th over: England 17-0 (Beaumont 12, Winfield-Hill 4) A tickle off the legs from Beaumont brings a boundary down to fine leg. She’s looking busy at the crease and scampers another single off the last ball. We’ll have one more over before the tea interval. 4th over: England 12-0 (Beaumont 7, Winfield-Hill 4) Banana watch: 3rd over: England 11-0 (Beaumont 6, Winfield-Hill 4) Beaumont is looking very positive, she whips a full ball from Perry off her toes to the mid-wicket boundary. Delightful timing. She then forces through the covers, for a safer single this time. 45 Overs remaining. England need 5.47 runs required per over. Australia still need the ten wickets. 2nd over: England 5-0 (Beaumont 1, Winfield-Hill 4) Sheeeeeesh -Beaumont scrambles a quick single to Perry at mid-off and I reckon a direct hit and she was a goner there! England showing intent. Yeh let’s go with intent. Just the one, that one, off it. 1st over: England 4-0 (Beaumont 0, Winfield-Hill 4) England are away, cruising this run chase already. Winfield-Hill drives confidently on the front foot to bookend the over. The players are back out there, Ellyse Perry has the new ball in hand and Beaumont and Winfield-Hill are opening up for England. Let’s play! Jess Jonassen came out and played a few scything shots at the end there, three boundaries in quick succession before the declaration came. Time for a quick cup of java before we get down to the business end of this match. Let me know if you are tuning in. Lanning waves them in. England need 257 runs and Australia ten wickets. There are 48 overs left in the day. Where’s your money? Definitely a message as McGrath skips down and deposits Dean off the first ball of the next over. An imposing strike. But very next ball she is BOWLED BY DEAN, through the gate with a bit of turn, good comeback and well bowled by the debutant. Will that be the declaration? Nope - out comes Jess Jonassen 62nd over: Australia 195-6 (McGrath 30, Sutherland 4) 3 off the over and still we go on. A pair of gloves and no doubt a message is sent out to the middle 61st over: Australia 192-6 (McGrath 28, Sutherland 3) Maiden from Sciver as the camera hones in on Meg Lanning whispering behind her hand... Thanks Geoff and hello OBO, The Ashes are on the line then and could be decided in the next few hours. England need to get something from this game, a draw just about keeps them in the hunt but will then require them snatching all three ODIs - a daunting and unlikely prospect against this Australian side, dominant as they are in the format. So will England go for broke and try and steal this game, pulling off a record-breaking run chase in the process? Or will Australia bowl them out and take the spoils? I reckon it’s going to get twitchy later on, which could be fun. Or not. Jim here in London, keep me company through the graveyard hours with your thoughts, theories and whimsy. I’m on the email and the twitters 60th over: Australia 192-6 (McGrath 26, Sutherland 3) Ecclestone to McGrath, a couple more runs, a lead of 232, and there are 54 overs remaining. I’m out of here, James Wallace coming in. 59th over: Australia 190-6 (McGrath 26, Sutherland 3) McGrath lays into a pull shot now, taking four from Sciver. Sutherland tries the same and edges it down towards Ecclestone, but the fielder can only dive and stop it, rather than get close enough to attempt a catch. 58th over: Australia 178-6 (McGrath 21, Sutherland 0) Lovely shot by McGrath from Ecclestone, driven off the pads through midwicket for four. Two close catchers and a short cover in place. 57th over: Australia 178-6 (McGrath 17) Wicket falls from the last ball of the over. Change of bowling, a short ball, Gardner hooks it because Gardner will, and the top edge goes down to long leg for a catch. The Australians are sending in Sutherland next, and it looks like King is padding up now. The batting will roll on. 56th over: Australia 175-5 (McGrath 16, Gardner 36) This is become a dirge. McGrath soaks up an over, scores a single, and has 16 off 43 balls. The great ball-striker of the T20s is doing this. It’s just pointless by now. England can’t chase this if Australia need to stop the runs, so why not put them in and take the best chance at bowling them out? 55th over: Australia 174-5 (McGrath 15, Gardner 36) McGrath lays into three shots against Cross in that over, and gets one run. Dunkley stops one at cover, half stops the other, and Ecclestone stops one at mid on. Gardner drives three down to long on, where Shrubsole has to chase back and stop the four. Can’t stop the next attempt after rotating strike though, with Gardner clubbing it over Shrubsole’s head for a one-bounce four. The lead is 214. There are probably 59 overs to go if we assume we’ll get 17 in the last hour. 54th over: Australia 165-5 (McGrath 13, Gardner 29) Four catchers around the bat for Gardner facing Ecclestone. Cuffs a cut shot away for two runs regardless. 53rd over: Australia 161-5 (McGrath 12, Gardner 26) Cross tries again, getting slapped over deep point for what could have been a catch but it lands safely. Anya Shrubsole puts an arm around Cross’ shoulders after the over. “Shrubsoling her,” says my colleague Bharat Sundaresan. 52nd over: Australia 157-5 (McGrath 11, Gardner 23) There’s the Gardner cut shot again, powerfully timed behind point for four more. They have two fielders for the shot but Gardner splits them off Ecclestone. Then she goes back and pulls two. The lead is 197. Lanning is still in her training kit instead of her whites with 51 overs left. Looks like the Australians will go the boring safety-first route again, as Lanning did in 2019. 51st over: Australia 151-5 (McGrath 11, Gardner 17) Kate Cross to replace Brunt, another mighty McGrath drive is well saved at cover by Dunkley diving across. McGrath blocks out the rest. This isn’t declaration batting, it’s just Gardner batting like Gardner. 50th over: Australia 151-5 (McGrath 11, Gardner 17) Nearly chips up to cover, does Gardner, before leaning back and lacing a late cut for four. Finishes off the over with a more forceful cut square for the same result. The lead is 191. 49th over: Australia 143-5 (McGrath 9, Gardner 9) Brunt nearly gets McGrath chipping a catch back, having to step away to dig out a yorker. McGrath is cutting well whenever the length affords it though, finding ones and twos. 48th over: Australia 139-5 (McGrath 8, Gardner 8) Nicely driven through cover again by Gardner, two runs. We’ll have 65 overs left after this one, with two lost for the changeover, so if Australia want to declare it will need to come soon. Lanning is usually a conservative captain though. Gardner chips two more over cover. The lead is 179. 47th over: Australia 135-5 (McGrath 8, Gardner 4) McGrath reaches for width from Brunt and clips on the bounce to gully. Dicey shot. Leaves alone the next wide one. Brunt responds with a perfume ball that wafts past McGrath’s face. 46th over: Australia 135-5 (McGrath 8, Gardner 4) Ecclestone to partner Brunt. Has McGrath stabbing away on the bounce to second slip, then away just past short leg. Gets off strike though, and Gardner pings four through cover. Very attacking field. 45th over: Australia 130-5 (McGrath 7, Gardner 0) Big appeal from Brunt last ball of the over, hits Gardner on the pad but going down leg. Eloise Sheridan has had a very good Test match umpiring. Double spin is over, Brunt is back. And strikes straight away! Standard delivery outside off stump but Lanning pushes at it, half-hearted kind of shot, and provides the edge for Heather Knight. The lead is 170. 44th over: Australia 130-4 (Lanning 12, McGrath 7) Ecclestone from the Manuka Pool end. McGrath picks up where she left off in the first innings, bashing a cover drive for four. 43rd over: Australia 126-4 (Lanning 12, McGrath 3) Here is Charlie Dean to finish the over that she started before lunch. Having taken her first Test wicket. I don’t know if it was superstition or taking in the moment, but she spent the entire lunch break sitting in the dugout by the boundary on her own, rather than going into the rooms to eat. Her first ball back, it’s off the outside edge of McGrath and just past silly mid-off. McGrath gets going with two runs through square leg, then a single to cover. Lunch is coming to an end. Here we go. 42.2 overs bowled, with Dean interrupted as lunch is taken with the fall of the wicket. That was Australia’s session, despite the wickets towards the end. They added 111 runs in the extended 2.5 hours. There should be about 71 overs left in the day, and they already have a healthy lead. Bat for another hour, slog a few, and they probably can’t lose this match. But England still have a thread of hope. Must take more wickets quickly after the break. News in from Sydney, too, where our sport editor’s son, Finn Hytner, has just made 71 not out and taken three wickets in the Under-12 Sunday Sixers league. Top work. That’s Eccle-stone dead. Hits Mooney right on the toe in front of middle, which means ball-tracking has to assume it’s going straight on. Mooney started to walk but Lanning called her to review. The result goes as expected. 42nd over: Australia 122-3 (Mooney 63, Lanning 11) Two slips in for Ecclestone bowling the left-hander now, which is curious. Mooney responds with an off-drive for four. 41st over: Australia 118-3 (Mooney 59, Lanning 11) Lanning mostly defending now against Dean, aside from clipping away a brace through square. 40th over: Australia 116-3 (Mooney 59, Lanning 9) More appeals, as Beaumont snares a rebound at short leg, but there was no bat from Mooney. 39th over: Australia 113-3 (Mooney 57, Lanning 8) The Australian captain working runs from Dean with ease, either side of the wicket. The lead is 153. 38th over: Australia 108-3 (Mooney 56, Lanning 4) Ecclestone with another one-run over. 37th over: Australia 107-3 (Mooney 56, Lanning 3) Australia just happy to bat, not looking to put the foot down. One run from Dean’s over as the lead climbs towards one fifty. 36th over: Australia 106-3 (Mooney 56, Lanning 2) Ecclestone continues, Lanning off the mark by flicking square. Then gets strike back and produces a nice square drive to the deep sweeper. 35th over: Australia 103-3 (Mooney 55, Lanning 0) Charlie Dean bowls a maiden over to Mooney, who is blocking everything. 34th over: Australia 103-3 (Mooney 55, Lanning 0) Ecclestone finishes her over with a couple of hand grenades to Meg Lanning, or so it seems. Very watchful. Australia lead by 143. You’d think England have left their run too late. Finally they get one. Hits Perry low as she stretches forward, and in front. She talks to Mooney and then walks off. But she was a long way forward! And they have three reviews in hand. Why wouldn’t you check that one? Anyway, she’s given herself out. 33rd over: Australia 103-2 (Perry 41, Mooney 55) Charlie Dean on for a bowl, tossing it up and drawing Mooney into a drive to deep cover for two. 32nd over: Australia 101-2 (Perry 41, Mooney 53) Down on one knee goes Mooney, miscuing a sweep from Ecclestone for a single. Perry defends the rest. England appeal for a couple of pad strikes, no love. 31st over: Australia 100-2 (Perry 41, Mooney 52) Kate is certainly cross right now. Chances spurned. She bowls a floaty full one that Perry dismisses through cover. Australia’s three figures come up. 30th over: Australia 95-2 (Perry 37, Mooney 51) England lose another review after Perry stretches forward in defence and comes close to edging a ball behind. But doesn’t. We had a check for a stumping as well. Perry survives. More runs come. Mooney edges a couple away to raise her 50. The lead is 132. Mooney pulls away another run. 29th over: Australia 91-2 (Perry 36, Mooney 48) Still three slips and a point for Perry, the gully has been taken out. Bowls outside off and now Perry is dropped! Ohhhhh my. Amy Jones again. Perry goes hard at it, thick edge going towards first slip. Jones the keeper has every right to go for the catch but her footwork looks slow, she has to dive, and she gets one glove to it without taking it in. All the drops in the first innings, now these ones: in short, England have not been good enough to win. 28th over: Australia 86-2 (Perry 31, Mooney 48) Ecclestone gets an appeal sent upstairs as Mooney comes forward with bat and pad together and is hit in line. Umpire Graham-Smith says not out and the soundwave tech suggests there might have been a tiny inside edge. Could also have been the bat hitting ground or boot or something. I don’t know whether it would have hit the stumps because we didn’t see the ball-tracking afterwards. 27th over: Australia 86-2 (Perry 31, Mooney 48) Cross has to find the calm to continue. Hit Mooney on the pad but there’s some edge involved. Finding a better length to Perry as well. 26th over: Australia 83-2 (Perry 31, Mooney 45) Ecclestone continuing, and they collect a couple of singles. 25th over: Australia 81-2 (Perry 30, Mooney 44) Cross in to Mooney after drinks, and she’s dropped by Jones! Straightforward chance for the keeper, one sidestep, normal height, and it hits her wrist and flies away for four runs. That is an awful miss. Mooney was on 40. 24th over: Australia 76-2 (Perry 29, Mooney 40) A couple of false shots against Ecclestone, Mooney top-edging the cut and then top-edging the pull, but lots of gaps and it all ends well for the batter. Drinks. 23rd over: Australia 70-2 (Perry 28, Mooney 35) Perry has been quiet for a while, but comes back to life with a perfect straight drive for four. Just past the non-striker’s stumps and down the ground from Cross. The partnership goes up to 58 with a couple of singles thrown in as well. 22nd over: Australia 64-2 (Perry 23, Mooney 34) The left-hander is happier to play shots against the spinner, tugging into the leg side for two on a couple of occasions. 21st over: Australia 60-2 (Perry 23, Mooney 30) Kate Cross on to replace Sciver. Mooney isn’t shy about playing shots to Cross, but keeps finding the field until a single off the last ball. 20th over: Australia 59-2 (Perry 23, Mooney 29) No run from Ecclestone’s over, as Perry is happy to wait it out. They’re being very cautious against England’s premier spinner. 19th over: Australia 59-2 (Perry 23, Mooney 29) A few really nice shots from Mooney today, and that’s the best of them as she steps into a cover drive for four. Add that to a brace through square leg. Sciver can’t put the brakes on. 18th over: Australia 53-2 (Perry 23, Mooney 23) Ecclestone to Mooney, another over with only a single as Mooney is largely happy to defend. Brunt has been off the field for a few overs but comes back on now. Danni Wyatt was the sub. 17th over: Australia 52-2 (Perry 23, Mooney 22) Sciver to Perry, who clips two more runs off her legs to deep square in an otherwise tidy over. 16th over: Australia 50-2 (Perry 21, Mooney 22) Ecclestone around the wicket to the left-hander,t rying to turn in to Mooney with a short leg in place Leg slip and a regulation slip as well. England need this wicket. The day is getting warmer too, still sticky and humid. No run from the over. 15th over: Australia 50-2 (Perry 21, Mooney 22) Sciver tries to bang in a few balls, make something happen by hitting the pitch. Finds swing when she pitches up as well. Three singles regardless. 14th over: Australia 47-2 (Perry 20, Mooney 21) Ecclestone comes on and slows the scoring immediately, Perry fishing without much contact at a few balls after a Mooney single. Chris Mackenzie-Davey takes passionately to his keyboard. “In response to Tim’s comments on Canberra yesterday: been living here for 20 years and take from a local, it’s fantastic. World class galleries and museums, vibrant arts scene, fantastic restaurants and fresh food markets, superb wine district, wonderful parks and gardens, national parks and bush reserves everywhere, five universities with campuses, incredible local region to explore including NSW south coast, Snowy Mountains and a myriad of other things to do and see. What’s not to love! Only things lacking are first-class cricket and an A-League football team. Oh, and we have Australia’s best beer!” Pretty sure the smaller breweries in most Australian cities would all have a decent claim to that last part, but the rest is true enough. Also when Canberrans complain about “peak hour” traffic for a five-minute delay it’s quite funny. Bloody cold in winter though, and can be bloody hot in summer. No escape on the great inland plains. 13th over: Australia 46-2 (Perry 20, Mooney 20) Sciver to replace Brunt, but it doesn’t start well as she overpitches and gets smoked through cover for four. Perry’s most convincing shot of the morning. Finds some outswing but Perry reaches for it and guides four through the gap at gully. Catches up to Mooney’s score. 12th over: Australia 38-2 (Perry 12, Mooney 20) Short ball from Shrubsole down the leg side, money for jam, but Mooney can’t catch up with it. Mooney is happy to leave most everything else. 11th over: Australia 38-2 (Perry 12, Mooney 20) A clever shot from Mooney, opening the face of her bat and diverting crisply behind point for four, and that was a decent enough ball from Brunt. A few singles as well, Mooney is keeping things moving. 10th over: Australia 31-2 (Perry 11, Mooney 14) Again Perry flings a drive at Shrubsole and very nearly edges behind again. The batting machine is not purring. Gets another thick outside edge past gully for a couple of runs. 9th over: Australia 29-2 (Perry 9, Mooney 14) A bit streaky and a bit controlled from Perry, driving with the outswing of Brunt to divert the ball along the ground past gully for four runs. Then it should be a dot ball as Perry clips to midwicket but Kate Cross lets it through her hands for three. We noticed she left a half-eaten banana on the boundary at fine leg, so perhaps there was some fruit-related slipperiness involved. 8th over: Australia 21-2 (Perry 2, Mooney 14) Nearly out, Mooney, with a big bottom-handed drive aimed at mid-on. Misses it and it nearly takes the inside edge to the keeper. Shrubsole follows up with a peach to Perry that nearly takes the outside edge. Survival time. 7th over: Australia 20-2 (Perry 2, Mooney 13) A solid thunk from Mooney’s bat as she strides forward and cover-drives Brunt, but straight at the fielder. Can’t get a run until a flick to leg from the sixth ball. 6th over: Australia 19-2 (Perry 2, Mooney 12) Shrubsole to partner Brunt, swinging one in that almost gets Perry in trouble lbw as well. Just gets some bat onto it for a single. Shrubsole bowls a right-hander’s line to the left-handed Mooney, who glances off her leg stump for four. 5th over: Australia 13-2 (Perry 0, Mooney 7) Just a couple of Brunt deliveries to finish the over that was interrupted yesterday, as the bowler appeals for one that hits the middle of Perry’s bat. It will be Perry and Mooney to resume, with Brunt bowling. Three slips, gully, point, cover, mid-off, mid-on, long leg. Running my eye over Manuka Oval, all looks good here. Plenty of green still on the surface, and some ragged patches at both ends of the strip. Is there enough there for the bowlers to force enough mistakes? That is the question. But at least, unlike most pitches we’ve seen in this format, there is a fair chance. Here’s my match report from yesterday’s play, which was great while it lasted. Good Canberra morning, nuffies. Here we are from the Australian capital once again, and the first thing I need to report to you is that it isn’t raining. Not now, at least. The forecast suggests showers could happen at any point during the day, though the radar isn’t showing much at present. So who knows. We lost two full sessions yesterday to rain, right at a very exciting part of the day, which has taken the air out of the game. The paths to a win for either team from here are: one, an 18-wicket day in which England fall short. Two, eight Australian wickets by perhaps an hour after lunch, and England have time to chase. Right now the Aussies are 52 runs ahead and two wickets down, and England will resume with rested bowlers and an almost new ball. So who knows.Conor Burns, one of the troupe of Johnson loyalists willing to humiliate themselves on behalf of the prime minister, now knows the first line of his obituary. It will be his attempt to excuse Boris Johnson’s lockdown-busting birthday party inside Number 10 with the immortal phrase “he was, in a sense, ambushed with a cake”. This deserved all the mockery it got, but it is by no means the most desperate of the arguments being offered by those trying to save the prime minister’s skin. Nobody warned me it was against the rules First came all those false denials that there had been any partying at Number 10. Then the prime minister was forced to admit he went to a “bring your own booze” bash in Downing Street, a confession that came with the ridiculous alibi that he mistook a garden full of people chugging drinks for a “work event”. His most pathetic excuse has been to suggest he had no idea what was against the rules. Even if you find it kind of plausible that such a recklessly irresponsible man was clueless about the laws enacted by his own government, ignorance is no defence. Let’s get a sense of proportion Many Johnson apologists have been pushing this line as a strategy to trivialise the scandal. This version comes from the veteran Tory MP, Sir Edward Leigh: “When Europe stands on the brink of war and with a cost-of-living crisis, can we please have a sense of proportion over the prime minister being given a piece of cake in his own office by his own staff?” A lot of citizens were punished for much smaller gatherings than the birthday party in the cabinet room and we know that this was just one of at least 15 revelries in Number 10 during some of the most intense periods of the pandemic, including a raucous booze-up on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral. This is not about “a piece of cake”. It is about whether the prime minister and his staff broke the lockdown rules that they imposed on the rest of the country and then lied about it. The Metropolitan police, which was previously very reluctant to get involved, would not now be conducting a criminal investigation if it regarded it as trivial. The Met commissioner says the police already has evidence of “serious and flagrant” breaches of the rules. We can probably all agree that Britain would be better off if Downing Street had its full attention on the Russian threat to Ukraine, soaring energy bills and the squeeze on the standard of living. We instead have a prime minister whose time is consumed by clinging on to his job. If Sir Edward and other Tory MPs want a leader focused on dangers abroad and crises at home, then they will need to get a new one. He’s not robbed a bank This contribution, almost as priceless as “ambushed with a cake”, came from the Essex Tory, Andrew Rosindell. Mr Johnson has robbed his high office of dignity, credibility and authority. Tory MPs do the same to their party the longer they go on trying to defend him. We have got all the big calls right This line is a favourite of Mr Johnson himself and one that he fell back on again at the most recent prime minister’s questions. The fatal flaw is that it is not true. Elements of Britain’s response to the pandemic have been impressive, notably the rapid development and distribution of vaccines. The credit for that primarily belongs to brilliant scientists and the efficiency with which the NHS got jabs into people’s arms. We should also take our hats off to Sir Patrick Vallance, who created the vaccine task force, and the task force’s leader, Dame Kate Bingham. The “big calls” for which Mr Johnson had prime responsibility were about the timing of lockdowns and these he judged so badly that Britain has the highest death toll in Europe. Most people broke the rules Crispin Blunt, the Conservative MP for Reigate, dismissed lockdown-busting at Number 10 with the claim that “probably inside most homes and inside most businesses, and inside most places of public administration, people may not have kept absolutely to the rules”. I’d previously taken Mr Blunt to be one of the better minds in his party. His dreadful defence demonstrates that the effort to save Mr Johnson is turning intelligent men into wretched dolts. Surveys suggest that most of the public were highly compliant with lockdowns, often making agonising choices and sacrifices to help with the life-and-death struggle to contain Covid. Even if some people did break the rules, that doesn’t make it fine for the prime minister and his staff to be among them. Lawmakers cannot be law breakers. Labour wants me to resign This claim by Mr Johnson is not aimed at you or me, but at Tory MPs’ havering over whether to trigger a confidence vote. He wants them to believe that his eviction would be a dream result for the opposition. Some Labour MPs do think that, even after all this, he would probably be a more formidable opponent at the next election than any of the alternative leaders available to the Tories. But the majority view within Labour’s ranks is that they are best served if he manages to limp on at Number 10 with his reputation shredded. There will have to be an election if the prime minister is changed This contention has been pushed by Nadine Dorries and Jacob Rees-Mogg, both famous constitutional non-experts. It is notable that the rest of the cabinet have eschewed this argument. It is easy to see why, especially in the cases of Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss. Were they to take this line and then find themselves prime minister they would have sworn up to calling a snap election whether or not it suited the Conservatives. Voters might want an election in the event of a change at the top. The opposition would very likely demand one. There’s a case to be made that a new prime minister ought to seek a fresh mandate from the public. But there is absolutely no requirement for this to happen. The two most recent changes of Tory prime minister – Cameron to May and May to Johnson – were not immediately followed by an election. Nor were the transitions from Eden to Macmillan, Macmillan to Douglas-Home, Wilson to Callaghan, Thatcher to Major and Blair to Brown. The claim there would have to be an election is a crude and bogus attempt to scare Tory MPs. What a change of prime minister would certainly mean is a new cabinet. That’s what really worries Ms Dorries and Mr Rees-Mogg. Wait for the Sue Gray report This one is changing into “delay for the detectives”. Johnson loyalists are gleeful that the Met has asked Ms Gray not to reveal key details of the eight events under police investigation. The prime minister reckons this will buy him more time, but Tory MPs should ask themselves for what purpose the time is being bought. Voters have already made up their minds that rules were broken. If Ms Gray’s report is published in heavily redacted form, which now appears to be the intention, it will look like a Whitehall whitewash. The police investigation could drag on for weeks, even months. If it ends with Mr Johnson slithering free, the public will conclude that it was an establishment stitch-up. Only a penalty charge notice Even if the police investigation results in convictions, some around the prime minister are blithely shrugging that this wouldn’t be so serious because the penalty for breaking Covid laws is usually a fine. By talking about this as if it would be no worse than receiving a parking ticket, people at Number 10 reveal that they still haven’t grasped the gravity of this scandal. The voters are sick and tired of it “I’ve been out and about with my constituents in Great Grimsby,” the Tory MP Lia Nici told the Commons. “They are sick and tired” of hearing about lockdown-busting parties at Number 10 and “want him [Johnson] to carry on getting on with the job”. If this is really true, Great Grimsby has a political microclimate entirely unlike anywhere else in the country. All the opinion polling suggests that voters are furious with the prime minister and a substantial majority, which includes about half of those who voted Conservative in 2019, think he should be removed from office. What they are sick and tired of is him and being taken for fools by his apologists. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverEight years on from the Trojan horse affair, Birmingham is braced to revisit memories of the difficult period as a new podcast examines the incident for an international audience. The divisive scandal thrust the city under the national spotlight in 2014 after a fake letter claimed there was a plot to Islamise schools, resulting in a crackdown on a number of teachers. The podcast, created by the New York Times and Serial, will investigate who was behind the Trojan horse letter, and what their motivations were in sparking the national panic. In late 2013, a photocopy of a letter, which appeared to be correspondence between Muslims plotting to take control of local schools, was sent to Birmingham city council with an anonymous note by someone claiming to have found the document in their boss’s office. The document was leaked to the press in 2014, and although the letter was quickly debunked as a fake, the accusations took on a life of their own. Albert Bore, leader of Birmingham city council until 2015, said that at the time of the scandal there had been serious concerns that “there might be an undermining” of Birmingham’s Muslim community “for years to come”. Bore, who is interviewed in the podcast, said that the council “did not accept” the approach taken by Michael Gove, who was then education secretary. Bore referred to the appointment of Peter Clarke, the former head of counter-terrorism with the Metropolitan police, who had the task of investigating the scandal, saying: “Two people were appointed to look into Trojan horse, one appointed by the city council and one appointed by Michael Gove. Michael Gove’s person was a former counter-terrorism person. So that underlines where he was coming from.” The letter resulted in a crackdown, with more than a dozen teachers barred from teaching before most of the bans were overturned. Bore said the concerns about the scandal’s impact on young people persisted until the story faded away: “Throughout that period, the city council was concerned about the immediate impact upon the Muslim community and particularly young people, and how detrimental it might be to them. Those concerns continued for a few years until the Trojan horse story sunk.” Similar fears were raised at the time of the scandal, with Labour MP Shabana Mahmood warning in 2014 that children in Birmingham risked having their futures harmed by allegations aimed at their schools. “There will always be children in Birmingham living with that stigma, day in and day out,” she said at the time. Samira Shackle, a freelance journalist who investigated the scandal in 2017, said there were potentially two sides to the subject being re-opened. “People who were involved have a sense of being hard done by and wanting the case to be heard,” she said. “On the other hand, I think there is an element of old wounds being opened. Because lots of people in the wider community just kind of want it to go away… the media scrutiny was so intense. “Regardless of what details come out, a lot of it is still talking about already marginalised areas being spoken about in the framework of extremism and radicalisation, and actually without very much foundation,” Shackle said.Ministers face calls this weekend to publish an investigation into how more than 700 Russian millionaires were fast-tracked for British residency via a “golden visa” scheme exposed for lax checks on illicit funds. The government said six months ago that it was finalising its report into tier 1 investor visas granted to the super-rich from several countries, including Russia, China and Kazakhstan, because of concerns over “dirty money”. It now faces calls to suspend the golden visa programme until the review is published. Under the scheme, launched in 2008, applicants provide a minimum investment of £2m in exchange for the right to live in Britain. They can later apply for full citizenship and a passport. The Liberal Democrat peer Lord Wallace has tabled an amendment to the nationality and borders bill in the House of Lords, requiring the scheme to be halted until the review is published. He said: “It’s claimed we are a great global country, but we are behaving like Cyprus and Malta by selling residency.” Britain faces criticism over claims it has failed to properly monitor the billions of pounds of Russian money which has flowed into London over the past two decades. A report by the Center for American Progress, a think tank close to the Biden administration, warned last week that “stronger action” against money laundering was required from the UK, which had become a main hub for Russian oligarchs and their wealth. It said more effective action would be required from the UK in the event of tough sanctions against Russia over the Ukraine crisis. The government has promoted its golden visa scheme around the world over the last decade. Campaigners highlighted that the government was creating a “hostile environment” for illegal immigrants at the same time as selling residency to the super-rich. The controversial programme came under scrutiny after the Russian state was blamed for the novichok poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal in Salisbury in March 2018. Transparency International warned that the scheme had been “wide open” to abuse by corrupt individuals because of the very limited checks that had been carried out on the source of their wealth. It was revealed six months after the Salisbury attacks that the government was conducting a review of golden visas handed out between June 2008 and April 2015. It was reported at the time that officials were scrutinising more than 3,000 visas, including more than 700 handed to Russians. There are also hundreds of dependants of successful visa applicants who have been permitted into the country under the scheme. It was reported last year more than 6,300 visas are now under review. New reforms to the scheme were announced in March 2019, including better checks on the source of funds and the requirement for an applicant to have a UK bank account. A report by the charity Spotlight on Corruption, called Red Carpet for Dirty Money, was published in July last year and warned of continuing weakness in the golden visa regime, which it said relied too heavily on financial institutions to conduct anti-money-laundering and due diligence checks. Susan Hawley, executive director of the charity, said: “We know Russia has wanted to infiltrate people in the UK and this has been a very easy route to do that. They must be laughing up their sleeves that this country is such an easy touch in allowing people in without proper checks. The government needs to urgently publish its review into the scheme and we need an independent audit of whether it meets its original purposes and whether it is fair.” Ministers were warned by parliament’s intelligence and security committee report on Russia in July 2020 about risks of the golden visa scheme. It said London had become a popular destination for Russian oligarchs and the key to London’s appeal was “the exploitation of the UK’s investor visa scheme”. The report said: “The UK welcomed Russian money, and few questions – if any – were asked about the provenance of this considerable wealth…What is now clear is that it offered ideal mechanisms by which illicit finance could be recycled through what has been referred to as the London laundromat.” John Penrose, the Conservative MP and the government’s anti-corruption champion, is among those pushing for more state action against illicit finance. He accused the government last week of stalling on an economic crime bill that would have exposed the owners of shell companies used to buy British property and introduced new reforms for Companies House. He warned Putin would “be looking for any signs of weakness that we aren’t serious about threats to sanction his oligarchs.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “We reformed the tier 1 visa route in 2015 and in 2019 to crack down on dirty money and we have not ruled out making further changes. “These changes have included requiring banks to confirm they have completed all due diligence checks prior to opening accounts and increasing the requirements for applicants to provide evidence of the source of their funds.”As the senior civil servant Sue Gray reacted this weekend to calls from the Metropolitan police for her to leave out the most sensitive sections of her report into parties in Downing Street, there was some relief among those close to Boris Johnson. “They think the heat is off them a bit, is the impression I get,” said a respected figure on the Conservative backbenches. “I think this could at least buy them some time.” But at the heart of government things remained chaotic and tense on Saturday. Confusion was rife, and no one knew exactly what would happen next. The Cabinet Office has been handling all matters relating to the Gray report and No 10 was still in the dark about when she would hand over the neutered version to the prime minister. The two parts of Downing Street were said by one senior Whitehall source not to be talking to each other much as the drama reached its climax. “I have never known dysfunction like this,” said a former Tory cabinet minister. “They are in the same bloody building, they are part of the same operation.” If Johnson was feeling more relaxed at his Chequers country retreat, the same could not be said about large numbers of Conservative MPs. Both among those who want the prime minister gone and those who have yet to make up their minds (who together almost certainly comprise a majority) the feelings were of deepening frustration and mounting despair. Ideally no Tory MP would want to be heading into a leadership contest now, with the pandemic only just easing, a cost of living crisis looming, tensions over Russia and Ukraine rising and local elections around the corner in May. But given the way the “partygate” allegations had been piling up, most had formed the view that the Gray report – published in full – would at least blow the whole thing open and establish the facts. Depending on Gray’s findings and her tone, Johnson would either face a leadership challenge, or the 54 letters from MPs needed to trigger one would not materialise and he could carry on. “Published in full it would allow us to draw a line under the whole disaster, one way or the other. It would be the denouement,” said a Tory MP from the undecided camp. Now, however, the fear is that the Gray report will be too limited in scope to deliver the full facts, or much clarity, and that judgment on Johnson will have to be postponed for weeks or months until the police investigation into partygate is concluded. In that time, Tory MPs say, leadership speculation will not go away. Far from it. Rather, it will just intensify but without a contest being under way. As one former minister put it: “The danger is that everything that happens between now and when the police report comes will be viewed through the prism of leadership and leadership ambitions, not according to the merits of the actual proposals themselves. That is a terrible position for a government to be in.” Increasingly Tory MPs are criticising the Met for allowing the impression to be formed that it was somehow in cahoots with No 10 in trying to get Johnson off the hook. The former cabinet minister David Davis, who has already called for Johnson to quit, told the Observer yesterday that there were no good legal arguments for the Met to call for Gray to redact sensitive parts of her report and that the resulting delay in publishing the facts would mean the prime minister being “tortured” for weeks or months more, rather than being put out of his misery soon. “What we have now is a circumstance where the benefits of the Sue Gray report – that it would bring the thing to a conclusion and then draw a line under it – are all destroyed,” Davis said. “There is no logic behind the police’s request and there is a strong public interest for Sue Gray to publish in full. Otherwise the prime minister could still be being tortured in months and months time. “People will think it is contrived which I am sure it is not, actually. It does put the Tory party in very poor position. It puts the government in a very poor position. This death by a thousand cuts has got to come to an end in order to allow the government to do its job properly and have the bandwidth to do it. It is a real problem.” Conservative MPs were dreading a leadership contest but were steeling themselves for one. Without a candidate around whom a clear majority of Tories could quickly unite, they knew the process would inevitably be messy and divisive. The two cabinet ministers talked of as the most likely successors to Johnson, Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss, occupy two of the great offices of state, chancellor and foreign secretary respectively, and would be pitted into a fight for the top job at a time of serious economic problems and international tensions – issues which should be uppermost in their minds. Even those who believe Johnson can survive – and who want him to – don’t think delaying the moment of truth will necessarily help. “It’s an f’ing mess. That is all I know,” one Johnson sympathiser said. Another former minister warned that Dominic Cummings would be relishing the chance to fill the void with yet more claims while the police worked on their report. “The first reaction of people was that this was good news for Boris,” the senior Tory said. “But now we have the prospect of damaging headlines for an indefinite period ahead.”As drivers budget for the year ahead, they face the prospect of an unwelcome increase in the price of motoring – a rise of 10% in insurance premiums. New figures show that the average annual premium exceeds £700, a sharp increase on the same time last year, as the end of travel restrictions increases the risk of people getting into accidents. Counting the costs Figures from comparethemarket.com for Cash show that the average premium comes in at £703 a year for new customers – up £67 on last January. The rises include both comprehensive cover, which has gone up by £63 to £679 a year, and third-party, which has increased by £56 to £1,621. The figures are calculated by taking the average of the lowest five prices on the market. Drivers with diesel cars have seen their premiums go up to an average of £716 from £658 last January. Petrol vehicles, meanwhile, are up to £695 from £621 in 2021. Electric car drivers, however, saw their bills go down from £678 to £629 on average. Price pressures One factor behind the increase is the end of lockdown restrictions. As drivers did not need, or were unable, to get behind the wheel for significant parts of last year, premiums were lower. But with the relaxation of restrictions comes freedom to get back on the roads, and the possibility of more collisions, says Ryan Fulthorpe of price comparison site GoCompare. “Last January we were in lockdown, which meant there were fewer people on the roads and in accidents, therefore claims costs and insurance costs were lower. Now we are in a new normal, those prices have been rising,” he says. Insurers have also seen the cost of repairs to vehicles go up. The British Insurance Brokers’ Association (BIBA) says that more sophisticated cars can result in higher bills. “The costs of car repairs are increasing because of the increased use of technology,” it says. Admiral, the biggest car insurance company in the UK, says traffic has returned to pre-pandemic levels and accidents have also increased. “On top of this, the insurance industry is experiencing inflationary pressures from increased repair costs, parts shortages and labour costs which all impact on the cost of claims,” it says. This month has seen the most significant shake-up to the industry for decades, as insurers are now banned from quoting policyholders a higher price to renew than they would offer a new customer. The move follows complaints that customers who regularly switched were paying much lower premiums than those who renewed. The Association of British Insurers (ABI) says it is too early to tell what impact the new reforms have had. It says that data from the ABI for the first nine months of last year showed premiums were at the lowest level in five years, although those figures are calculated in a different way to statistics from price-comparison websites. It suggests that increasing costs for insurers could continue. “There remains cost pressures, particularly around rising repair costs that may have a greater impact going forward,” a spokesman said. The one relief for drivers is for those who have gone green and drive electric vehicles (EVs), premiums have dropped by 7%, according to the comparethemarket data. Fulthorpe says insurers are now better informed about how much it costs to repair EVs. “They are able to understand a lot more about them,” he says. “At the start of last year, they did not have enough data to build their pricing models to accurately quote for the actual risk. Now there is plenty more data on the cost to repair and the correct repairers to approve.” Shopping around So should you still shop around, even though the new price rules have come into effect? Yes, it is always worth looking to see if there is a better deal elsewhere with another insurer, even if it can be a laborious process. MoneySavingExpert recommends getting quotes on all of the four big comparison sites – MoneySuperMarket, comparethemarket, Confused.com and GoCompare – to get a full view. It is then worth checking with Direct Line, which only offers products directly. After that, look at cashback sites to see if you can get any money back by buying through them – for instance, Quidco offers up to £35 if you use it to purchase a policy. Ways to save on a new policy • Be wary of over-insuring your vehicle. Look out, too, for automatically included features such as breakdown cover which may be included with your bank account, or key cover which you may already have on home insurance. • Watch the excess. The amount you pay when you make a claim is typically between £100 and £500. Increasing it will cut your premium. But take into account that setting it too high will prove costly if you do make a claim. • The cheapest time to get a quote is just over three weeks before the policy begins, according to research by MoneySavingExpert. It puts the optimal time to get a price at 23 days before, after which prices tend to rise. • Installing “black box” technology in your vehicle, which tracks how you drive, can tell the insurer how safe you are and may reduce your premium. Source: Which?, MoneySavingExpertAmong the many treasures in the British Museum’s forthcoming Stonehenge exhibition is a collection of carved and polished spherical stones, each about the size of a cricket ball. The stones are 5,000 years old and have mostly been found singly in Scotland. The most famous of the 400 or so discoveries is a beautiful polished black sphere from Towie, Aberdeenshire, with three bulbous surfaces, tactile as a miniature Henry Moore. The sphere is carved with precise geometric whorls and spirals. In common with the much weightier neolithic monuments that the Stonehenge exhibition celebrates, the longer you look at the stones, the more mysterious they seem: what and why and how? If the answers to those questions remain unknowable, one thing that the balls – and the culture that prized them – make clear is their creators were people of enormous curiosity and skill, prepared to invest untold hours in making a perfect object, because they could. They were connoisseurs of stone. I was thinking about the ancient magic of those finds, and their more spectacular counterparts, while driving across Salisbury Plain early one morning last week in the company of Neil Wilkin, the curator of the British Museum’s World of Stonehenge show. With a trace of moon still evident, a thin mist lying in the valleys, and the morning light just beginning to ink in the curves of hills, this landscape can hardly have changed – the A303 and firing ranges apart – since the bluestone and sarsen boulders of the monument were first raised. The 300 sq miles of Salisbury Plain is the largest area of chalk grassland in northern Europe. Its rolling flatness and enormous skies demand some verticality, like the surface of the moon demanded a flag; Stonehenge is, among other things, a monument that gives a sharp sense of identity to the landscape around it. It is, as images ingrained on our collective retina insist, also a place made for sunrise (probably, in terms of its celebrated alignment with the arc of the sun at winter and summer solstice, literally so). On the morning we visited, in common with more than one million mornings before, the silhouettes of the oldest stones came more alive in the light and glow of a wintry dawn, borrowing the pinks and golds of the horizon. In this period of managed access to the site, to be in among the megaliths, in the absence of tourist crowds, felt like a lifetime privilege; in the quiet of the breaking morning, the building feels as it must always have felt, like an awesome natural receptacle for the new day, a singular earthly welcome to the returning sun. It is designed to experience rather than to share: from within the double circle you can capture parts of the ruin, without ever getting the whole in your camera frame. “Why are there so many doors?” the writer John Fowles once heard a schoolboy ask. As the Stonehenge show will illuminate, those doors open up the time and space beyond the monument in multiple different ways. One of those framings is a reminder that the building of Stonehenge was not a single event but a series of interventions in the site, beginning in 3000BC with the first earthworks and spanning 1,500 years – or 90 truncated human generations (each one marked with a painstakingly made axehead on one wall of the forthcoming British Museum show). Our visit to Wiltshire included that constellation of ancient sites that encircles the henge. The earthworks and settlements of nearby Durrington on the River Avon, the extraordinary stone circle and monumental ditch that runs through the centre of the village of Avebury, and the underground hilltop gravesite at West Kennet Long Barrow, approached over farmland. Most of the neolithic and bronze age treasures found by archaeologists and detectorists at such sites are housed in the two neighbouring museums – at Salisbury and Devizes (highlights of the newly marketed Great West Way tourist trail) – and it is from there that many of the prized objects have made their way to London. The British Museum show is, remarkably, the first that it has devoted to this relatively local history. Mired as the museum is in repatriation arguments, it might seem timely and politic to have an exhibition devoted to this island’s insular prehistory. Except, of course, the story is not that simple. “I imagine people may come in thinking that this is a show about England,” Wilkin says, “and then be surprised to find that, actually, to understand Stonehenge, you have to keep widening your focus.” For a start, there are the connections to the Preseli mountains of Pembrokeshire from where the bluestones of the original circle came, but Stonehenge further emerges as the hub of a complex network of links to Ireland and Scotland and northern Europe and the Alps. Far from being a nativist emblem, the exhibition argues, the stones are best understood in the context of successive waves of immigration. First from the earliest hunter-gatherer tribes who migrated north across Doggerland, the “sea bridge” to the Kent coast – two extraordinary ancient stag-skull headdresses, about 11,000 years old, one from North Yorkshire, one from Germany, cement this connection. The DNA record shows how these tribes were supplanted in Britain by the first farmers, about 6,000 years ago, who came across the Channel, bringing with them seeds of cereal crops and domesticated cattle and sheep (and building the first stone circles). And then that gene pool is completely disrupted again 1,500 years later, when Beaker people, named for their distinctive pottery, arrived from central Europe, bringing metal to Britain for the first time, entirely supplanting the people who built Stonehenge. The Stonehenge exhibition will give a vivid shorthand story of all these shifting population movements, concentrating on those two millennia in which the first farmers on Salisbury Plain celebrated the sun and the seasons, culminating in that period in which precious metals allowed the worship of golden light to be more personal and portable. The final exhibit in the show is the delicate Shropshire sun pendant, discovered by a metal detectorist in 2018, that comes from the very end of the bronze age in 1000BC. It was probably made by an Irish smithy, reflecting continental European styles. The decoration retains solar symbolism, but now the sun is setting on that world. The show will also demonstrate how, like the mobile populations who have congregated at it for millennia, Stonehenge has never carried a settled meaning. In 1967, the archaeologist Jacquetta Hawkes wrote that “every age has the Stonehenge it deserves – or desires”. If the dominant postwar association was with druidic hedonism (Mrs Thatcher was having none of it: at the 1985 Battle of the Beanfield 537 new age travellers were arrested after clashing with Orgreave-hardened police over plans for a “free festival” among the stones), our own times tend to emphasise the environmental symbolism of the site (English Heritage live-streams the dark night skies above the stones direct to your laptop). Scientific advance has also changed Stonehenge. One new certainty is that Celtic druids, who appeared about 2,000 years after the stones were erected, played no part in the genesis of the monument whatsoever. A Stonehenge exhibition is long overdue in London, Wilkin says, because the twin advances of radiocarbon dating and DNA analysis have revolutionised our understanding of the societies that built these monuments. As a result, he says, with a far more nuanced understanding of surviving objects, “there is a whole new series of stories you can tell about a period of history of which we have been taught to believe we know very little”. For example, forensic geology of an exquisite jadeitite axe head quarried in northern Italy and left as an offering beside the Sweet Track, a wooden pathway built through reed beds on the Somerset Levels in 3807BC, tells a startling story, proving the movement of neolithic people over vast distances. DNA testing of grave remains, meanwhile, establishes specific family relations across generations, giving a new human intimacy to the oldest bones. Some of the most recent work on the stones themselves by the archaeologist Mike Parker Pearson has identified exactly where in Wales Stonehenge’s oldest, smaller, bluestone circle originated. Parker Pearson last year located the spot on a hill called Waun Mawn, where, he believed, the stones, weighing between two and five tonnes, were positioned in a great circle – perhaps for centuries “acquiring holiness” – before being transported the 140 miles to Wiltshire. In a book published to coincide with the exhibition, How to Build Stonehenge, the neolithic expert and British Archaeology magazine editor, Mike Pitts, documents the likely route by sea – navigating the Welsh coast and River Severn estuary – and river and land by which the bluestones most likely travelled. Pitts also surveys the latest work on the methods by which the great post-glacial sarsen megaliths with their unique lintels were hauled from the Marlborough downs, and raised in place. The largest stones weigh 30 tonnes and stand 7m tall – the new research argues that most were transported from a site 20 miles north of Stonehenge and probably moved not on rollers as was previously believed, but on enormous sledges across logs laid as rails. To shape and dress the stones would itself have been a labour of hundreds of thousands of man hours. One conclusion of his book is that the technology, if not the manpower, used to create the henge did not appear from nowhere. There were many wooden structures of a comparable design across Britain and beyond. The British Museum show will include part of the outer ring of the miraculously preserved Seahenge, a contemporaneous timber circle with a great upended oak tree at its centre, roots turned to the heavens. The Seahenge had been preserved in peat and sand in north Norfolk, until it was exposed by rising sea levels in 1998, its 4,000-year-old bark still intact. A closer understanding of the lives of the people who built the henges, and who moved these great stones, suggests a high level of commonality and shared purpose. The skeletons found in the burial sites near the Wiltshire monument show comparatively little evidence of violence. Wilkin suggests that “the act of building was perhaps as important as the building itself”. Not far from Stonehenge is Silbury Hill, the largest manmade structure in Europe in 2400BC, and of similar height and volume to the roughly contemporary pyramids in Egypt. Excavation shows no tomb beneath the great mound, however. The latest theories suggest that its construction, over several generations, was a community endeavour, perhaps a collective rite of passage, a great monument to pastoral co-operation. The sarsen uprights of Stonehenge, and the long avenue that approached them, appear to have been constructed as this kind of society, with its deification of stone, was first beginning to come under threat. The discovery of the grave of the “Amesbury Archer” when the foundations of a new primary school were dug in 2002 in a village three miles from Stonehenge is early evidence of this great technological and social shift. The man, who was in middle age, died 4,350 years ago and was buried with numerous objects that included five Beaker pots, three copper knives, a pair of gold hair ornaments, a small anvil used in metalworking and 122 pieces of worked flint, including the arrowheads that gave him his nickname. When the grave was first discovered the tabloids christened him the “king of Stonehenge” but the truth of the mix of grave relics makes him even more fascinating. While the pots are in the new Beaker style that originated in continental Europe, they were likely to have been manufactured locally. By contrast, the gold ornaments are made in a British style but from metal that was probably from mainland Europe. Examination of the isotopic composition of the man’s teeth suggested that the Amesbury Archer had grown up in the western Alps before travelling to Britain later in life. Piecing these bits of information together, archaeologists conclude that this man was among the very first to bring the magical knowledge of how to manufacture copper to Britain, which perhaps guaranteed him such a high-status burial; DNA analysis of a companion grave nearby show it to be that of the man’s great grandson, who had been born in Wiltshire but spent part of his life abroad. In the centuries that followed, such individual graves became more common, in contrast to the collective burial sites of the earlier period. The appearance of metal objects, including gold, in these graves seems to coincide, the exhibition suggests, with new social networks and trading routes related to the ever-increasing demand for metal. The implication of single-occupancy graves was mirrored above ground where farmland becomes enclosed. Stonehenge continued in this period as a significant and perhaps sacred site, with burial mounds constructed all around it, but the implications of the new detailed DNA and dating advances are that the collective agrarian spirit that enabled it gave way to a more modern sense of individuality and selfhood and ownership. (The idea of Stonehenge as “property” persisted – it was bought as recently as 1915 by a locally born barrister, Cecil Chubb, for £6,600, as a present for his wife. Three years later, he handed it back to the nation in exchange for a baronetcy.) “We talk about connectivity a lot,” Wilkin says, “but I think what’s different about it here is that we’re using those connections to explain some of the real fundamental changes that happened in this period of European history: the rise of individualism, the introduction of farming, the settlement of the lands and enclosure in the middle bronze age which eventually seems to have led to greater conflict and warfare.” In between these times there is a long period of competing traditions in which marvellous metal objects were made to celebrate and explain the movement of sun and stars as the great stones had once perhaps done. The earliest such object in the world, the Nebra Sky Disc, an exceptional loan to the British Museum from the Halle State Museum of Prehistory in Germany, probably dates from about 1550BC. Its gold relief against a dark night sky background is the first-known metallic depiction of the cosmos. More than that, though, its genesis reflects a Europe of constantly shifting and mixing populations: it is made of Cornish tin and gold and incorporates astronomical knowledge from Scandinavia, the Mediterranean and Egypt. Ideas that were once set in stone are now free to travel. The World of Stonehenge is at the British Museum, London, 17 February-17 July 2022The hugely successful Danish pop phenomenon Mø is best known as a featured artist. Her collaborations with people such as Major Lazer and Justin Bieber have been streamed billions of times. The downside of this ubiquity was burnout, vocal injury and anxiety. A 2019 break to recuperate and course-correct has resulted in an album made in Copenhagen, mostly with Scandinavian women rather than American men: heavyweights such as Noonie Bao (Sweden) and Caroline Ailin (Norway), who co-wrote New Rules with Dua Lipa. Motordrome – Mø’s third LP – refers to the “wall of death” in which a motorcyclist zooms round a circular space, defying gravity: it’s a nod to both the pop hamster wheel and the churning of Mø’s mind. If that all sounds downbeat, the recent pop era has been rife with uplifting bops about previously poor self-care. Mø’s new-era singles thus far have been earworms – the euphoric Live to Survive, the Ed Sheeran-like Kindness, the more recent electronic ballad Goosebumps. The remainder of Motordrome mostly maintains this hit rate, with New Moon and Wheelspin reiterating themes of renewal after trials. She can’t get away from famous US men, though: Brad Pitt is a song about Mø’s teen crush.Until last week, Spotify-using fans of Neil Young could access a vast 54-year catalogue of songs, which attracted more than 6 million listeners a month. Now all that remains are appearances on compilations and, for some reason, a 1989 live album. Enraged by what he saw as the promotion of “life-threatening Covid misinformation” on The Joe Rogan Experience podcast, the Canadian singer-songwriter issued an ultimatum: “They can have Rogan or Young. Not both.” As Young surely knew, Spotify’s choice was a foregone conclusion. Rogan’s show, which the streaming service acquired for $100m in 2020, is its most popular podcast, with an average listenership of 11 million per episode. In its first month, it accounted for 4.5% of all podcast listening on Spotify worldwide. For Spotify, which is banking on podcasts to drive subscriptions, he is a star of the magnitude of Adele. He has also become explosively controversial. Young’s walkout, followed later in the week by Joni Mitchell’s exit in solidarity, was prompted by an open letter calling on Spotify to counter Covid misinformation after Rogan recorded an interview with Dr Robert Malone, a virologist who has become a rightwing media star for his opposition to vaccines. The director general of the WHO tweeted in support of Young’s boycott: “We all have a role to play to end this pandemic and infodemic.” Young, the most ornery of all boomer rock legends, is the perfect antagonist. He is an obsessive audiophile who temporarily removed his music from all streaming services in 2015 and a purist whose 1988 single This Note’s for You decried licensing songs to commercials. As a survivor of childhood polio, he might also have particularly strong opinions about vaccines. What’s more, he can afford to take the considerable financial hit. He has a loyal fanbase that will pay for top-dollar boxsets and subscriptions to his website archive. Last year, he sold 50% of the rights to his song catalogue to the investment fund Hipgnosis for a reported $150m. For less comfortable artists, Spotify could be too big to quit. In the opposite corner is Rogan, a former comedian and martial artist who has recorded close to 1,800 episodes since launching his podcast in 2009. His guests have included Kanye West, Elon Musk, Quentin Tarantino and Bernie Sanders. But he has also entertained figures from the “alt-right” such as the conspiracy theorist Alex Jones, the Proud Boys co-founder Gavin McInnes and the provocateur Milo Yiannopoulos. Rogan’s politics are broadly contrarian with a rightward skew. He is a bullish libertarian who initially backed Sanders in the 2020 election but ended up preferring Donald Trump to Joe Biden. Last April, Rogan said that if you are young, fit and healthy, then you do not need a vaccine, attracting criticism from Biden’s chief medical advisor, Anthony Fauci. “I’m not an anti-vax person,” Rogan responded. “I believe they’re safe and encourage many people to take them.” Yet he has still booked anti-vaccine guests. Unlike Facebook or Twitter, Spotify has never claimed to have an ideological commitment to free speech. In 2017, following a white-supremacist rally in Charlottesville, it began removing music by “hate bands”. The following year, it introduced a somewhat incoherent “hate and hateful conduct” policy, designed to promote “openness, diversity, tolerance and respect”. Spotify may be deeply inconsistent but it has established a precedent that it takes responsibility for the material it serves up. Last week, a spokesperson boasted that Spotify had “removed over 20,000 podcast episodes related to Covid since the start of the pandemic”, a startling number. Not Rogan’s though. Spotify CEO, Daniel Ek, has framed his hands-off approach as an anti-censorship issue, telling US news website Axios last year that Rogan was no different to a big-name rapper: “And we don’t dictate what they’re putting in their songs either.” Musicians have had an ambivalent relationship with Spotify since its US launch in 2011. Some are grateful to it for saving the music industry after a decade of digital piracy and plummeting sales while others claim its measly royalty rates favour only the megastar elite. The pandemic has re-energised its critics. Abruptly deprived of concert income, many artists looked again at their royalty statements and demanded a fairer deal. The Young-Rogan contretemps is a PR headache of a different order, one that exposes the tensions inherent in Spotify’s aggressive move into podcasting and decision to make music a subset of audio. Now artists and subscribers are effectively funding politically inflammatory content in the middle of a global health crisis. The rappers mentioned by Ek haven’t embraced Covid misinformation and would not reach 11 million listeners if they did. For a company proud of its progressive record, doubling down on Rogan on the pretext of a sudden dedication to free speech appears disingenuous, cynical and greedy. While still the largest streaming service by far, Spotify has been slowly losing market share to its rivals. Podcasts were meant to reverse that slide but they could make things worse by thrusting Spotify on to the culture-war frontline. While the company has presumably calculated that the financial benefit of sticking with Rogan outweighs the reputational cost, many users have cancelled their premium subscriptions. “The company’s bullshit is just too much to bear now,” tweeted the popular YouTube music critic Anthony Fantano. The backlash is calling into question what exactly Spotify has become, or was all along. The US musician Damon Krukowski tweeted that Spotify “are not in the music business, they are a tech platform, and however they can get people to spend more time on the platform, that’s where they will go… Spotify is not interested in the future of music.” Not for the first time in his maverick career, Neil Young has opened a can of worms. This one might be the biggest of them all. • Dorian Lynskey is the author of The Ministry of Truth: A Biography of George Orwell’s 1984How deeply strange it is, how deeply unsettling, to be able to compare and contrast a fictional pandemic with the real thing. I read Emily St John Mandel’s bestselling Station Eleven shortly after it came out in 2014, when the tale of a mysterious flu sweeping the globe and laying waste to normal life lay wholly beyond the bounds of reality. Now the television adaptation by Patrick Somerville (known for Maniac and The Leftovers) for HBO, streaming in the UK on Starzplay, is here and … resonating. Or at least part of it is. There are – as is starting to feel mandatory with small-screen dramas – two timelines. The first concerns the early days and years of the pandemic. Different episodes concentrate on the experiences of different characters, but the through line is young Kirsten (an absolutely extraordinary performance from 13-year-old Matilda Lawler in her first substantial role), a child actor who is abandoned by her chaperone when a stage performance of King Lear is chaotically truncated by the death of the lead, Arthur (Gael García Bernal). Audience member Jeevan (Himesh Patel) tries to take her home, but they are overtaken by the collapse of civilisation and begin their new life navigating the disaster together. Though “their” plague is much more devastating than ours (it has a 99% fatality rate), it is still quite something to see people coughing in enclosed spaces while those nearby bristle, and others wonder about masks or gather supplies so they can hunker in apartments until the virus has burned itself out. People die alone, with their loved ones unable to be with them, and people grieve alone. It is almost more discomfiting, however, to be able to point now to moments the creators get wrong. In the very early days, for example, Jeevan and Kirsten go round a supermarket that is full of produce but empty of people. Ah, you say – no. It wasn’t like that. The second timeline takes us 20 years in the future, when Kirsten (now played by Mackenzie Davis) is part of a troupe of actors known as the Traveling Symphony, who tour the midwest putting on Shakespeare plays – Hamlet, when we meet them – to the scattered plague survivors. Even in 2014, I was sceptical that there would be such an appetite. Now I am more so, but beyond the practical, the questions posed by the book and the show about how much of a refuge art can provide, what we should work to preserve, what makes a civilisation and what, ultimately, makes life worth living, remain interesting ones. Station Eleven is a slow burn. The first few episodes look beautiful but move at a stately pace. If you can stick with it, you will be rewarded. Having established its Serious Credentials, it gains confidence and begins to move away from the elegiac tone that threatens to overwhelm it. Backstories are filled in – notably of Miranda (Danielle Deadwyler), Arthur’s lover and the author of the graphic novel (called Station Eleven, but don’t let the meta-ness put you off) that has been Kirsten’s lifeline over her 20 years of post-apocalyptic wandering. Lighter moments leaven the darkness, particularly when the irreducibly charismatic and off-kilter Lori Petty, as the troupe’s composer Sarah, is on screen, or when we flash back to pre-pandemic times. “You seem to get reborn almost every time you leave the house,” says Arthur’s best friend, Clark (David Wilmot, another mesmerising turn), after listening to a California female actor be an excessively California female actor over dinner for too long. Villainry arrives (via the most frightening performance I’ve ever seen, from Daniel Zovatto as the stranger who insists on joining the Traveling Symphony “otherwise your friends are going to start to disappear”), along with the secret community known as the Museum of Civilisation. Further threads arise from the stories of other settlements – one led by Clark and the female actor (Elizabeth, played by Caitlin FitzGerald, who ended up marrying Arthur after an affair they began while he was with Miranda) – and begin to be woven together. We start to plumb the depths of Kirsten’s soul, forged by suffering, saved by the Symphony and ready to save it, too, by any means necessary. We begin, really, to care, to wonder, to ask more questions. To take refuge in the art, dammit.My children and I had often looked at the Velvetisers in our local Hotel Chocolat store, and I had dismissed them in the way you do when you really want something, but can’t justify it: simply too expensive (five pence under £100) and what’s more, you can make perfectly good hot chocolate in a pan. Both true. And then we were given one and all my protestations instantly went away. A Velvetiser is a milk frother into which you put milk and hot chocolate (and, despite what Hotel Chocolat says, you can – and I have – used other hot chocolate flakes/powder) and it heats it and whirs it up and not a single person who I’ve strong-armed to buy one has regretted it. If you have the money and January is making you want to treat yourself, I thoroughly recommend it, after two years of almost daily use. Hotel Chocolat makes lots of hot chocolate to go in it, and seasonal specials some of which I’m not a fan of. It’s best to keep it simple: the 70% is a good one to start with, but I also seriously love the latte sachets and I don’t generally like such things at all. Not for use in the Velvetiser, but the small independent brand Duffy’s has just launched an excellent range of hot chocolate drops of single-origin chocolate from 61% to 70%, £12.45/250g, all absolutely stunning and they can as easily be used in baking, or for snacking. Or warmed in a pan with milk. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB“As children,” Julieann Campbell writes in her introduction to this intricately woven oral history of Bloody Sunday and its long aftermath, “we were told stories about my uncle, Jackie Duddy – a teenage boxing champion – who went on a civil rights march and was shot by British soldiers.” Jackie Duddy, aged 17, was the first fatality on the afternoon of 30 January 1972. A photograph of his limp body being carried by local men, while a priest walks uncertainly ahead of them waving a white handkerchief, has since become the single most memorable image of the day’s horror. For his close family, it is also a constant and painful reminder of the casual brutality of his passing. “We knew Jackie’s face from family photographs, book covers and the Bogside mural,” she elaborates, describing the discomfort she felt as a child “seeing mum subjected to her brother’s dying moments again and again” each time footage of Bloody Sunday aired on the news. For Campbell, then, this book is a deeply personal, as well as meticulously journalistic, undertaking. (Her previous book, Setting the Truth Free: The Inside Story of the Bloody Sunday Justice Campaign won the Christopher Ewart-Biggs Memorial prize.) Drawing on new and historical interviews with around 110 people, mainly survivors, relatives and eyewitnesses, On Bloody Sunday possesses a veracity and cumulative power that sets it apart from previous accounts. “As a relative,” writes Campbell, “I felt the need to keep asking and keep recording these accounts, knowing just how precious they were.” On the page, one testimony inexorably following another, it is the sense of utter disbelief felt by those caught up in the terror that is most palpable. It is Father Daly, the priest with the white handkerchief, who would later become Bishop of Derry, who captures it most vividly in his description of the frantic moments that followed the first killing. “The paras were still firing, and we decided to make a dash for it to try and get young Jackie away. We were terrified. This seemed like it was in our imagination, like this was film we were seeing. It was hard to believe it was reality.” Fifty years on, that remains the case. Though Campbell provides much-needed context for the massacre, and reprises the families’ long campaign for justice, it is the details of the day that resonate. One local man mistook the sound of the bullets cutting through the air around him for the buzzing of wasps and remembers thinking, “How could there be wasps in January?” A woman who was badly injured by a bullet in the leg remembers looking into the face of the soldier who shot her from just 20 feet away. More chilling is the testimony of a local doctor, Raymond McClean, who came upon two young boys trying to resuscitate a man who was lying on the steps of a square. He was 35-year-old Gerard McKinney, who was already dead. Dr McClean was immediately called to a house nearby, where he found 17-year-old Michael Kelly lying next to Jim Wray, aged 22. “Michael was already dead when I examined him,” he states matter-of-factly. “Jim was also dead... I told the young first-aiders to continue their efforts at resuscitation. I did this mainly to keep them occupied and in the hope that if they were kept busy, they would be less likely to panic.” On the streets nearby, panic spread as people fled the scenes or crouched behind walls, while others lay dead or injured. Seventeen-year-old Hugh Gilmour was shot while running towards his home in Rossville Flats. He died below the window of his parents’ flat. Alexander Nash saw his son William lying by a makeshift rubble barricade on Rossville Street alongside two others, and ran frantically to the spot with his hand raised “to signal that the shooting should stop”. He was hit twice, falling beside the bodies. “I put my hand on my son’s back and said: ‘Willie!’ His eyes were wide open, but I knew straight away that he was dead and that the other two men were dead too.” Amid all this, people risked their lives to tend to the fallen, often crawling to where they lay. For those who witnessed the carnage, and for the families and friends of those killed, the trauma of Bloody Sunday was exacerbated by all that followed: the portrayal of the victims as gunmen and nail bombers by the British army and an acquiescent rightwing media, an initial inquiry-cum-whitewash that exonerated the guilty, and the long cover-up by the military and political establishment. In 2010, a heroically dogged justice campaign by the families culminated with the publication of the 12-year-long Saville inquiry, which found that soldiers from Britain’s 1st Battalion, the Parachute Regiment fired on marchers, none of whom were armed or posed a threat, and that many of the soldiers “knowingly put forward false accounts in order to seek to justify their firing”. Why the regiment was deployed in the first place, being spectacularly unsuited to the task of controlling civilian protest during such a tense and tumultuous time, is a question that also resounds through this book. Campbell devotes a chapter to the Ballymurphy massacre that happened five months before Bloody Sunday, the paras shooting dead 10 unarmed civilians, including a priest and a mother of eight, in nationalist Ballymurphy in Belfast over three nights. She also includes a memo, written in the wake of that horror, and just weeks before the killings in Derry, by General Ford, commander of land forces for the British army, whose decision it was to deploy the Paras. It reads: “I am coming to the conclusion that the minimum force necessary to achieve a restoration of law and order is to shoot selected ring leaders amongst the DYH (Derry young hooligans), after clear warnings have been issued.” Before the terror was unleashed, it was normalised from on high. The findings of the Saville inquiry led to an apology – “on behalf of the government, indeed on behalf of the country” – from prime minister David Cameron. Last year, the director of public prosecutions made the decision to discontinue the case against the single ex-paratrooper, known as Soldier F, who was set to face trial for the murder of two of the victims and the attempted murder of four others. The families have appealed against the decision and their long campaign persists. For the families of those killed, the survivors and the nationalist population of Derry, the events of Bloody Sunday, which shaped the course of the Troubles like no other single incident, remain, as Campbell puts it, “present, debated and unresolved”. Reading her intricately structured account of the day and its long shadow, it is not hard to see why. • On Bloody Sunday: A New History of the Day and Its Aftermath By the People Who Were There by Julieann Campbell is published by Octopus (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThere is one man with very personal reasons for finding the scenes of sectarian intimidation in Sir Kenneth Branagh’s film homage to his home city particularly haunting – his first cousin, Martin Hamilton. Hamilton, who grew up with Branagh and his family in inner-city north Belfast, says the images of Catholic families being forced out of the mainly Protestant district brought back painful memories of his own fractured friendships that were lost in the Troubles. Branagh’s movie Belfast – hotly tipped for an Oscar – is a memoirish tale of how the Northern Ireland conflict that erupted in 1969 forced his family to escape the gathering sectarian storm. Watching the darker moments of Belfast when Catholics are driven from their homes, Hamilton recalled how a fiercely close boyhood friendship was broken up. “Those parts of the film really resonated with me when I first saw Ken’s film,” he said. “I was living across from Ken and his family, in flats on Skegoneil Avenue in 1969. My best friend growing up was a lad from a Catholic family. We played football together, we got into fights together – although never about religion – and we made up frequently after them. We were inseparable as boys. “When the Troubles broke out, people from outside our area, some of whom were Protestants moving out of mainly Catholic districts, started to stir things up in the flats. “They started asking why Catholics were still living among us and the atmosphere they created was so hostile that these Catholic families, including my friend’s, felt too insecure to stay. “They moved out just like the people forced from their homes by the mob in Ken’s film. Ken captured this tragic turn of events so well in the movie. It was so very true to what was sadly happening back then,” he said. Hamilton, who will be 70 this year, described Branagh and his older brother Bill as “more like my other brothers rather than cousins”. He said: “Because my dad was working in the shipyard and my mum managed a local Co-op store, I used to go to my aunt Frances and uncle Billy’s house after school. I knocked around more with his brother Bill as we were about the same age. I remember Ken at the time was quiet, shy.” As in the movie, Branagh and his family leave strife-torn Belfast for a new life in England. But when Branagh returned to his native city in the late 1970s to star in a series of critically acclaimed TV dramas written by Graham Reid – the Billy plays – his extended family were there to protect him. Hamilton told the Observer he was deployed to ensure his actor-cousin with the English accent wouldn’t be mistaken for a British soldier. “Ken stayed with my mum and dad as Aunt Frances was worried about him. She was concerned that with his accent someone might think he was a soldier, which was a very dangerous thing to be in Belfast in the 1970s. “I was tasked with driving him over from the north of the city to the filming in the east. Many years later when he became famous, he spoke about those wet and windy nights in Belfast when his cousin drove him about. He never ever forgot about his roots or his family.” Branagh’s film recreates the working-class Victorian terraced streets and alleyways of the Mountcollyer Street/York Road area at the end of the 1960s. Today the district is depopulated, with row upon row of bricked up houses, while Mountcollyer Street where the Branagh clan lived is hardly a street at all any more, but rather a cul de sac. Those who grew up nearby in the Tigers Bay area, such as Karen Clarkin, said the set of Belfast with its corner shops, street lamps and yards with outside toilets is faithful to the time and place that Branagh’s direction captures. “My granny was friends with Ken’s grandmother Frances who lived across from her. His granny was always talking about her grandson who she insisted was always going to be a great actor. “But it was the scenes in the film of his grandfather (played by fellow Northern Ireland actor Ciarán Hinds) that really got to me. Him sitting on the outside toilet drinking his mug of tea, all his tools and his knick-knacks reminded me of my own grandad in Tigers Bay. I loved the film because it brought home what this part of Belfast really was like,” Clarkin said. Then she pointed to a nearby structure in a green space Branagh would once have played in during the late 1960s – Alexandra Park. During the Troubles the park was often a nightly battleground for rival rioting Protestant and Catholic youths. The violence became so bad that locals living on either side of what was once an invisible sectarian dividing line demanded a permanent barrier to keep the mobs apart. A giant steel “peace” structure was built, and its foundations were laid on 1 September 1994, the first day of the historic IRA ceasefire. Although it can be opened during the day, this 3-metre reinforced corrugated iron barrier remains a near-permanent “border” creating separate Protestant and Catholic zones in the park. While the film contains joyous moments and is a love letter to a city Branagh clearly adores, Belfast ends with captions that commemorate the things lost during 35 years of conflict. The director remembers those who had to leave, those who remained and endured, and finally those that were lost for ever in the violence. The film has struck a chord with the generations who lived through the Troubles. After a screening at the art deco Strand cinema in east Belfast last Tuesday several elderly and middle-aged viewers had tears in their eyes as they left the movie house. That sentiment of loss and futility is felt too by Hamilton, who has watched his famous cousin’s award-winning movie twice. “I can still remember the name of every family in our flats that had to get out. They had good neighbours, but it was the bad ones that forced them to go. I suppose if Ken’s film has any message for me personally it is that Northern Ireland can be a great place if they’d just leave us alone.”It was news last week that women are having fewer children and at a later age: the Office for National Statistics (ONS) reported that more than half of women in England and Wales don’t have children by the time they are 30. But it hardly felt surprising to me. As a woman without children, at 36, I don’t feel in a minority. Obviously, no one’s friendship circle is statistically significant, but my child-free friends still outnumber those with kids – whether by choice or circumstance. Yet while there seem to be similar reports published almost every week – here a piece on falling global births, there another on fertility rates dropping during the pandemic – the wider reaction is still often one of dismay and unfair judgment. Only this month, the actual pope weighed in, criticising potential parents who prefer pets to children. And in response to these latest findings – that in 1971 18% of 30-year-olds had no children, while the figure now stands at 50.1% – some commentators were quick to assume that female fecklessness is the cause. Nick Robinson raised hackles by asking on Radio 4’s Today programme if women are delaying motherhood because “they want more fun before becoming a mum”. For a start, it’s frustrating that the ONS report only discusses women, as if having a baby is something we do by ourselves. Many women who don’t have or delay having kids do so because they haven’t met the right person or their right person isn’t keen. Without trotting out tired stereotypes about commitment-phobic men, the rise of dating apps has surely led to an increased sense – for men and women – of endless possibility, delaying our willingness to “settle down”. Which, if it means people don’t settle for rubbish relationships, has got to be good – even if it does contribute to delayed baby-making. But there’s also a mountain of economic reasons why millennials might think twice about having kids. The 2008 crash means we’ve only ever known job uncertainty; then there was a pandemic. Buying a home, something we’ve been told to do before sprogging, is harder than for previous generations (and, in parts of the country, almost impossible without financial help). Many people still aren’t earning enough to start a family until later. That old idea of the job for life, steady career progression and decent benefits is a dream for many. Yet with maternity pay feeble, and paternity more so, at least one parent needs to be earning well before kids can seem viable. To keep both jobs, you’ll need to spend an insane amount of money on childcare or have family nearby who can help out (also rare compared with previous generations). As I’ve seen from watching friends, it can seem impossible. And yet when someone really wants a baby, such rational considerations disappear. Having witnessed women in the grip of a desperate desire to conceive, the meanness of maternity payments may be an anxiety, but not having a baby feels worse. That deep, primal maternal urge triumphs. So I suspect there’s something more fundamental behind falling birth rates – and that’s choice, alongside the acceptance that, actually, not all of us do experience that maternal urge. This is borne out by the fact that birth rates are falling even in countries with generous parental leave and subsidised childcare, such as Sweden. Some women know they want kids, some know they don’t; many are ambivalent, a story we tend to hear less about. But it’s a very real experience and one I’ve spent the last few years thinking about: in my own life and while writing a novel exploring how changes in the 20th century affected choices and opportunities for women, in particular, I deliberately wanted to make my heroine share my hesitancy about having children. In previous generations, societal pressure would tend to steamroller such ambivalence: motherhood was an inevitable destiny for most women. But today, we genuinely have a choice. Women are educated, employed, financially independent and able to access contraception. When we’re not told we must have babies, fewer of us choose to. There’s surely a snowball effect here, too: the more women choose not to have kids, the more normal that seems and the more women see it as an option. Having so many happy, fulfilled, child-free friends has, I’m sure, contributed to the fact that having a baby never felt like the default for me. And when the genuinely undecided are faced with a real choice, that’s when all those other financial, practical and ethical concerns may help swing the decision. Still, it is a terrifying decision for the uncertain: you can change your mind about a job, a partner, a house. You can’t change your mind about a baby and the time frame for deciding is finite for women. And if the last several decades have shown us anything, it’s that you simply can’t “have it all”. You can’t have a baby and it not have an impact on the rest of your life – certainly not while financial support for parents is as it is. But it’s also the case that looking after a tiny human simply will – should! – change your priorities and lifestyle. Let’s be honest: there are enormous gains and losses on both sides. I feel a terrible sadness knowing that I may never feel that all-consuming love and joy parents talk about. But when I think about having a baby, I also feel a terrible terror of losing everything I love in my life. Maybe I would rather choose freedom, energy, time, sleep – yes, why not my own fun? For women who don’t feel that intense desire to mother, being liberated from expectation and pressure may be the thing that has tipped the scales against having kids. People questioning how much they really want to have children, rather than it being an unquestioned norm, is no bad thing. Being able to make that choice is a cause for celebration, not concern. Holly Williams’s debut novel, What Time Is Love?, is published in the springWhen Germany’s new chancellor, Olaf Scholz, shook hands on a coalition deal with his liberal-green partners last month, they energetically vowed to “risk more progress”. Less than two months on, however, Berlin’s allies in Kyiv, Washington and neighbouring European capitals worry the country remains stuck in passive old ways. As tension mounts on the border between Russia and Ukraine, they fear Scholz is falling back on foreign policy instincts honed by his most recent centre-left predecessor, the ex-chancellor-turned-lobbyist Gerhard Schröder. A restrictive attitude to exporting weapons is one source of frustration. In spite of being one of the world’s top five biggest exporters of arms, Germany says it cannot send lethal weapons into conflict zones for historic reasons, instead supplying Ukraine with 5,000 military helmets, a gesture that Kyiv’s mayor described as “a joke”. It has still not signed paperwork allowing Estonia to give Ukraine nine D-30 howitzers, which Germany has to authorise because the Soviet-made long-range weapons were once stationed in East Germany. For Germany’s critics, however, nothing symbolises its ambiguity towards the brewing conflict more than Nord Stream 2. The recently completed but still unapproved gas pipeline between Ust-Luga in Russia to Lubmin in north-east Germany, they say, shows how the country’s energy needs have made it vulnerable to blackmail by Putin. Scholz insists that “all options are on the table” when it comes to potential sanctions in the event of a Russian incursion into Ukraine, but his government has been slow to go into specifics, even arguing it is strategically wiser to remain vague. “We must not rule anything out when it comes to sanctions, including Swift [the global banking payments system] and Nord Stream 2,” said Nils Schmid, the foreign policy spokesperson of Scholz’s centre-left Social Democratic party (SPD). “If push comes to shove, then Nord Stream 2 will probably be unsustainable,” Schmid told the Observer. “It’s crucial that Putin cannot calculate in advance what the consequences of his actions will be.” The logic of this stance is not just questioned abroad but also domestically. “Threatening sanctions does not work if the other side can tell you are afraid to spell out what they are,” said Norbert Röttgen, a member of the Bundestag’s foreign policy committee for the conservative Christian Democratic Union. “It has to be clear that authorising Nord Stream 2 is out of the question if there is a war. “We are on the cusp of the most dramatic situation since the end of the second world war: a war in Europe that would change the geopolitical balance on our continent,” Röttgen told the Observer. “Chancellor Scholz needs to make it clear he understands the historic significance of this moment, or he risks gambling away Germany’s reputation as a reliable partner of the west.” As Scholz’s Social Democrats convene on Monday for an internal debate on its stance on Russia, Röttgen urged the party to take a stand against those who use German history as a cover “for personal financial gain and an appeasement policy that turns aggressors into victims”. The belief that Germany, whose military forays in the Nazi era cost millions of Russian lives, cannot act as aggressively towards the Kremlin as other European nations is not a minority view. It runs across the German party spectrum and is widely shared among the population. However, the SPD’s Schmid says: “You have to take into consideration that Germany, alongside France, has the role of a mediator between Russia and Ukraine in the Normandy format [the four-way contact group set up after the conflict in Donbas]. We cannot supply weapons to one of the two parties we are mediating between.” Even the Green party, heralded by some as human rights hawks who would radically reposition Germany’s stance on China and Russia after claiming the foreign ministry under the new government, reaffirms this position. “The German government has not provided any arms shipments to Ukraine for almost a decade,” said Agnieszka Brugger, a Green member of the parliament’s defence committee. “A change in policy would not make any significant short-term military difference on the ground but may be a big risk for the very difficult ongoing diplomatic talks,” Brugger said. “European and Nato unity in our support for Ukraine is crucial to demonstrate a strong stance towards Russia, and we should not let the different ways we show our support for our allies get in between us.” No party in the Bundestag has used Germany’s historic crimes as a cover for expanding ties with Russia as much as Scholz’s, however. As Germany’s oldest party, the SPD has a tendency to reach back into the history books, and few of the party’s politicians talk about Russia without citing Ostpolitik, the “change through rapprochement” foreign policy strategy towards the Soviet Union and its satellite states pursued by its former chancellor Willy Brandt. Yet the SPD’s attitude to Russia doesn’t necessarily run as deep as it likes to convince itself. In an essay for the Frankfurter Allgemeine last week, the historian Gerd Koenen argued that a foreign policy of “latent equidistance between Washington and Moscow” was rooted in the centre-left’s experience at the start of the millennium, when an SPD-led German government refused to join America’s war in Iraq. That stint in power resulted in the SPD splitting over domestic policy, with Chancellor Schröder pursuing a New Labourite third way while finance minister Oskar Lafontaine peeled off to co-found the leftwing Die Linke (The Left). But in their pro-Russian sympathies the two camp leaders remain united. Schröder, who on Friday insisted that Russia had no intention to invade Ukraine and accused Kyiv of “sabre rattling”, joined the state-controlled Russian giant Gazprom’s North European Gas Pipeline company, later renamed Nord Stream AG, as chairman within months of losing the 2005 election. The Baltic Sea pipeline between Russia and north-east Germany, which bypasses Baltic and east central Europe, was green-lit in the interim period before Angela Merkel took office, but continued under her tenure. At Nord Stream AG, Schröder’s chief executive is Matthias Warnig, a former high-ranking Stasi officer who once spied on West German industry for East Germany’s secret police under the aliases “Ökonom” (“Economist”) and “Arthur” and ascended to Putin’s inner circle after the fall of the Berlin Wall. While revelations about Stasi links can still curtail political careers in Germany – one Berlin state secretary from the same paramilitary regiment as Warnig was made to resign in 2017 – the past of Nord Stream’s boss is rarely mentioned in the debate around the project. “I am sometimes surprised this doesn’t play a more prominent role,” said an SPD politician who asked not to be named. Schröder’s networking still links the SPD and Russian gas. A German subsidiary of Nord Stream 2 called Gas for Europe, founded last week in an apparent attempt to complete the controversial pipeline’s certification process, has registered as its supervisory board chairman Dietrich Walter Haller, who worked at the chancellory under Schröder from 2003 to 2005. On Thursday night, the German foreign office announced it would seek to ban Haller from the role, since it was in conflict with his recent activity as a top diplomat. Lars Klingbeil, the Social Democrats’ co-chair, used to work in the Hanover constituency office of Schröder, whom he declined to desribe as a “lobbyist” when pressed in an interview with Der Spiegel last week. Klingbeil is also a trustee of “German-Russia – The new generation”, a networking association founded in 2011 by the Russian ambassador to Berlin. Scholz, who was SPD general secretary under Schröder, has brushed against these networks. But his rise to power is not of their making, and it remains possible that he can detach himself from them. If the Schröder generation’s approach to Russia was shaped by Brandt, Scholz has cited as his political idol Brandt’s successor, Helmut Schmidt, who prodded Nato in 1979 to adopt its so-called dual-track resolution: a strategy of military armament and threat coupled with an openness to dialogue. Schmidt’s confrontational course made him enemies within his own party, but in an interview with Süddeutsche Zeitung last week, Scholz seemed to signal that he favoured this strand of his party’s foreign policy tradition: “If you cite Brandt and Schmidt, then territorial integrity and states’ right to self-determination is an inextricable part of that,” he said. Schmid said: “Both Brandt and Schmidt were committed transatlanticists: that’s something that’s misremembered by some people in Germany, including some in my own party. Scholz will act in Schmidt’s vein: he has no nostalgic illusions when it comes to Russia. He won’t bat an eyelid when it comes to sanctions.” • This article was amended on 31 January 2022. An earlier version referred to “the start of the millennium, when an SPD-led German government refused to join America’s war on terror”. That should have said “America’s war in Iraq.”The Responder (BBC One) | iPlayer Trigger Point (ITV) | ITV Hub The Gilded Age (Sky Atlantic) Survivors: Portraits of the Holocaust (BBC Two) | IPlayer I was rather taken aback by BBC One’s The Responder: by how good it is, how unsettling and vivid. It looks like a bog-standard “edgy” five-part police drama (all episodes are on iPlayer), this time set in Liverpool: the fraught “corrupt” cop with the marriage on the rocks; the seedy underworld; drug deals going wrong; threats; eruptions of violence … The Responder has all of this, but much more besides. It is television police drama refashioned as a long, dark night of the soul. Martin Freeman plays the titular “responder” (officer who responds to 999 calls), who feels he’s “disappearing”. At first, hearing his Liverpudlian accent, you think: is this a Stephen Graham impersonation – how long before it turns into a tongue-chewing mess? But it doesn’t, and the effect is transformative – Freeman is a different actor almost – but that’s not all. He gives a first-rate performance: whether being pulled into the criminality, working nights dealing with society’s outcasts or offloading to his inevitable counsellor (practically TV law since The Sopranos), he’s believable all the way, exposing layer after layer of melancholy, humour, fortitude, weakness, existential dread and pain. Directed by Philip Barantini (Boiling Point), who also appears as an abusive boyfriend, and Tim Mielants (The Terror), The Responder is the first TV series written by author Tony Schumacher, who himself worked in Liverpool as a responder. This enriches the drama: there’s a realistic, often humorous bounce to the dialogue, a sense of “speaking human”. There are also fantastic performances: Ian Hart (sporting a truly terrible Harry Enfield-style “scousers” wig) is alternately menacing and mischievous as a drug dealer; Rita Tushingham is heartbreaking as a dying mother; Adelayo Adedayo burns through scenes as an initially judgmental rookie cop; Emily Fairn (well, hello, Juno Temple meets Andrea Riseborough) portrays a drug addict who – hallelujah! – isn’t just plonked there to be stereotypically doomed and pathetic. Negatives? The Responder is overlong and at times repetitive, the ending is mangled, and some of the night-time filming is so murky, it feels like being slowly lowered into a well. For all that, this is a defiantly anti-formulaic poem to redemption: original and unmissable. As for formulaic, there was the first episode of ITV’s new six-part bomb disposal series, Trigger Point. Created by Daniel Brierley, directed by Gilles Bannier, it’s from the same production stable as Line of Duty, and – slap me to my senses – I’d really been looking forward to it as a 21st-century answer to the late-70s toff-officers-and-bombs classic Danger UXB. It stars Vicky McClure as Lana, an explosives disposal (Expo) officer working alongside Joel, played by Adrian Lester, though (cue doomy spoiler hashtag!) #NotForLong. As soon as Joel starts fondly speaking of getting back with his ex, the clock is ticking on his chances of survival. He’s too lovely. Lana likes him so much. Also, Lester is a big name: sorry, mate, you’re toast. McClure and Lester are both excellent actors who could breathe naturalistic majesty into the instructions for a microwave meal. But even they struggled leading a soapy opener that was a tad heavy on jargon (trigger phones, jammers, “lucky” pairs of “snips”) and light on plot, characterisation and, for that matter, reality. Entering a council estate flat that is considered a “bomb factory”, would Lana, a seasoned professional, really have reached straight for the light switch? Spying an unattended van, would Joel, another expert, have nonchalantly strolled towards it? On the plus side, there was a visceral scene involving a suicide jacket, and an explosion was rendered as a beautifully macabre symphony of ash, fire and pebbles. I hope there’s more of this and less of the sense of an issue-box-ticking “school play”. Over to Sky Atlantic’s nine-part The Gilded Age to see Downton Abbey creator Julian Fellowes’s narrative logic (“I mean, everybody enjoys olden days posh people sneering at commoners, right?”) applied to late-19th-century New York. Left penniless by her father’s death, Marian (Louisa Jacobson) arrives in New York circa 1882 to live with her aunts: Christine Baranski in the Maggie Smith-patented ultra-snob role (“You belong to old New York”), and Cynthia Nixon, who does little more than simper lethargically and sew samplers. Elsewhere, a black (“coloured”) character (Denée Benton) yearns to be a writer, and an arriviste railway tycoon couple, the Russells (Carrie Coon and Morgan Spector), are viciously humiliated as they try to enter elite New York circles. The first episode is a clunker, though perhaps I was just imagining FOB (Fear of Bridgerton) ominously haunting every scene like an oversexed ratings-busting Netflix spectre. Peeking ahead, The Gilded Age, directed by Michael Engler, manages to be simultaneously too Downton (there’s an unsuitable lawyer love interest again) and not Downton enough: the usually magnificent Baranski is too limp to be the American Violet Crawley, and the servants are so underdrawn that, a few episodes in, I was wondering whether I should ring a little bell to find out who they were. Keep watching, though: the Russells, far from being victims, turn out to be new money brutalists who don’t take the snubs lying down. On BBC Two, the gently paced but fiercely moving documentary Survivors: Portraits of the Holocaust, directed by Suniti Somaiya, focused on the 2020 project, commissioned by the Prince of Wales, in which seven artists painted seven Holocaust survivors for an exhibition in the Queen’s Gallery, Buckingham Palace, ultimately destined for the Royal Collection. The artists, including Clara Drummond and Jenny Saville, were clearly moved to be involved, but it was the survivors, all children at the time, and their testimonies that compelled. Anita Lasker-Wallfisch went to Auschwitz fully expecting to be gassed – she survived by playing the cello in the women’s orchestra there – while Zigi Shipper initially thought the chimneys signified bakeries. Shipper and another sitter, Manfred Goldberg, knew each other from the camps, and took pleasure in their lifelong friendship. Together, they noted that even they, child survivors, were now dwindling in number. In keeping with the art project, this documentary came to be about bearing witness, remembrance, the solemn magnitude of it all. What else I’m watching And Just Like That … (Sky Comedy) The Sex and the City follow-up has vastly improved since the series premiere disaster-fest, where panicked uber-wokeness sucked all hope into a black hole of cringe. Now, themes (love, grief, ageing) are dealt with much more sagely. I, Sniper: The Washington Killers (Channel 4) A docuseries about the 2002 Washington sniper case in which 17 victims were randomly killed by a teenager and an army veteran (since executed). The teenage sniper, Lee Boyd Malvo, now in his 30s, speaks from prison. Jay Blades: Learning to Read at 51 (BBC One) The Repair Shop presenter grew up struggling with illiteracy and was only diagnosed with dyslexia as an adult. This lovely one-off documentary shows Blades determined to read a story to his daughter before she turns 16.Monica Ali, 54, is the author of four novels but best known for her first, Brick Lane (2003), which catapulted her to fame even before it was published, earning her a place on Granta’s best young British novelists list. Love Marriage is her first book for 10 years and a publishing event in its own right: a serious, subtle, hugely entertaining exploration of relationships. At its centre is Yasmin, a doctor from an Indian family (Ali is of Bangladeshi and English heritage) and her fiance, Joe, a fellow doctor and son of a liberal, middle-class firebrand of a mother. She lives in London with her husband and their two grown-up children. Why has it taken so long to get this novel written? I went through a time of deciding I wasn’t going to write. I had a total loss of confidence. A healthy dose of self-doubt is good for any writer, but you also have to have self-belief. A total loss of confidence is catastrophic. I found I was depressed when I wasn’t writing and the depression fed into not being able to write – it was a downward spiral. What got you out of it? I thought maybe I could write TV drama. I sank my teeth into learning to write scripts. Everybody said it was a tough thing to get into and that I’d feel beaten up by the process. I never found that, although, when the first thing I pitched was accepted by the BBC, I thought: “Easy!” [she laughs] and then… it never got made. Do you think Brick Lane’s success was too much too soon? Looking back, I was kidding myself. When asked about writing with a baby, a toddler and with little childcare, I’d merrily say: “It was fine, I wrote when they were napping.” I wish I’d been able to enjoy the publication process more. It took me away from home more than I wanted and I struggled with that. It had an impact I didn’t acknowledge because I thought I ought to be able to cope with everything, that it would be unbecoming to moan. When did you first realise you had a gift for storytelling? It’s funny because my children say I’m the worst storyteller ever. “Arrrgh… Mum’s starting a story again…” They’re not talking about my books, but if I’m telling a story at the dinner table, they immediately start rolling their eyes. I’d like to think it says nothing about me and a lot about the parent/child relationship. In Love Marriage, you send everyone up… is there absurdity in all of us and is it important to recognise that? It is how I see the world. Humour is a serious business because without comedy, the capacity for self-delusion is limitless. Comedy keeps us intellectually honest and enables us to embrace our human folly and strive with good-heartedness. It’s a prescription against falling into pessimism. If you were sending yourself up, what would you home in on? Ridiculous amounts of overanxiety, perfectionism and fears with which I torture myself… I laugh about it but I’m a great catastrophiser. I can see something happening to someone else, even across the world, and start imagining it happening to me. What is a love marriage and don’t all marriages end up to some extent arranged? Friends and acquaintances ask what the book is about. I say: love and marriage. But actually, it hinges on sex. Infidelity, revenge sex, sexual addiction… I must confess (without spoilers) I have a crush on middle-aged, single Dr Pepperdine. There’s a Pepperdine fan club at Virago, they’ve all got the hots for him! Harriet, Joe’s mother, is less irresistible: she believes herself tactful but is entitled and invasive – Jane Austen could not have done a better job characterising her. Do you know any Harriets? I have known Harriets and continue to meet them. Yasmin is pissed off when assumptions are made on the basis of her ethnicity. There can be a reflex attitude that [as a person of colour] you must, at all times, be a flag-bearer or an oracle and this can override complexity. Your characterisation of Joe’s therapist is spot-on. I gather your mother was a therapist? I’ve been in therapy for some years and been able to draw on that. I’ve done research, too, reading people like Gabor Maté. I’m deeply interested in the psychology of relationships, peeling back layers. If I were to change, a therapist is the career I’d be drawn to. What did your father do? He started as a civil engineer in Dhaka and worked in a factory when he came here and could not get any other job. He then went back to university and started teaching Open University courses. You grew up in Bolton and studied politics, philosophy and economics at Oxford? I had a fantastic time at Oxford – I felt like a fish out of water but quickly found a group of friends. So much of your novel is about parental influence. Is there any parental advice you still follow? The advice my father most frequently gives is: “Take it easy.” But I don’t take it easy. And besides, I don’t think he really means it. What is the most important thing to remember as the parent of grown-up children? Mine are 20 and 22. The main thing to remember is it only gets more complicated. What I can do now is to listen to them and not impose my view. You show deep understanding of loneliness in old age. Is this something you fear? I’ve had discussions with friends about how we’re going to start a commune together. The thought of doing things completely in isolation – even though, as a writer, I spend a lot of time on my own – is not good. Will we have to wait another 10 years for your next novel? I’m adapting Love Marriage for TV. This novel poured out of me – 240,000 words, which I cut down. But television is very story-hungry and there are scenes I can resurrect. For now, Yasmin and Joe continue – they are still a thing in my life. • Love Marriage by Monica Ali is published by Virago (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyI’ve pinned the ultrasound images of the coming baby to the corkboard in our kitchen. It’s the first thing we’ve pinned there for a while. We got it shortly after we moved in, thinking it would be a place for us to keep lists, or vouchers or important notices. Once it got filled up, we just stopped using it because we are deeply unserious people masquerading as adults and, in fairness, when our son was born we surrendered to chaos a little more freely than before. Now it stands as a fossilised relic of the concerns and appointments we were faced with between April and September, 2018. There are inscrutable notes, written with great haste about important things, now indecipherable. There is the EKG printout from that time I called 111 about my bad back and they managed to convince me I was having a heart attack and sent some rather unimpressed paramedics to our house. There is a gift voucher, itself three years out of date, for a Spanish restaurant that went out of business during the first lockdown. Looking at all these things now provokes the same melancholy tinge of those site photos from Pompeii; whole streets excavated to find people locked in an arbitrary moment in time, buried under volcanic ash, but still sitting upright at desks, or churning butter, or inspecting the use-by date on their tapas vouchers. Beneath that is the ultrasound we got for our son, four years ago. It has decayed over those years, blown out by exposure to the kitchen window, so that his tiny, spongy form, once clear, is now scribbled and scratched beyond all recognition. Its edges have curled up like a Cornetto wrapper, as if melted by creeping lava. Beside them, the ultrasounds of his sister, which are sharp and clean and brand new, seem like they are from a future age. It’s a stark, slightly bittersweet marker of how much time has passed. At a glance, it looks as if we ordered our first baby on VHS, but switched to Blu-ray for the next. And just to the left of that there is an even more striking artefact. A single sheet of notepaper marked GRAB LIST, which details everything we were supposed to bring to the hospital four years ago. On it I’ve written READY, as if this list is in its final, perfect form and proves our preparedness for everything that came after. It is a touchingly naive document of the moment just before our son was born, since its contents speak to a more innocent idea of what those few days in hospital would be like. I clearly presumed listening to music would be a big concern, as I’ve written speakers twice. This time we have no grab list, and the Bluetooth speakers will likely stay at home. We know that the volcano is coming, at least. We just no longer pretend to be ready. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsThe BBC has paid £1.64m in damages over the deaths of 11 former staff who died from cancer after working in corporation buildings riddled with asbestos, the Observer can reveal. It has made the payouts to families of make-up artists, engineers, riggers, set builders, studio managers and television producers. All 11 died of mesothelioma, a rare cancer caused by prolonged exposure to asbestos. They worked at no fewer than 18 BBC locations, including Broadcasting House in central London, Pebble Mill studios in Birmingham and Television Centre in White City, west London, its headquarters for decades until 2013. The list also includes Bush House, the former base of BBC World Service radio, and Alexandra Palace, both in the capital. Known as “the birthplace of television”), the latter is a key part of BBC history because the corporation made its first TV broadcast from there in 1936. The BBC made the admissions in response to a freedom of information request by the Observer. We sought details of settled cases after revealing last year that it was facing potential damages claims from relatives of ex-members of the BBC Symphony Orchestra (BBCSO) and other former personnel who worked in premises containing asbestos. The broadcaster said it had paid £1,637,501 in compensation over the last decade to settle claims involving the nine men and two women, who worked for it between 1959 and 1998. It did not name them. “The payouts over these deaths show that asbestos remains a major menace,” said Liz Darlison, the chief executive of Mesothelioma UK, who is also a part-time NHS nurse in the NHS. “Many people don’t realise that 95% of our hospitals and 85% of our schools still contain some asbestos and that asbestos is a carcinogenic substance that causes mesothelioma. “It’s a dreadful disease. Over half of people die within a year of being diagnosed – an appalling statistic,” Darlison added. About 2,700 people a year in the UK are diagnosed with mesothelioma. Some of the 11 also worked at Dickenson Road Studios in Manchester and BBC Scotland’s former headquarters at Queen Margaret Drive in Glasgow’s West End as well as on Bressay, in the Shetland Islands, and on Ascension Island, at the World Service’s Atlantic Relay Station. The BBC said: “It is not possible to confirm whether the individuals were exposed to asbestos while working at BBC locations and, if so, over what period that exposure may have occurred.” In 2006 the BBC warned current and former employees and freelancers that they had been exposed to asbestos in studios TC2, TC3 and TC5 at the now-defunct Television Centre between 1990 and 2005. It was possible asbestos fibres had fallen from cable ducts on to floors, potentially giving rise to human exposure. The Observer reported last year how the family of Christopher Larkin, a horn player with the BBCSO who died of mesothelioma, were suing the BBC. The BBC admitted liability for the musician’s death and an inquest found he “died from the consequences of exposure to asbestos”. He rehearsed for 36 years at the BBC’s Maida Vale studios in London, which were later found to contain asbestos, some of it broken and exposed. The building is due to close and replacement studios are being built at the Olympic Park in east London. We also disclosed how the BBC had admitted exposing Richard Evans, a set builder on shows including Doctor Who who died of mesothelioma, to asbestos during his 23 years at the corporation making and painting sets. He worked mainly at Television Centre but also other locations around the UK and routinely used Artex, a textured coating that until the mid-1980s was made with white asbestos. His widow Valerie has also launched legal action. Harminder Bains, the lawyer for the families of Larkin, Evans and other former BBC staff who died of mesothelioma, said she suspected far more corporation personnel had been exposed to asbestos than those in the 11 settled lawsuits. “While the BBC may only have settled 11 cases, I don’t believe that they have only exposed 11 people to asbestos. “There must be hundreds if not a few thousand people [who were] exposed to asbestos by the BBC, given the number of locations but also the long number of years asbestos was present in BBC locations,” said Bains, a partner at Leigh Day Solicitors. The Commons work and pensions select committee is undertaking an inquiry into asbestos, chaired by the former Labour cabinet minister Stephen Timms. Its final evidence session this Wednesday will see MPs quiz bosses of the Health and Safety Executive as well as Chloe Smith, minister of state at the Department for Work and Pensions. Charles Pickles, an asbestos consultant turned campaigner, warned that many schools still contain amosite, also known as brown asbestos, and pose a danger to staff and pupils because it is the form of asbestos found in the lungs of 98% of people who develop mesothelioma. “Amosite is clearly lethal, yet remains built into our public buildings.” A BBC spokesperson said: “We would like to extend our continued sympathies to the families of all those affected. “The health and safety of BBC staff and all that use BBC buildings is a primary concern. The BBC manages asbestos in accordance with applicable regulations and statutory requirements.”A man who came to the UK to train as an accountant almost 40 years ago and was left homeless after a catalogue of Home Office delays has finally been granted leave to remain months before his 70th birthday. Ponnampalam Jothibala, 69, a Sri Lankan Tamil, said he was overjoyed his case had finally been resolved, even though he was now “an old man”. When interviewed by the Guardian last year, Jothibala said he had not been able to leave the UK for decades, but he dreamed of going on holiday by the seaside if his case was ever sorted. The Home Office finally granted him indefinite leave to remain earlier this month after leaving him on immigration bail for more than 16 years. “I need a holiday after all this,” Jothibala said. “Many, many years ago I visited Spain and Portugal and loved these places. I have decided I will go to Barcelona for my holiday.” He came to the UK in 1983 to go on a course at the London School of Accountancy, with hopes of forging a professional career. Education was highly valued in his family – both his parents were teachers and his close relatives are lawyers, doctors and accountants. Instead, he has spent decades homeless and staying on people’s sofas, sometimes sleeping on a mat at the London Sree Ayyappan Temple in Harrow, where he helped out as a volunteer cook before the pandemic struck. He was granted periods of temporary leave to remain by the Home Office in the 1980s but halted his studies after experiencing trauma as a victim of an arson attack in which three people died. He survived the fire by jumping out of a first-floor window. He was convicted of fraud and theft in 2003, and the Home Office planned to deport him, but he lodged an appeal and an immigration judge ruled in his favour in May 2006. The judge found Jothibala had been pressured and intimidated by criminals into committing the crime, from which he had derived no benefit himself. The Home Office mistakenly recorded on Jothibala’s file that he had lost rather than won his appeal, although officials took no steps to remove him from the UK, nor did they appeal against the judge’s ruling. A note on his Home Office file in July 2014 stated that Home Office officials, having spoken to the courts and tribunal service, now knew that the appeal had been upheld rather than dismissed. The note stated that “in light of the mishandling of the case following the determination of 2006”, the case would be reconsidered. However, no action was taken. Jothibala’s solicitor, Naga Kandiah, of MTC Solicitors, sent a letter to the Home Office last year informing officials that he would be lodging judicial review proceedings if they did not resolve the matter speedily. He said the Home Office had rejected an application he had made under the Windrush scheme, and called for an amnesty for Commonwealth citizens who arrived in the UK before 1988. Kandiah said: “This case is a sobering reminder of how a historic injustice can devastate a person’s life. My client has lost out on so many opportunities to progress in life. In 2006, his deportation order was overturned by the court but unfortunately nobody recognised that he was without formal status. After four decades in the UK I am so glad that the Home Office decided to exercise discretion and has granted him indefinite leave to remain.” Last year, the Home Office told the Guardian it would be defending its approach in this case after Kandiah launched a legal challenge. When approached again about the decision to grant Jothibala indefinite leave, a spokesperson said the Home Office did not comment on individual cases.Twenty years ago, the American psychologist Tessa West began arriving early to the department store at which she worked, so she could avoid the salespeople she spent most of her time with. Really, she was hoping to escape just one colleague – someone with whom she disagreed about shop-floor etiquette. (Her: don’t steal clients. The co-worker: why not?) In the early mornings, West could be sure they wouldn’t run into each other, saving her from stress and anxiety, which can lead to ill health. “It’s not that I thought anything bad was going to happen,” she recalls, via Zoom. “It was the not-knowing what would happen,” and “the increase in heart-rate” that comes with that uncertainty. Soon the situation became so preoccupying that West quit, not so much resolving the conflict as bypassing it altogether. “Did it work? Sure. But how much energy did that take up? A lot.” West, who is now 40, is a professor of psychology at New York University, where she runs the West Interpersonal Perception Lab, a research unit that studies, broadly, how we deal with each other, and how those interactions affect our mental and physiological states. “I spent the first 10 years of my career doing basic science on how people communicate,” she says, which included “a lot of time in labs evoking horrible experiences to see what people do.” (One study involved West sitting participants in a chair and “being mean” to them, to measure their stress responses.) Before long, she noticed that a lot of what she was observing could be captured in the workplace: how individuals influence groups, how status affects persuasion and morale, how anxiety affects everyday relations. And the more she researched, the more she realised that, like her younger self, very few of us know how to resolve everyday conflict at work. “Like, I don’t know,” she says. “Did you ever take a course to learn what to do when someone’s being a low-level asshole?” West and I are meeting to discuss Jerks at Work, her new book, in which she explains the types of bad colleagues we encounter in the workplace, and attempts to equip readers with strategies to mend disputes. “Most of us have worked with someone who had an outsized effect on our emotional wellbeing,” she writes. “To cope, we’ve tried a few tactics: venting to friends, disengaging from the social scene at work, gossiping about the person in the hopes our bosses will learn – via the grapevine – just how miserable we are.” None of this tends to help. Typically, neither does the alternative, retaliating through confrontation, which often “ends in more conflict, since most people don’t enjoy having their flaws spelled out to them in excruciating detail.” Sometimes we think of the ability to argue as displaying superiority or courage, and not a worrying volatility and lack of emotional control. West argues we’re all capable of being poor colleagues. A lot of workjerkery is rooted in innate feelings and behaviours: laziness, jealousy, the various emotional fissures we experience in marriages, repackaged for office life. (On needling pettiness at work, one recent viral tweet read: “The feeling of forwarding an email you have been accused of not sending is probably the same as winning a duel.”) We all have our embarrassing weaknesses – we can all be jerks. “Some of us get overwhelmed, so we ghost people, do a disappearing act. At work, those folks are more likely to be free-riders, or neglectful bosses. Others get anxious, so they micromanage.” Problems arise whenever a group works together. “I’ve seen Nobel laureates act the same way in meetings that I saw on the shop floor,” West says. Tantrums, attacks on reputation, hotshot egos, credit stealing, microagression, passive aggression, conniving attempts to get ahead… it affects us deeply. Once, when West was tasked with re-arranging her faculty’s office plan, she faced kickback from colleagues upset at the changes. “People would come to me in private and say, ‘There’s no way I can share a wall with this person.’ They cared more about that – how many feet away from their nemesis they were – than whether or not they got promoted.” She later caught a co-worker “walking down the hall with a two-gallon bottle of water that was clearly full of urine.” West realised he was pissing in his office to avoid bumping into a colleague in the toilet. All of this would be amusing if it weren’t so damaging. “A lot of us worry about acute stressors – those big life events, when we can physically feel our hearts racing and our palms sweating,” West says. “But the biggest predictor of health outcomes is daily, low-level stuff.” Incessant stress sustained for three to five days is enough to affect your immune system, making you more susceptible to mild illnesses, like colds. As that stress cascades over years, studies have shown scarier problems to emerge: obesity, impotence, cancer, high blood pressure, heart disease. “If you’re feeling butterflies in your stomach because you know you’re going to run into someone who’s going to say something rude…” West says. “That adds up.” In a 2014 study, West asked parents to deliver a talk to strangers, an experience known to induce anxiety, and then had them sit with their children, all of whom were between six and 12 months old. “We found that the babies showed physiological alignment with their parents’ stress responses,” West says. “If a mum had an elevated heart rate, the baby caught that stress.” (This kind of emotional transference can be termed stress contagion.) “And if you told the mum to try to regulate it, to push it down, the effect was even worse,” she continues. “So if you get really stressed with your boss at work and you try to suppress it, if you don’t talk about it with your family, if you think that that’s going to solve it…” She shakes her head. “Doesn’t. Work. It leaks out of you through all of these non-verbal communication channels. You show it in your face. You sigh. And your family becomes attuned. It affects your relationships with them. But it also affects their physiology. Their stress. In their bodies.” She looks concerned. “That part is terrifying, that if you don’t solve your problems at work, your kids are going to suffer, your spouse is going to suffer, in ways you don’t even realise.” It is likely you’ve had bad colleagues. It is also likely you’ve had a bad boss. Everyone has a story – don’t you? Perhaps it involves micromanagement, or neglect, or small acts of soul-crushing criticism, or larger harassment and abuse. Perhaps the malevolence was overt. Perhaps it was more subtle, so that if you were to later describe it to friends it would seem minor and inconsequential, and you might come off as appearing hypersensitive. (This is true of so much workplace conflict; often a jerk is a jerk for a series of small, collective actions, not for one colossally atrocious deed.) Sometimes, bosses don’t realise the effect they’re having on workers, and it is helpful to remain modest about their levels of self-awareness. An acquaintance recently told me she “once had a female boss who did all of the following in an open-plan office, in front of both male and female colleagues: 1. Asked me what menstrual products I used. 2. Asked me what bra size I wore. 3. Asked me when I was planning to have children. 4. Told me off for asking ‘How was your weekend?’ on a Monday morning, because she didn’t like personal questions.” Often, managers become managers for one of two reasons: they had excelled at their previous job, or they had drifted around an organisation long enough for higher-ups to finally announce, “OK, it is time.” Frequently, a manager has no experience of managing people before they are required to, which can be disastrous. “Very few managers are trained,” West says. (Sometimes it is because their managers weren’t trained.) “And if you get so far up at work and you still suck at this, it’s a bit embarrassing. You don’t like to admit it. It’s like a dark secret… Once you get to a certain career stage, it feels patronising to take a ‘How to Get Along with Others’ class.” In the book, she writes, “A lot of jerk at work problems result from poor leadership” – it is up to a manager to transform an undermined or eroded culture. In West’s view, we undervalue how much communication affects the workplace, and she is riled by the fact this learnable skill is rarely taught. Why aren’t workers mandatorily coached in conflict management? she wonders. Why, during interviews, is our focus on bottom-line productivity rather than how well they might function within a larger whole? “There are some basic skills,” West says, of bosses, “like how to check in on a team to make sure no one is free-riding; how not to enable people who kiss up and kick down. Little things managers should do, they’re simple, they don’t require charisma or mind-reading or magical empathy or any of those kinds of soft skills – they just require small changes in behaviour. Obvious shit, really. But so many of us don’t do it because nobody told us to.” The lasting shift to remote work brought on by the pandemic has been kind to jerks in some ways and terrible in others. Colleagues who once benefited from the slippery, informal workplace conversations that were allowed to occur in office environments have been hampered by Zoom calls, which involve structure and multiple attendees – it is difficult to bitch about a colleague if your target is with you on-screen. But others have thrived. With physical distance, it has become easier for neglectful bosses to neglect. (West: “Bosses should never assume no news is good news.”) At home, shirkers shirk, and micromanagers send emails around the clock, because what does the pandemic workday look like any more? Recently, West attended a department video conference in which she says one colleague – a bulldozer digitally, if not in person – dominated by yelling, so that he appeared on screen more than anyone else, making it difficult for the meeting’s organiser to interrupt and increasing his chances of getting his own way. The Zoom problem (which, remarkably at this stage of working-from-home, remains a common organisational issue) is easily fixed: never use Speaker View, which a single participant can monopolise, and instead break the screen up into a grid, so more voices can be heard. (This is a strategy West describes as “controlling the spotlight”.) Other conflicts are trickier to resolve, though they nearly always involve similarly simple actions. In Jerks at Work, West helps readers understand that a poor office situation isn’t futile – that no matter how constantly unsettled you might feel, there is always a move to make. For micromanagers, she suggests: “Set mutually agreed upon expectations.” For bulldozers: learn to speak first in meetings, and jettison their dominance. For the co-worker on a campaign of terror: create physical and psychological buffers, so as to lessen interaction and anxiety. Much of West’s book leads to the fact that if a colleague is being a jerk to you, it is likely they are being a jerk to other people, too. To this end, West suggests developing a broad network within your organisation – not friends so much as distant contacts with social capital, who, via inter-departmental awareness, might help identify troublemakers. This needn’t be the CEO, because who, really, can reach the CEO? “I’m the only faculty member here who invites the IT department to my Christmas parties,” West says. “People think it’s weird. I’m like, ‘What are you talking about? They’re the most socially savvy people here!” West has worked at NYU for 14 years, and has been a tenured professor for seven. At the end of our conversation, I ask if she has problems at work now, half-expecting the answer to be no, perhaps naively, faintly hopeful. “Yes,” she says. “Many.” “It’s still tough?” I ask. “Of course,” she says. Then she laughs, and adds, “Just like any other skill, it needs practice.” How to spot a work jerk There are seven types to look out for. Are you one of them? Kiss up/kick downers ‘These are people who climb to the top by any means necessary,’ writes Tessa West. They tend to be competitive with colleagues at their level and below, reserving good manners only for bosses and people above them. Credit stealers ‘They seem like friends, but they will betray your trust if your idea is good enough to steal.’ This could involve offering to help in the early stages of a project, only to claim it as their work later. Bulldozers ‘Workers who take over the process of group decision-making and render bosses powerless to stop them through fear and intimidation.’ Often they don’t mind making a fuss to get what they want. Don’t mistake their behaviour for leadership. Free riders People who are ‘experts at doing nothing, and getting rewarded for it’. They take on work that seems important but requires little effort. Micromanagers Co-workers who email you at all times of the day. ‘Some do it because they used to have your job and are having a hard time moving on, others because they’re under the false impression that more monitoring equals better performance.’ Neglectful bosses These are managers who follow a three-step process: periods of neglect, a buildup of worry, ‘a surge of control over you to alleviate their anxiety’. If you have a neglectful boss, ‘you will live in a world of chronic uncertainty.’ Gaslighters ‘These workers lie with the intent of deceiving on a grand scale.’ They often isolate victims to get what they want. Jerks at Work: Toxic Co-workers and What to do About Them by Tessa West is published by Ebury Edge at £11.99 If you’d like to hear this piece narrated, listen to The Guardian’s brand new podcast, Weekend, which will launch this Saturday. Subscribe on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts.What is it with Essex and makeovers? It was reported that the county council is to invest more than £300,000 to put its best face on and “challenge people’s preconceived ideas of how they see Essex on TV”. Council bosses wanted to banish thoughts of The Only Way Is Essex, fake tan and fast cars synonymous with the south of the county, replacing them with the Constable-country vistas, windmills and nice thatched cottages of north Essex. We’ve been here before. The council’s drive to combat the Essex stereotype is almost as old as the stereotype itself. In 1997, moves to improve the county’s image were reported in the national press. “Difficulties arise when overseas investors come to the UK, go to competitor locations, and hear jokes about Essex girls having more shoes than books,” said the head of the Essex Economic Partnership, Terry Conder. The council said it often received letters from residents about Essex’s reputation. As the new millennium arrived, Essex asked the government for permission to spend council tax payers’ money on improving its image and the council started its “Real Essex” tourism campaign. It spent £100,000 on a drive that claimed Essex was, borrowing from the old Mars bar adverts, the place to “work, play and rest”. Like today, they wanted to draw attention to Constable and quaint villages. As with most disquieting elements of British discourse, Essex’s reputation was partly a creation of the rightwing press. Essex man was invented in 1990 via an anonymously published Sunday Telegraph editorial by Simon Heffer. The High Tory columnist grew up watching a new town, South Woodham Ferrers, being built on the edge of marshland downhill from his village. It soon filled up with Cockney emigres. West Ham United usurped the local passion for cricket. After a chance encounter with a loutish, Essex-based City worker on a train into Liverpool Street, he exacted revenge through a gross caricature depicting vomiting at the station. Heffer and other Conservatives didn’t hate Essex man, however. After all, he was the future of the party, and typified the age of upward mobility. His invention was useful for the Tories as it claimed working-class social mobility exclusively for Thatcherism, rather than it being part of a longer process you could trace back to the rise of Keir Hardie and Labour in metropolitan Essex in the late 19th century. The editorial freely admitted, too, that Essex was more an ideal than a location bound by geography: “For spiritual purposes, Essex is to be found all over the newly affluent parts of the outer London suburbs.” Essex man’s less industrious and more materialistic counterpart, Essex girl, soon formed part of the repertoire, rubber-stamped when the Ilford-born Sun journalist Richard Littlejohn ghost-wrote a grim little tome of misogynistic jokes, largely about the promiscuity of women half his age. The power of the Essex girl gave journalists the licence to pry into the sex lives of very young, even underage, girls. So, does the council have a point? Essex, after all, was the fifth least popular English county, according to a YouGov poll in 2018. Kent, our neighbour just over the estuary from where I live in Southend, is frequently near the top of most-visited lists, Essex languishes nearer the bottom. Yet, in making this all about image, the council is ignoring other factors. Essex is still agricultural and, despite the excellent walks along its many public footpaths, much of its countryside is earmarked for private use. Thanks to its proximity to London, much of south Essex is either residential land or green belt. People still flock to Southend and Clacton on bank holidays but, more than tourism, Essex is a success story about the idea of making a home, from the postwar plotland dreamers building in former farmers’ fields to the influx of Eastenders to new towns such as Harlow and Basildon. Essex was inundated by the North Sea flood of 1953, with scores of casualties, and today great concrete sea walls keep the tide at bay in places such as Canvey Island. It is as if the council is following suit, building bigger and bigger defences to keep out the tide of representations. In truth, the stereotype is being eroded by the passage of time. The term Essex girl was taken out of the Oxford Dictionary in 2020. Essex man, so characterised by his daily commute to the City, has had to diversify into home working since the pandemic started. There is no “Real Essex” to be unearthed if we can just crack through the veneer of the mediated, overdone, “fake” Essex of TV lore. Because – and can I just shock you – I have seen Botox fillers in Constable country, too. The Invention Of Essex by Tim Burrows will be published by Profile Books in 2023The private education system, I’m beginning to suspect, just isn’t that into me. I blame myself – I’ve been playing hard to get. Pointing out the divisions in British society that having private schools causes, mentioning how the fees have gone up hugely ahead of inflation and questioning their charitable status in light of that. But still, in my heart I was up for being seduced. I went to private schools and was generally fond of those institutions. As a left-leaning centrist but also a conservative with a small “c” (a woolly position that makes me a massive “c” in the eyes of some), I’m uncomfortable with abolishing, or otherwise driving out of existence, non-profit-making educational institutions. I don’t like banning things in general. I can see the logic that these schools, which undoubtedly provide something good for thousands of children, might nevertheless be causing societal harm overall. But I’m squeamish about taking that logic and commissioning some politicians to turn it into a great big illiberal bunch of laws. So the truth, private education system, is that I was still fluttering my eyelashes at you. It’s obvious to me now, though, that I am no longer being courted. My good opinion, and that of other woolly centrists, has stopped being attractive to the sector. This became clear when I read about a Times investigation into the new Middle Eastern branches of some major British private schools. It found that some of these offshoot institutions were making politically motivated local changes, such as dropping rules against homophobic bullying in deference to the homophobic regimes in which they are based. A spokeswoman for Royal grammar school, Guildford defended this approach, with reference to that institution’s Qatar branch, saying that the school “must comply with the laws of the country in which we are operating”. Then she added: “Royal grammar school, Guildford will always challenge bullying, whatever the root.” But what if the root is an unjust and bigoted non-democratic regime? They’re not challenging that, they’re accommodating it. They don’t have to set up a school there. What possible reason could there be for doing so if core principles of a liberal education, including equality and mutual respect – presumably the very ethos the school is hoping to bring to this other country – are illegal there? Sherborne school in Dorset insists that “school policies and practices are inclusive and supportive of LGBT people”, which Sherborne school in Doha does not. A former teacher at the Dubai branch of Brighton college has said that they were forced to cover up Israel on maps of the world. And, according to the Times, the Doha branch of King’s college, Taunton changed the definition of bullying set by the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) to exclude the word “homophobic”. When I looked at the King’s, Doha website (albeit not from Doha, where it might look different), I actually did see homophobia mentioned there, but I was struck by the juxtaposition of these schools and the NSPCC. These organisations all enjoy charitable status, but for some reason only one of them is not looking to expand globally. The NSPCC isn’t seeking franchises in other countries where the law requires charities to be more equivocal about the issue of cruelty to children. It’s not looking to be flexible about that and so perhaps change its name to something less controversial like the National Society for the Prevention of Killing Children, or even the National Society for the Prevention of Killing Too Many Children, in order to build a client base in a new territory and expand the global outreach of its collection boxes. It’s a powerful reminder of how institutions with charitable status behave when they happen actually to be charities. I hate the new trend of British private schools opening branches abroad because the reason, it seems to me, is naked and unreflecting expansionism. It’s not spreading the original institution’s educational values because, as the Times investigation shows, they’re all too ready to drop those values in order to continue to trade. The desire for revenue obviously plays a part but, as the institutions don’t make profits, I don’t think personal financial rewards for the various executive headteachers or boards of governors are a huge factor. It’s less intelligent than that. It comes from an ill-considered capitalistic urge for growth, nothing more thought through than bigger is better. This is the same reason McDonald’s opened a branch in Soviet Moscow, but that was fine because, as far as I know, McDonald’s has never applied for charitable status. What is astonishing is how, by conducting themselves in this way, private schools seem to have given up on making a meaningful argument to retain that status themselves. They’ve just stopped caring about the views of the likes of me. Is the right wing of the Conservative party now so completely dominant that the idea of keeping the sympathy of anyone on the left or in the centre feels like a waste of time? Or is their interest in convincing me another casualty of the current polarisation of views? When centrist opinion is treated with such contempt by both post-Brexit Tories and post-Corbyn lefties, there’s no point courting it. You never hear from those muddle-headed vacillators any more, the schools must think. The left is now impossible to win round to private education so there’s no point trying. And if people in the Conservative party were ever squeamish about morally vacuous globalisation, they show few signs of it these days. This empty-headed push for more branches, like Our Price in the 80s, Gap in the 90s and Jamie’s Italian in the 2000s, couldn’t be more out of step with the exigencies of the climate crisis, an issue these schools presumably wouldn’t teach their pupils about if opening a branch in Texas. And the notion of spreading British private education to the world, of planting the seeds of our own corrosive class system, like socioeconomic knotweed, all over the planet – as a sort of heritage product, but stripped, wherever local governments require it, of anything worthwhile it might stand for – is loathsome. The fact that the aesthetic of Britain’s ancient public schools is so attractive to brutal Middle Eastern regimes should tell us everything we need to know.Hosting the Winter Olympics during a pandemic was always going to test the Chinese government, by putting its ever-growing ability to exercise political control and virus containment on a collision course with its enthusiasm for international prestige and status. The 2022 Winter Games, which open on Friday, are being held at a time of particularly intense western criticism of China over human rights abuses, from the mass persecution of Uyghurs in far western Xinjiang – labelled a genocide by the United States – and other groups including Tibetans, to the crushing of Hong Kong’s freedoms. China denies human rights abuses, but activists have dubbed the gathering in Beijing the “Genocide Games”, and western powers from the US to the UK have announced a diplomatic boycott of the opening ceremony. The exiled campaign group World Uyghur Congress urged: “No one should want another Olympics like this.” There is so little trust of the host nation that many countries have told their athletes to take burner phones, and cyber security experts warned a health app for Olympians could spy on them and steal health and other personal data. Further censure has come from environmentalists who have warned for years about the negative impact of hosting the Games – which need a lot of water for snow and ice – in an area of intense water scarcity. Yet Beijing weathered the controversy when it hosted the Summer Olympics, in 2008, said Susan Brownell of University of Missouri-St Louis, an expert on Chinese sports who was in China for those Games. Then, high-profile protests dogged the global torch relay, violent suppression of protests in Tibet put Chinese oppression there on the news agenda, there was pressure on leaders to skip the opening ceremony and environmentalists warned about the intense pollution that shrouded Beijing. But, once the competition began, the focus shifted to the athletes. Beijing’s calculation is, no doubt, that the same thing will happen this year. “Right now, the political and investigative journalists have the front page, but once the Games start, it will be the sports journalists,” Brownell said. Covid and control Covid has conveniently spared Beijing any worries about protests from the stands, which would have been the most likely arena for political activism in a country where public demonstrations by citizens are in effect banned. Competitors and the few other foreigners given permission to come to Beijing, including coaches, support staff and journalists, will fly into a sealed-off Olympic world, a “closed loop” of venues and hotels in just three locations, connected by their own transport vehicles, travelling in their own lanes. It is staffed by Chinese workers who are not allowed to return to their own homes without a long period of quarantine. Authorities are so bent on total separation that they have warned Beijing residents against helping Olympians if a loop vehicle crashes. For Victor Cha, senior vice president at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington DC, these rules seem like a metaphor for how China’s communist leadership wants the Games to play out overall – in a closed system fully under their control. “Covid has really given them the excuse to completely lock down everything. They want to have complete control over the picture of the Olympics and that helps,” he said. There will be an official international protest, in the form of a diplomatic boycott by western governments including the US and the UK, but their absence is unlikely to be a major headache for officials in Beijing, or feature prominently in news coverage through the Games. “They shrug off the diplomatic boycotts. It feeds the domestic narrative that the west is trying to steal China’s moment in sun, and they can say leaders are not coming anyway because of Covid.” Athlete pressure The shutdown of international participation in the Games has put particular political pressure on the athletes, now the only people with a platform to make a statement. “It is impossible to separate sports from business and politics. More than a big sporting occasion, this is also a political event,” said Mark Dreyer, author of Sporting Superpower: An Insider’s View on China’s Quest to Be the Best. The human cost of China’s political controls has been thrown into the spotlight in a very personal way for athletes by the treatment of one of the country’s best-known, most successful Olympians, tennis star Peng Shuai. Last year, she vanished from public view after accusing a former senior Communist party official of coercing her into a sexual relationship, and her allegations were scrubbed from the internet. After international outrage, she made a series of stage-managed public appearances inside China, including with Olympic officials, which have done little to assuage concern about whether she is acting with free will. Her treatment was highlighted by protesters at this month’s Australian Open, who wore T-shirts saying simply “Where is Peng Shuai?”. Organisers banned them, then backtracked on the ban. Perhaps concerned by the swell of support for Peng, China has taken the unusual step of going beyond the International Olympic Committee bans on athletes taking political stands. If they break Chinese laws, with “behaviour or speech that is against the Olympic spirit”, athletes will face “certain punishment”, Yang Shu, a member of the Beijing Organising Committee, told a news conference this month.This rhetoric may be intended mostly as deterrent, analysts say. An athlete’s arrest over a political protest would be shocking, and likely to become an enduring image of an event that Beijing wants remembered as a sporting and logistical triumph. Rob Koehler of Global Athlete, an advocacy group for sportspeople, said they have reluctantly advised competitors to save protests or criticism of China for when they have finished competing and returned home. “That is the hardest and most outrageous thing we have had to say, given how hard we pushed for them to have the right to basic freedom of expression,” he said. Omicron disruption Even if China manages to side-step an inflammatory protest – or an inflammatory response – at the Games, the virus that might once have looked like a gift to a government bent on control has become more of a threat to a successful Olympics, with the highly contagious Omicron circulating widely. If an outbreak knocks out high-profile athletes, or significantly diminishes the number of competitors, it could start to undermine the events. Beijing announced on Saturday that, even before the Games had begun, the number of cases in the Olympic village had jumped from two to 19. Cases among athletes and team officials exceeded those among media and “other stakeholders” for the first time. There has already been disruption to qualifying competitions after athletes tested positive. At the US figure skating championships, Brownell said some athletes developed Covid between competitions, and despite taking extreme precautions. “They had been masking, observing social distancing; the pairs team had only private lessons in the rink with their coach and didn’t know where they had got it. It created quite a panic at the championships themselves,” Brownell said. Ironically, China’s success with controlling earlier variants of Covid has left it particularly vulnerable, public health experts say. Its domestic vaccines are ineffective against Omicron, and because there have still been only a few cases in a country of more than 1.4 billion people, there is almost no natural immunity. A vulnerable population and an unevenly distributed healthcare system makes the potential of a Covid outbreak terrifying. The devastation that ripped through Wuhan in the earliest days of the pandemic could still be unleashed on the rest of China, and fear of this has almost certainly contributed to the intense testing and quarantine rules. Beyond China These factors have affected how the rest of the world, or at least audiences in markets such as the US, will experience the Games. The broadcaster NBC is keeping its commentators at home, covering Beijing from thousands of miles away. Restrictions on media coverage of the last Games, the Summer Olympics in Japan held last year after a year’s delay, diminished the viewing experience for many of the millions of people who wanted to follow from home. “My personal feeling was that coverage of the Tokyo Games really lost something. It was pretty clear they didn’t invest the same amount of money, the coverage was not as glossy and aesthetically pleasing,” said Brownell. “Now, with commentators not actually being in Beijing, that’s going to be even more marked. I think the pandemic restrictions could have an impact on how the TV and social media audiences see these Olympics.” There may also be less promotion. In a sign perhaps of how these Olympics are among the most controversial in recent decades, sponsors who pay eye-watering sums to be connected with the Games have not been flaunting those links in the west as they have done in the run-up to previous iterations of the competition. For years China has forced heavy penalties on sports personalities, companies and managers who risked the slightest public criticism of its politics. A 2019 tweet by Daryl Morey, then general manager of the Houston Rockets, supporting pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong was estimated to have cost the National Basketball Association hundreds of millions of dollars after he was allowed to stay in his job. But sponsors in the west are wary of being accused of pandering to China. Perhaps because they are caught between Beijing and Washington, there has been no pre-Games campaign to spur excitement in the US from the card payment giant Visa, Coca-Cola or Procter &amp; Gamble, the Wall Street Journal reported. One game, two worlds The framing in China of the Beijing Winter Games, however, is drastically different from that outside the country – focused on igniting national pride, and using the Games to boost participation in sport and expand the domestic winter sports industry. Chinese citizens’ participation in sport has been on the rise since the 2008 Games, said Shushu Chen, a lecturer in sport policy and management at the University of Birmingham, who has been tracking the impact of the Summer Games in Beijing and London. Chen noted that compared with London, residents in Beijing were “ostensibly more positive about the inspirational effects of the Olympic Games, which can perhaps be explained by sociocultural contextual differences between the two cases”. Dreyer, who has lived in Beijing since 2007, observed that the wave of enthusiasm in China for winter sports began in 2015, when the country won the hosting rights. “China will not top the medals table this year, but it will probably do better than it has ever done before. And it will have many more athletes competing in the Winter Games than previously.” Inside China, the Games are already being hailed as a triumph for Beijing and its ability to rally against the virus, and against western criticism. Internationally, these Games may be remembered very differently.Some 20 years ago, Joe Rogan was a reality TV host, fronting Fear Factor on NBC, in which hapless contestants faced dangerous, scary or gross stunts. Now he’s one of the most powerful figures in American media, though often little acknowledged or actively shunned by the country’s coastal elites. He is sometimes left-leaning but says he detests identity politics and political correctness. He appears committed to some forms of social justice but is amenable to conservatives. The Joe Rogan Experience podcast – the vehicle for his enormous wealth and power – intersperses comedy, politics, criticism of the media, interviews and discourses on topics ranging from cage-fighting to psychedelics and quantum mechanics. Last week, Rogan, a martial arts enthusiast and one-time Bernie Sanders-endorser, collided with the rock veteran Neil Young. The 76-year-old Canadian singer objected to the music streaming giant Spotify giving a platform to Rogan, 54, who has been accused of promoting falsehoods about Covid vaccines. Earlier this month, Rogan invited Dr Robert Malone, credited with a role in developing mRNA vaccine technology, on the show. Malone, who has been banned from Twitter for spreading Covid misinformation, claimed “mandates of an experimental vaccine are explicitly illegal” and said the US government was “out of control”. Both men were criticised for promoting several baseless conspiracy theories, including the false claim that hospitals are financially incentivised to falsely diagnose deaths as having been caused by Covid-19, and Malone’s assertion that world leaders had hypnotised the public into supporting vaccines. The appearance prompted calls for the White House health adviser Dr Anthony Fauci to debate Malone on the show, and proved to be the trigger for Young to issue his “him or me” ultimatum to Spotify. Earlier this month, 270 scientists and medical professionals signed a letter urging Spotify to take action against Rogan, accusing him of spreading falsehoods on the podcast. Rogan has said he used ivermectin, an anti-parasite drug that has no proven benefit against Covid-19, against the illness. He says he is not anti-vaccine, though he has questioned the need to give it to young, healthy people. “I’m not an anti-vax person,” Rogan said last year. “I believe they’re safe and encourage many people to take them.” The Joe Rogan Experience, which can run for up to three hours, is the No 1 podcast on Spotify. After Young issued an ultimatum, Spotify chose to go with Rogan, who received $100m for distribution rights from the Swedish company in 2020. For Spotify, it was an obvious choice. Streaming is highly competitive, with low margins. Apple, Google and Amazon are competing for market share. In its latest filing, Spotify reported 172 million paying subscribers, up from 144 million when it signed Rogan. When it comes to plotting a lucrative future in modern media, Young, a cultural legend, was simply not competitive. Britain’s Prince Harry and his wife Meghan expressed their concern to Spotify – with which they have a podcast deal – on Sunday. But the fight with Young – joined by Joni Mitchell – was not the only major headline Rogan created this week. He also interviewed the rightwing Canadian academic Jordan Peterson, triggering a deluge of coverage over comments about race and the climate crisis. Not that Rogan cared. Nor would it bend the arc of his astonishing rise. Rogan got his start as a magician on Fisherman’s Wharf in San Francisco. He moved to Massachusetts, where he competed in taekwondo. He switched to comedy and was nicknamed “Little Ball of Anger”. He went for the soft flesh, skewering the fable of Noah’s Ark: “Noah was 600 years old and a drunk!” he would tell audiences. Back on the west coast he was cast in the 90s sitcom NewsRadio, playing a conspiracy-prone dude named Joe. In 1997, he started working for Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) as a commentator. He moved to reality TV, then in its infancy, as a host of Fear Factor, inviting contestants to engage in tests involving worms, flies and snakes. After 9/11, as commentators worried that culture had changed forever, the NFL invited U2 to play the Super Bowl half-time show. The names of those who died in the attacks scrolled behind the band. But in a memorable act of counter-programming, Rogan presented Fear Factor: Playboy Playmates Edition, replete with a countdown clock to the second half. Rogan prised away 11 million viewers. Since then he has only increased in popularity, and accrued cultural power, caring little for taste or perceived notions and winning a legion of fans attuned to new media platforms and dismissive of old elites. “The social media stars know how to tell a story, it’s all about presentation, whereas journalists employ some of the most boring writing ever. It’s all formula,” noted the cultural critic Bob Lefsetz last week. “Young people don’t even bother to read the paper and they never will. They’re going to be reached another way.” Rogan’s wealth has grown. He has moved from California to a $14m mansion outside Austin, Texas – destination of choice for tech entrepreneurs. Nor is he alone. A flipside to Rogan – though closer than either might think – is Charlamagne tha God, AKA Lenard Larry McKelvey, a hip-hop star and morning radio host. Democratic politicians flock to Charlamagne, frequently getting burned in the process. He recently asked Vice-President Kamala Harris who was really running the country? Both Rogan and Charlamagne are just doing their jobs, says media professor Robert Thompson at Syracuse University. “The job description is practically to say the kinds of things that will almost, but not quite, get you fired. Eventually you cross the line because the line is not very well-defined.” Neil Young, Thompson says, could find that he needs to be careful what he wishes for. “However noble Young’s intentions are, Rogan is contained by a subscription wall. Spotify has distribution rights but Rogan owns his show. Fire him and he could potentially have even greater distribution than he’s got now.” In 2019, a year before Rogan signed to Spotify, his podcast was downloaded about 190m times in a month. Elon Musk came on. The pair smoked a joint. The far-right conspiracist Alex Jones came on in 2020. Daniel Ek, chief executive and co-founder of Spotify, defended Rogan to the FT: “We want creators to create. It’s what they do best. We’re not looking to play a role in what they should say.” In recent months, Rogan has engaged with anti-vaxxers including the far-right Republican congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene and Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers, who described the deworming medication ivermectin as a viable Covid treatment. There are still some limits – even for Rogan. On Wednesday, Spotify slightly changed its tune, mindful that it may bear some responsibility for Covid-19 misinformation. “We want all the world’s music and audio content to be available to Spotify users,” it said. “With that comes great responsibility in balancing both safety for listeners and freedom for creators. We have detailed content policies in place and we’ve removed over 20,000 podcast episodes related to Covid since the start of the pandemic.” But does Rogan share such beliefs? Thompson acknowledges that many believe stars like Rogan or Fox News’ Tucker Carlson are performing an act, successfully gaining money and influence. “They’re staying in character, other people are supporting and believing them. So I guess in the end whether it’s an act or not is something we will never know and therefore doesn’t really matter.” • This article was amended on 7 February 2022. Rogan has not invited Marjorie Taylor Greene and Aaron Rodgers onto his podcast as an earlier version said. If you’d like to hear this piece narrated, listen on Saturday to The Guardian’s brand new podcast, Weekend. Subscribe on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts.Residents of a small Alabama city will on Tuesday hold a town hall meeting to discuss claims by community members and activist groups that local police have pursued excessive policing for profit. Officers in Brookside, a former mining town 20 min outside Birmingham, have been accused of generating hundreds of thousands of dollars in city revenue through ticketing, towing and other traffic-related fines, despite Brookside having no traffic lights and a few two-lane roads, news site AL.com first reported. With a population of less than 2,000 and a median income of less than $40,000, in 2020 Brookside generated more than $610,000 in fines and forfeitures from drivers, a 640% increase over two years and almost half of city revenue. Towing ballooned from 50 cars in 2018 to 789 in 2020, with residents reporting that they were required to pay thousands of dollars to get vehicles back. “Brookside is a poster child for policing for profit,” Carla Crowder, director of the nonprofit Alabama Appleseed Center for Law &amp; Justice, told AL.com. “We are not safer because of it.” Officers have been cited in at least five federal lawsuits for manufacturing reasons for traffic stops, “making up laws”, overcharging fines, using racist language and other misconduct allegations, AL.com said. “This city is a ticking, ticking timebomb waiting to explode,” Juandalynn Givan, a Democratic state representative, told WVTM, an NBC affiliate in Birmingham. Givan has called on several officials to resign, including Brookside’s mayor, Mike Bryan, and is holding the town hall so residents can air their concerns. “It’s the wild, wild west, and they created their own wild, wild west,” she said. On Saturday, Givan did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Despite reporting only 55 serious crimes from 2011 to 2018, with no reports of homicide or rape, the Brookside police department under chief, Mike Jones, greatly expanded, hiring one officer for every 144 residents. The average size of a force in Alabama is one officer for every 588 people. Jones resigned on Tuesday. Brookside officers also received Swat training and riot gear, according to residents who said officers parked a riot control vehicle outside the community center. Issues with Brookside police have been escalating for years, according to several residents, but many have been hesitant to officially pursue complaints given the cost of doing so and difficulty of contesting fines in courts. “I saw the same attitude in every officer and every person,” Ramon Perez, who tried to fight several tickets in court but ultimately paid the fines, told AL.com. “That’s why I hesitated to fight it. They were doing the same thing to every person that was there. They own the town.” Crowder said: “This is shocking. No one can objectively look at this and conclude this is good government that is keeping us safer.”I think that there are some parts of our language that are worth defending to the hilt, but it seems, sadly, that not everyone feels so strongly. According to research from an organisation called Perspectus Global, many longstanding phrases and sayings are falling by the wayside, unused, or simply unknown, by younger people. Nail your colours to the mast; casting pearls before swine; a nod’s as good as a wink – all seem destined for the knacker’s yard (as is that). I’m all for developments in our language, but what a shame if such rich sayings were lost. I for one will go to the barricades to defend them (any befuddled young people can look that up on the internet). One phrase I wouldn’t expend any energy on trying to save is “hot button issues”. This is becoming ever more intrusive and I imagine is wielded to instil some dynamism into headlines and writing. Well, it doesn’t. Crucial or vital will still do just as well, so please desist. For reasons best known to myself, I was recently reading the back of a Yeo Valley Organic yoghurt package, offering the chance to win a Brompton bike. Wonderful bits of engineering, I hope you agree. I was intrigued to see that one of its models came with an “intelligent pedal assist” and wonder whether this is what a layman might call a motor. If any marketers out there could get in touch, I’d be eternally grateful. And finally, given the tension between Russia, Ukraine and the western alliance, I wonder: whither chicken kiev? As the new orthodoxy seems to suggest that Kiev is now Kyiv, is it time for supermarkets to instigate a massive rebranding? I’m just asking. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistRecord vacancies, as firms complain they can’t find staff. Employers taking that most extreme of measures: raising wages. This is not the usual post-recession story, partly reflecting that the pandemic has shrunk our labour force by around half a million workers. This has led to speculation about the lasting effects of pandemic-induced labour shortages, with suggestions ranging from higher prices, to more machines replacing missing workers, or a smaller economy. But in terms of what comes next, it’s possible that less crystal ball gazing and a few more history lessons might help. That’s where new research into the impact of cholera outbreaks in 19th-century France that killed 1% of the population comes in. It looks at the number of deaths in different areas to investigate how the labour scarcity they caused affected the adoption of technology. It turns out that bigger shortages had a positive effect on uptake of technology (ploughs) and innovation (irrigation) in agriculture, but a temporary negative impact on industry (mining/textiles). Why? Because technology substitutes workers in agriculture, so can replace them, but complements them in industry. Labour shortages increased people’s confidence that learning how to read would pay off via higher wages, boosting the need for agricultural mechanisation because literate workers avoided low-paid jobs there. So, some good news for those hoping labour shortages will boost investment. The bad news? It involved training, which we’re not much interested in these days. Importantly, today’s workforce reduction is about older workers and young men not seeking work, compared with cholera deaths in 19th-century France. So we shouldn’t just ponder the effect of labour shortages – we should reduce them by supporting people back to work. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgFrom now on I’ll find it hard to wash my hands without thinking of Mark Rylance. In Dr Semmelweis he incarnates the Hungarian doctor who was a pioneer of antisepsis but is now largely forgotten. Perplexed, furious and zealous, Rylance is the burning centre of the play he wrote with Stephen Brown before the pandemic, and which is now brought to reverberating life under the direction of Tom Morris. Working in the obstetric clinic of the Vienna general hospital in the mid-19th century, Ignaz Semmelweis was appalled by the number of women who were dying soon after giving birth. Conventional medicine considered the deaths inevitable, accounting for them by miasma, poor ventilation or emotional disturbance. Semmelweis’s investigations, conducted before the concept of bacteria, revealed that patients were being unintentionally harmed by the men who were trying to heal them: physicians, who moved straight from conducting autopsies to delivering babies, were contaminating the mothers. When they washed their hands with a chlorinated solution, the deaths ceased. The effect was indisputable but resisted by the medical profession for years; Semmelweis died, his work unacknowledged, in an asylum. The medical history is crystal clear, but this is also a murky individual story. In the way of whistleblowers, Semmelweis was tremendously difficult. Not simply awkward but ruthless, blinkered, dragged by vision and mission. Rylance is wonderful at conveying the sense of being out of control, unstable with passion. His eyes are often fixed, but his words come out in flurries; he seems to interrupt himself, as if head-butted by his own sentences. The human cost of his obsession, in which individuals are sacrificed for the general good, is made painfully apparent in very fine performances by Thalissa Teixeira as his wounded, distinguished wife, and Jackie Clune, the intelligent nurse to whom no one attends because she is – well – just a nurse. Morris directs with high imagination, weaving together naturalism and dream. Ti Green’s design encloses the action in an iron rotunda: unyielding, inescapable (though Rylance twice shins up its tall pillars). Voiceless women, dead mothers, soft-limbed in russet and pirouetting in tulle, dance through the evening. Violinists (all female) move among the audience and actors, playing Schubert’s Death and the Maiden. These are more than spectral victims. They are reminders that the line between delusion and original insight is not firm; that not everybody sees everything; that phenomena as yet unnamed and unexplained – hello, 19th-century bacteria – are not necessarily fictions. Elizabeth McGovern has also written a play with herself in the title role. Ava: The Secret Conversations is the story of a star, but as drama it is more of a black hole. Based on Ava Gardner’s autobiography, written with Peter Evans, Gaby Dellal’s production trots dutifully through the actor’s life, viewed from the perspective of her final years, when, having had a stroke and settled in London, she was being interviewed by Evans, played by Anatol Yusef. Videos designed by Matthew Taylor – rather too sumptuous for a play that aims at intimacy – act like tourist-board ads when the scene shifts: London is St Paul’s and a downpour of rain, though Gardner actually lived on the other side of town. The two actors often remind each other of who they are: “Peter, can I ask you a question?” “Yes, Ava.” The fairly well-rehearsed facts of Gardner’s life – with husbands Mickey Rooney, Artie Shaw and Frank Sinatra – enable McGovern to be barefoot and foul-mouthed, but also kittenish, and Yusef to supply some routine gestures towards impersonation (Sinatra is slurred in a trilby). The off-stage voice of Ed Victor, wheeler-dealer literary agent, is heard demanding his client get details of Sinatra’s penis: not fair to Victor, this – he certainly wasn’t delicate, but he was too clever to be that crass. McGovern flickeringly suggests how beguilingly she might summon up Gardner, but she is very low-wattage. Why? Because of the stroke (one hand is crooked to her chest)? Because her spirits are waning with her fame? Or because she is stunned by the script she has given herself? She deserves better. Star ratings (out of five) Dr Semmelweis ★★★★ Ava ★★ Dr Semmelweis is at Bristol Old Vic until 19 February Ava: The Secret Conversations is at the Riverside Studios, London, until 16 AprilBefore the pandemic, Deborah Yewande Bankole was on what she describes as a “steady diet of short stories”. She loved seeking out emerging writers and admired the work of Nana Kwame Adjei-Brenyah, Julia Armfield and Danielle Evans, but had not considered writing one of her own. So during lockdown, when furloughed from her job as a creative producer, she found herself with the time to sit down and write, and was surprised when what materialised was her own first short story. Less than two years on, she has completed a six-month writing course at independent publisher Dahlia Books, been awarded a mentorship by Word Factory, the national short story organisation, with author Toby Litt and hopes to publish a short story soon. “Short story writing allows you to do things in literature in a variety of different ways that perhaps long-form writing doesn’t,” she said. The 31-year-old from London was one of many to try their hand at writing short stories during lockdown as the art form enjoys rising popularity. The Dublin-based literary magazine The Stinging Fly, whose previous editors have included author Sally Rooney, said submissions have increased by 100% in the last two to three years, while subscriptions went up by 50% during the pandemic (although it lost out on physical sales to closed bookshops). Such is the apparent appetite for short stories that a new independent press entirely dedicated to them – believed to be the first of its kind in the UK – is to launch in March. Scratch Books’ first publication will be Reverse Engineering, a collection of seven short stories by authors including Irenosen Okojie, Sarah Hall and Mahreen Sohail. Founder Tom Conaghan said today’s “weird fragmented times” are ripe for short stories: “There’s an appetite for it. Life is coming undone and the short story has that potential to reflect it more than anything.” Meanwhile, he said that a new generation of short story writers comparable to greats such as Alice Munro, who announced her retirement in 2013 shortly before winning the Nobel prize in literature, and the late Flannery O’Connor is coming through. Among the key figures, he names Okojie, Ben Pester, Wendy Erskine and Nicholas Royle. Through Scratch he wants to democratise the short story, which, he admits, “has maybe made itself slightly exclusive”. He hopes to one day make short stories so accessible that they are readily available in supermarkets. Royle, who as well as writing short stories and novels edits the annual Best British Short Stories and runs Nightjar Press, said short stories are finally getting the profile they have “deserved for a long time”. Between 1890 and the first world war there were dozens of magazines and newspapers publishing short fiction in Britain, but now there are very few. Royle wants to see more magazines supporting short stories in the way that publications such as the New Yorker, which regularly publishes short fiction, still do in the US. “We just don’t do that [in the UK]. We have magazines that could do that and don’t, so it’s been disappointing.” Some have put the rise in popularity down to reduced attention spans, but Royle disagrees. He said: “A good short story requires you to concentrate and it’s the most amazing example of the story coming together between writer and reader. There’s this great intimacy.” He said independent publishers such as Salt Publishing, Comma Press and Nightjar Press, and prizes such as the Sunday Times short story award, the BBC national short story award, the Manchester fiction prize and the Edge Hill short story prize, the winner of which was due to be announced on Saturday night, have played a key role. Declan Meade, editor and publisher of The Stinging Fly, said momentum has been building for some time. “Writers are feeding off the energy that’s there for them in the short story and recognising the potential of it and you can see that in the variety of the form itself.” Ireland’s story writing scene, he said, has been helped by increased funding from the country’s Arts Council during the pandemic, with new literary magazines launching all the time. When The Stinging Fly launched its own press in 2005, it was a struggle for writers to get their first book of stories published. But now, one of the most positive signs, Meade said, is that short story collections are increasingly being published by big players such as Bloomsbury and Picador. But, he adds, there is still a “pecking order”, with authors usually expected to promise to produce a novel soon after. During lockdown, the magazine had to bring in extra readers to get through all the submissions as people with long-harboured writing aspirations found the time to do it. “I don’t know whether the pandemic will swing it in favour of the short story once and for all… but it would be nice to see it happen,” he says. Cathy Galvin, journalist, poet and founder of Word Factory and the Sunday Times short story award, said the form’s current health has been about 15 years in the making: “There’s a very vibrant, diverse, powerful series of voices that are coming through in the short story form and being heard and making a difference, and that’s why the short story form is alive, because the writing is alive and the writing is rooted in real experience.” Unlike some sectors of the book industry, print sales of short stories have remained steady through the pandemic in the UK, according to Nielsen BookData, with sales for 2021 from mid-March to the end of the year of £4.1m (the top seller was First Person Singular by Haruki Murakami followed by Jo Nesbø’s The Jealousy Man). But it does not include short stories accessed via online platforms, which have played a significant role for readers and writers across the world globally. Chimeka Garricks, the Lagos-based author of short story collection A Broken People’s Playlist, said online journals are a vital part of the short story ecosystem – for helping writers to gauge interest and gain a following and for greater accessibility to readers: “They give the writers a platform to publish their work, even if it’s a work in progress.” What are the short story’s prospects, then? Paul Baggaley, editor-in-chief for adult consumer publishing at Bloomsbury, said publishers in the UK are increasingly seeing new formats and genres such as autobiographical fiction and essay collections as commercially viable, which they would not have done previously, and this, he said, bodes well for short stories. While in the past a publisher might have “gently tried to persuade an author away from writing stories”, now, he said, “that’s a thing of the past.” Giving as examples Alan Moore, author of the Watchmen comic book series, and Three Women author Lisa Taddeo, both of whom have short story collections coming out, he said: “Once you have that position and that reputation and that fanbase, then they will follow you for everything.”Campaigners are urging ministers to ensure any forthcoming UK-wide ban on conversion practices does not contain a loophole allowing those who received “informed consent” from their victims to evade justice. Critics of the practice declared “you cannot consent to abuse”, as a survey revealed the extent of sexual violence used during attempts to change a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity. Research indicates about 7% of LGBT+ people have been offered or undergone conversion practices, and activists are concerned that UK proposals do not go far enough, with the consent loophole causing the most consternation. A Holyrood committee last week published a report calling for an immediate ban on the “traumatising” practice in Scotland, with the recommendations being welcomed as a fully comprehensive prohibition, with no exemptions. The consultation on Whitehall proposals is closing on Friday, with supporters rallying to ensure the UK government’s measures on the “abhorrent practice” are equally watertight. The novelist Jeanette Winterson told the Guardian: “Any country with equal rights should be banning conversion therapy. To me, it’s as bad as forced marriage.” The LGBT+ anti-abuse charity Galop released a survey last week that revealed that about one in four LGBT+ victims of sexual violence in the UK had been assaulted by people they believed were trying to “convert or punish” them for their sexual orientation or gender identity. The Galop CEO, Leni Morris, said: “Our survey shows very starkly that the reality of conversion therapy in the UK is far from what people imagine, or have seen in films like The Miseducation of Cameron Post, where American high school kids get sent to a Christian camp.” Addressing the proposed consent loophole, Morris said: “It is fundamental that UK legislation does not carve out a form of abuse that is OK if you agree to it – consider domestic abuse, forced marriage, honour-based violence – you cannot consent to abuse.” Galop runs a helpline for people who have experienced conversion practices. “We hear from a large proportion of people who believe they consented to what happened to them,” Morris said. “I would argue you can’t consent to something that if you do not go through with it, you risk losing your religious connections, your community, your family or your home”. Sasha Misra of Stonewall said comprehensive legislation was required to outlaw “all forms of conversion therapies in every setting without loopholes … It’s been over three years since the UK government committed to banning conversion therapy, it must act now to protect our communities and outlaw this abhorrent practice once and for all”. The UK government has explicitly pledged to include trans people in their legislation, despite a recent response from the Equality and Human Rights Commission suggesting that the legislation should initially focus on attempts to change sexual orientation only. In Scotland, some faith groups expressed anxieties that prayer and pastoral conversations would be affected by the new law. Holyrood’s Equalities Committee rejected this, however, stating it saw no conflict between banning conversion practices and protecting religious practice. Blair Anderson, of End Conversion Therapy Scotland, himself a survivor of the practice, said the public were often shocked at its prevalence. “The public don’t know that this is happening all around them, in family homes or in churches,” he said. “My experience was informal and at home: that’s why we need a broad definition of what conversion therapy is.” He added: “As a teenager, my mother would take me through prayer, asking God to stop me being gay, and reading passages from the Bible telling me I would go to Hell. She isolated me from support and told me that family members would die as a punishment if I didn’t change.” Winterson has previously written about being subjected to exorcisms as an LGBT+ teenager by the Pentecostal church. She said: “My view is that if a person isn’t comfortable with their sexual orientation, they should be able to find a therapist to talk through their feelings. There are plenty of uncomfortable heterosexuals, and of course there are people who for religious reasons, and sometimes for family reasons, find their gayness impossible to manage. “Therapy is great; conversion therapy is silly. The talking cure isn’t there to talk you out of your feelings; it’s there to help you be you, whatever that means.”The setting is unmistakably Japanese: a mountainous backdrop and, out of view but menacingly close, an active volcano. And nestling amid barren rice paddies seeing out the winter, a distillery producing a spirit whose roots lie far from rural Kagoshima. The prefecture on Japan’s southernmost main island of Kyushu is famed for shochu, a spirit, often made with sweet potatoes or barley, that has sustained family-run businesses here for centuries. But for the past five years staff at the Komasa Jozo distillery have turned their shochu-making skills to producing gin, as a country better known for the rice-based spirit sake, and its award-winning whiskies, acquires a taste for the juniper berry. Komasa has been distilling shochu since 1883, but branched out into gin production in response to declining demand for the Japanese spirit. “Gin is an international spirit, and shochu consumption is in decline, so that was a factor,” says Makoto Birou, deputy general manager at Komasa, which has been run by the same family for five generations. “It’s distilled, like shochu, which makes it much easier to make. And it’s why Japanese craft gin is of such a high quality. We paid a lot of attention to British gin, but our intention wasn’t to try to copy it but learn how we could make something different.” The use of shochu as the base spirit imparts a subtle Japanese quality to some of the dozens of craft gins to have flooded the domestic market in recent years. But it is the enthusiastic addition of locally sourced botanicals that have surprised, and enchanted, members of the international gin-drinking community – from Japanese citrus fruits to green tea and, in the case of the Sakurao distillery in Hiroshima, oyster shells. Komasa’s three varieties are no exception: Sakurajima Komikan, named after the nearby volcano and made with the world’s smallest tangerine; Hojicha, which incorporates roasted locally grown tea leaves; and its most recent offering, Ichigo, the Japanese word for strawberry. “We wanted to use local ingredients and come up with gins that reflect Japan, and Kagoshima in particular,” says Ryota Miyamae of Komasa’s research and development division. Japan’s craft gin boom began in 2016 when the Kyoto distillery launched Ki No Bi, infused with green tea, bamboo and sansho pepper, among other ingredients, and made with water from a well that has served the area’s sake brewers for centuries. “All that awareness among shochu makers means it’s easy for them to make gin,” says Stephen Lyman, co-host of the Japan Distilled podcast and co-author of The Complete Guide to Japanese Drinks. “They are already experts at fermentation and distilling.” When customers at Miyako Takebe’s bar in Tokyo order a gin and tonic, they are no longer limited to familiar brands from the other side of the world. “It’s so well made,” she says of Ki No Bi, the first Japanese gin she stocked. “People tried it with tonic water and seemed to really enjoy it. Once they had acquired a taste for it, they started asking for other labels. I usually ask them if they’re in the mood for something zesty or floral.” Now her inventory includes several Japanese gins – the Observer sampled, among others, 9148 from the Benizakura distillery in Hokkaido, made with kelp, dried daikon radish and shiitake mushrooms. While old-school gin drinkers tend to draw the line at anything too sweet or citrusy, Takebe says the new breed of enthusiasts is less fussy. “The craft gin boom is for people who didn’t really like the bitterness you get with conventional gin,” she says. “But they’re prepared to try other types that don’t have that prominent, medicinal juniper flavour.” Japan’s connection with gin can be traced to the Edo period (1603-1868), when the spirit was brought over to the Dutch trading post on Dejima island in Nagasaki on Kyushu. Its modern incarnation is influencing the way it’s imbibed, with many drinkers shunning the traditional tonic water and opting instead to water it down as mizuwari or mix it with hot water as oyuwari – a style beloved of many shochu drinkers. Komasa sells its range all over Japan and exports a small quantity overseas. Overall sales in 2021 were double that of the previous year – a reflection of a wider trend that saw exports of Japanese gin reach more than 3,700 kilolitres in the first 10 months of last year, most of it to North America and Europe. Lyman is wary of predictions that Japan’s gins will rival the country’s acclaimed whiskies but believes some hold their own against established labels. “Japanese gin is reminiscent of the early days of craft beer,” he says. “There were microbreweries making all kinds of things, and not all were good. But those that are left make great craft beer. The same thing is happening with gin. I’ve had some unbalanced ones in Japan, but some of them are excellent.”Only five women have sat on the US supreme court in its 232 years. Not one has been a Black woman – but that is now set to change. The retirement of Justice Stephen Breyer has given Joe Biden a unique opportunity and if, as pledged, he chooses a Black woman to replace the 83-year-old, the US president will not only be making history, but recognizing the power of a core constituency. Biden won the support of close to 90% of Black female voters as a key piece of his 2020 victory over Donald Trump and, as the Democrats’ most loyal group, they have voted at a higher rate than any other demographic in the past five presidential elections. Biden said he will select his nominee by the end of February, but an informal slate of contenders is already doing the rounds. “We all know it’s way past time. He made that commitment and he’s delivering. I think that’s a great thing close to 240 years later,” Melanie Campbell, president of the National Coalition on Black Civic Participation and convener of the Black Woman’s Roundtable empowerment program, said. She added: “The fact that there’s never been a Black woman on that court – it’s a feat in itself that we’re finally at this table.” Guy-Uriel Charles, founding director of the center on law, race and politics at Duke University and a law professor at Harvard, called the prospect of the new supreme court justice “absolutely historic” and on a par with Kamala Harris becoming vice- president. And on the court, he said: “The parallel would then be to Thurgood Marshall, the first Black man. To have a Black woman [at] the highest reaches of the profession means something for not just Black people but Black women in particular and having representation one can identify.” Black voters in South Carolina turned around Biden’s sinking campaign in the 2020 primaries and, in the election itself, Black voters made the difference for him in several key states that Hillary Clinton lost to Trump in 2016, namely Wisconsin, Michigan, Georgia and Pennsylvania. Biden acknowledged that they had had his back and in return promised: “I’ll have yours.” The constituency is vital for Democrats in many state as well as national elections. In Virginia in 2021, for example, Republican Glenn Youngkin’s gubernatorial victory was in part secured by the fact that his opponent, party veteran and former governor Terry McAuliffe, was unable to earn the full and enthusiastic support of Black voters. Now Breyer’s retirement announcement arrives amid discontent among Black voters and activists as the Democratic-controlled Congress persistently fails to pass voting rights protections, while racist voter suppression and map-rigging are rampant in many red states. Meanwhile, any Biden pick joining the liberal wing of the court will find themselves, alongside Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan, comprehensively outnumbered by the conservative super-majority achieved under Trump, writing scorching dissents as American law is forced further right. Nonetheless, advocates of equity and diversity are not going to downplay the moment. Ohio Democratic congresswoman Joyce Beatty, chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, said in a statement: “We know that when America’s boardrooms, legislatures and even the supreme court start to resemble America, we all benefit,” and she urged confirmation of whomever is put forward “without any unnecessary delay”. Biden has revealed no names, but he said at the White House last Thursday: “The person I will nominate will be a person of extraordinary qualifications, character, experience and integrity”. That didn’t stop instant conservative sniping. This prompted Jatia Wrighten, an assistant professor in Virginia Commonwealth University’s political science department, to lament that the US is “really not as far along as we would like to think”. “A lot of the pushback already is ‘Why this focus on race – is this another form of affirmative action?’” she said, saying such an attitude “highlights a blindspot in American political history” after centuries of white men as the norm on the court. To boot, only five of around 300 federal appellate judges in the US were Black women when Biden became president. He appointed five more in his first year. Wrighten added: “Pundits and legislators and congressional members were saying things like ‘is this person even going to be qualified?’ This idea that if it’s a Black woman in some way she’s not qualified when in the last days of Trump’s presidency they had the audacity to push through Amy Coney Barrett who really had little experience in that realm in comparison to other supreme court justices,” she said. And she asked: “Why have we not seen more diversity on the supreme court that actually reflects the population that live in this country? “The question should be: why hasn’t this been a question before?”Mark Hodkinson was born in a “modest, boxy” house in a Manchester suburb. There was one book in the house, kept on the top of a wardrobe with other revered items such as his cycling proficiency certificate. The book was Folklore, Myths and Legends of Britain, and Hodkinson writes that: “When I see the front cover again, an illustration of Cernunnos, the Celtic horned god, looking startled and irked … I fall through time.” Hodkinson’s family moved to Rochdale in the mid-1970s, when he was 10, and he still lives there. He became not only a working-class reader – as per the subtitle of this book – but also a working-class publisher and writer too, which makes him a very rare bird. The upper-middle-class grip on British literature may be stronger than ever today, working classness being, as Hodkinson writes, “disavowed and discarded” in favour of an American notion of aspiration. Accounts of working-class life must be smuggled under flags of convenience. Hodkinson lists them: “female, ‘misery lit’, black, ethnic, gay, Welsh, Scottish or Irish.” And of course the working classes are more elusive these days. Of 70s Rochdale, Hodkinson writes: “Many streets had mills on them, standing tall and wide like battleships, completely out of scale with the rest of the surroundings”, whereas Rochdale now is “Anytown UK … spotted with litter-strewn retail parks”. Working-class writers did get a look-in during the 50s and 60s, when prosperity and permissiveness shook up factory life and the social-realist “kitchen sink” genre emerged, mainly in the north. The young Hodkinson read those books but found the protagonists too earthbound, too fixed in their northern locales. They were not the inspiration of his writing and reading, nor the reason he has now accumulated 3,500 books. He has none of the chippiness afflicting some of the kitchen sinkers; he is not out for revenge. Instead, he’s a dreamer. He reads to be “spirited away from reality”. We see the young Hodkinson lying in bed “with books fanned out around me like numbers on a giant clock”. His reading is of a piece with his “thinking while drifting, across wasteland and cemeteries”. He once consulted a therapist (because he’d got a bit worried about having so many books), who told him they were his metaphorical friends. I know Hodkinson slightly. Like him, I was born in a modest, boxy house in the north (there were about 10 books in ours). Perhaps that’s why I so enjoyed the way he talks about literature, some negative remarks about one of my own works excepted. On a snowy day in Rochdale, the young Hodkinson reads The Outsider by Albert Camus. In his head he is in dusty Algiers – “the fig trees, the red sky” – watching the sea sending “long, lazy” waves across the sand. He describes Billy Casper, urchin-like hero of A Kestrel for a Knave by Barry Hines (a late kitchen sink work), as “half-boy, half-pigeon”. Of Morrissey: “The words he uttered were drawn from the end of the rainbow – ‘charming’, ‘elegant’, ‘marvellous’.” There are vivid character sketches of authors Hodkinson has published. Simon Armitage, doing star jumps with his wife on their daughter’s trampoline when he was made poet laureate. Hunter Davies, knocking on, but not so much sprightly as spritely. As they walk through the Lake District chomping on apples, “I half expected him to suggest a game of hide and seek”. There is much dark comedy about Hodkinson’s publishing career. A driver brings a truck load of 3,000 unsold books, to be stored in a lockup. Hodkinson has done his back in, but the driver makes clear he is “under no obligation whatsoever” to help. This is a book about the north; it is also about publishing, writing and music, but it transcends its subjects and meets the criterion Hodkinson sets out in his preface: “The best books, the same as the best days, skitter on the breeze. They go their own way.” Andrew Martin’s latest book, Yorkshire: There and Back, is published in May by Corsair • No One Round Here Reads Tolstoy: Memoirs of a Working-Class Reader by Mark Hodkinson is published by Canongate (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWhen VC Andrews’s debut novel, Flowers in the Attic, was published in 1979, it was not well received by all critics: one described it as “possibly the worst book I have ever read”. However, her gothic horror-romance about four children who are locked in an attic for three years by their beautiful, conniving mother – who seems loving but actually starves and poisons them – went on to sell more than 40 million copies, was on the New York Times bestseller list for 14 weeks and is still in print more than 40 years later. Now, startling parallels between the lives of the children imprisoned in the attic and Virginia Andrews’s own life as a severely disabled woman are to be laid bare for the first time in a forthcoming biography, The Woman Beyond the Attic. The book claims that when Andrews – who spent most of her adult life housebound in a wheelchair – was disobedient, her “controlling” mother would imprison her in her bedroom and deprive her of a meal as a punishment. “Her mother would lock her in her room and not give her dinner, if she got angry at her,” said Andrew Neiderman, author of the new biography, which will be published on Thursday. “She controlled who Virginia could see, what she could do and punished her for not doing what she wanted.” Andrews suffered from rheumatoid arthritis but lived a relatively independent life before a surgical treatment in her late teens left her unable to walk and move her neck without pain. By the time Flowers in the Attic was published, Andrews was 56 and had been dependent on her mother, Lillian, for decades. “She was trapped,” said Neiderman. Like the children in Flowers in the Attic, “her mother kept her under lock and key. Firstly, because she was ashamed of her for being disabled, and secondly, because she couldn’t handle it [Andrews’s disability].” For example, Lillian “made sure” Andrews always wore clothes that covered up her wheelchair in a way that would hide her disability from visitors. She placed her daughter’s chair behind bushes when Andrews sat on the front porch so that passers-by would not see her. “She didn’t want people looking at her.” Since Andrews “hated” her disability, she went along with her mother’s attempts at “disguising” her wheelchair, Neiderman said. “She thought that when people looked at her and saw her illness, they looked at her as ugly.” It was her mother who taught her to feel that way, he said: “If, as a child, your mother wants to hide you, obviously it is going to affect the way you look at yourself.” Neiderman became Andrews’s ghostwriter following her death from breast cancer in 1986, completing her unfinished manuscripts and penning 96 bestselling novels in her style under her name, approved by her estate. Many of the revelations contained in the book emerged from his interviews with her closest living relatives, who also gave him unprecedented access to Andrews’s personal letters. “I said to them: I think it’s time to write her biography, but I need all the little details, all the personal letters and the personal information. And they agreed.” Andrews always maintained that the plot of Flowers in the Attic was “a fictionalised version of a true story” that a hospital doctor had told her when she was a teenager. But as an isolated disabled woman, reliant on her mother’s care, “she felt so trapped by her illness – and was so incarcerated by her mother sometimes – that she could understand how children would feel locked up in an attic,” believes Neiderman. In the filicidal novel, which Andrews dedicated to her mother, Cathy becomes a sexually frustrated teenager after years of being confined in the attic with just her siblings for company. She is then raped by her older brother. Like Cathy, Andrews would have known how it felt to be penned up and sexually frustrated: “Even though she was in her 50s, she thought like a young girl because she didn’t have adult experiences with men.” Her mother had prevented her from going on dates as a young woman. “When she was writing, she interviewed her [adult] niece about sex – because she had no idea about it.” She asked her niece to tell her how it felt to have sex and what the experience was like, emotionally and physically, he said. Because Lillian could not drive and the family had very little money, Andrews rarely left her home: “It was very difficult for her to move about,” said Neiderman. He does not think Andrews even had access to a garden for some of her life – like the children in the attic, who make paper flowers in an attempt to turn their prison into an imaginary garden. It wasn’t until Andrews achieved fame and fortune as a novelist that her living conditions as a disabled person improved – but even in 1980, a journalist who interviewed her wrote: “Her only companion is her mother.” By 1981, Andrews had moved into an 11-bedroom mansion but despite her success, another journalist, Stephen Rubin of the Washington Post, noticed that during an interview, she “always returns to the subjects that seem to preoccupy her most – her wheelchair and her mother”. When Rubin questions her about her relationship with her mother, who fusses constantly over Andrews and seems to him “an adorable little old lady”, she tells him, darkly: “Mothers wear two faces like most people.” When Flowers in the Attic celebrated its 40th anniversary in 2019, it had become a global bestseller. Andrews’s mother, however, never read it. “She wouldn’t read her books, she wouldn’t read anything she wrote,” said Neiderman. She did not encourage her, either. “It wasn’t until Virginia became famous and did readings and book signings and a trip to Europe that her mother respected her as a writer.” At that point, her mother became “proud” of her, he said. “Yes, Virginia Andrews had a difficult life. But the thing about her is: she overcame it all – and went on to have one of the biggest successes of commercial fiction.”Two of documentary cinema’s current fascinations – the foibles of the super-wealthy and the environmental cost of our way of living – are brought together in this extraordinary, savagely poetic film. In the republic of Georgia, a billionaire – the former prime minister Bidzina Ivanishvili – has a hobby. He collects trees. But not just any trees: he favours huge, ancient and rare examples that have been a constant in the lives of the people of the Black Sea coast for generations. The chosen trees are gouged out of the ground, leaving raw gashes of stripped topsoil, and transported at vast expense and inconvenience to their new home, the Shekvetili Dendrological Park. Ivanishvili is absent from the film, but his autocratic whims – part folly, part power flex – are the subject of much debate among the Georgian people. Some are gung-ho: he builds roads in order to transport the trees, improving the infrastructure of the area, they argue. More often, though, they weep over the aftermath of this ego-driven environmental vandalism.Solway Firth, Cumbria There’s more than a spectacular sunset to watch on the Solway Firth. The coastline that separates England from Scotland is also renowned for its birdlife – herons, oystercatchers and short-eared owls are often seen along the banks. At sundown, the low cliffs and hills of the Scottish coast glower against a vast sky shot through with rose-yellow hues, with the swathe of sand glowing in the last of the rays. Stay at the Steamboat Inn, right on the shoreline on the Scottish side, for unfussy pub dishes and simple but comfortable rooms – but world-class views (doubles from £110 B&amp;B, thesteamboatinn.co.uk). Ditchling Beacon, East Sussex Rising up like a giant wave, the East Sussex Downs come to a peak at Ditchling Beacon, offering spectacular views southwards to the sea and northwards over the wooded Sussex countryside. On a clear day, the sky floods apricot and pink over Devil’s Dyke and mid-Sussex as the sun sinks below the horizon, flooding the sea with a vivid, gold light. The Beacon is five minutes’ drive (or a stiff uphill walk) from Ditchling village, where the Green Welly café (thegreenwellycafe.co.uk) does an excellent line in restorative tea and cake, and the Bull offers classic pub dishes and stylish rooms (doubles from £119, room only, thebullditchling.com). Mynydd Illtyd Common, Brecon Beacons Walk from the visitor centre at Libanus on to Mynydd Illtyd Common, a wide open space swathed in heather and bracken, that offers 360-degree views of the surrounding peaks. Head to the vantage point at Twyn y Gaer to see Pen y Fan – the region’s highest mountain – blaze with rust-coloured hues in the last of the light, while the forests and hills in the westerly direction slowly fade to silhouette. Warm up with a stay at Peterstone Court, a country house hotel on the outskirts of Brecon with a cellar spa and a fine dining restaurant (doubles from £170 B&amp;B, peterstone-court.com). Talisker Beach, Isle of Skye Talisker is a photographer’s dream of a beach, with a long, sweeping arc of sand and a rocky shoreline of black boulders that provides an ideal foreground to the flaming skies beyond. The beach faces due west so on a clear winter’s day the outline of South Uist – the second largest of the Outer Hebrides – is set against the horizon as the sun gradually disappears. It’s a bit of a drive to Talisker, so reward yourself with a stay at the Broadford Hotel, with leather Chesterfields in the bar and wonderful dinners of locally caught seafood (doubles from £85 B&amp;B, broadfordhotel.co.uk). Greenwich Park, London The ever-changing London skyline is at its most eye-catching at sunset, when the towers, spindles and historic domes are silhouetted against a flaming sky. Take the riverboat to Greenwich Park for widescreen views from the City and Canary Wharf to the London Eye. Spend the hours before sundown dipping into Greenwich’s bustling market, or discovering Britain’s seafaring history at the National Maritime Museum and the Cutty Sark (rmg.co.uk). Stay at the Pilot, which has 10 individually designed bedrooms and a buzzy, open-plan kitchen (doubles from £139 B&amp;B, pilotgreenwich.co.uk). Sandbanks, Dorset Last year, Sandbanks was voted the best sunset-watching spot in the UK, and this long spit of sand, leading to one of the country’s most exclusive (and expensive) communities, offers plenty to do on a wintry beach day. Hop on the ferry to Studland Bay, and explore the romantic ruins of Corfe Castle before hot chips, eaten walking along the sands on Shell Bay. Time the return journey to watch the sunset from the water – but be quick, the crossing takes around four minutes. Stay at the Hotel du Vin in Poole, with a buzzy brasserie and wine cellars (doubles from £95 room only, hotelduvin.com). Zennor Head, Cornwall Wear plenty of layers, take flasks of coffee and get your phone ready for glorious, windswept sunsets on a walk out to Zennor Head, a 750-metre long promontory stretching into the roaring Atlantic Ocean. Park in Zennor village and follow the coastal path to the headland, keeping an eye out for kestrels on the clifftop, and seals bobbing in the waters below. Book into the Gurnard’s Head, unmissable with its egg yolk-yellow frontage, for tangy fish soups, hearty meat dishes and indulgent puds, all made with locally-sourced ingredients. Afterwards, retire upstairs to one of the eight super-cosy rooms (doubles from £142.50 B&amp;B, gurnardshead.co.uk). Broadway Tower, Cotswolds The highest point in the Cotswolds near one of its prettiest villages, at 312 metres above sea level, this former folly boasts 60-mile views across 16 counties. At sunset, watch the sun drop behind the Welsh skyline, the river Severn glowing in the half-light, and pick out Oxford’s gleaming spires. There’s a lovely circular walk, a visitor centre, shop and espresso bar in the Tower Barn. Stay at the 16th-century Broadway Hotel, with slick contemporary rooms (doubles from £99 B&amp;B, broadway-hotel.co.uk). Spurn Point, East Yorkshire A three-mile long, constantly moving spit of sand between the North Sea and the Humber estuary, Spurn Point offers some of the most spectacular skies in the country. Pop into the visitor centre before strolling along the sands. At sunset the sea floods gold, roe deer skitter across the scrub and you may even see porpoises bobbing in the water. Check into the Dunedin Country House, a charming Georgian manor within walking distance of the picturesque village of near Patrington (doubles from £120 B&amp;B, dunedincountryhouse.co.uk). Rhossili Bay, Gower peninsula The three-mile stretch of sand at Rhossili Bay is pretty spectacular at any time, but sunset ups the ante several notches. The beach faces due west, which means front row seats for a flaming winter sky that turns the sea a deep, metallic teal. It’s easy to spend a whole day on Rhossili – at low tide, walk across the causeway to the rocky Worm’s Head island to get a fantastic perspective on the entire stretch of beach. Stay at the Worm’s Head Hotel, right above the bay, to watch the sunset from the privacy of your own balcony – or from its hearty food-serving restaurant (bay view doubles from £93 B&amp;B, thewormshead.co.uk). • This article was amended on 1 February 2022 because an earlier version misspelled the name of the village of Patrington in East Yorkshire as “Packington”. It was further amended on 7 February 2022 to replace an image taken from Ditchling Beacon which was taken at sunrise. This has been replaced with an image taken from that location at sunset.Governments underestimate the power of celebrity at their peril. First it was Marcus Rashford and his campaign for hungry children. Now it is Jack Monroe pointing out how the official inflation figure bears no relation to the real cost of living increases facing the neediest households. The footballer and the chef have performed an important public service by highlighting, in a way that official statistics and thinktank reports can’t, just how tough life is on or close to the breadline. It is often said Britain is a wealthy country, which indeed it is. But if you rely on food banks it doesn’t really matter if house prices are going up and the stock market is booming. The poorest 10% of households in the UK have negative net wealth, because their debts are higher than the assets they own. Monroe’s point about inflation is well made. The official measure of the cost of living does not reflect the lived experience of people across Britain and was never intended to. The consumer prices index doesn’t show whether those on low incomes are being affected by supermarkets cutting back on value ranges. Nor does it reflect the fact that richer households have savings to draw upon when times get tough. What’s more, as the Resolution Foundation has pointed out, soaring energy prices act as a form of deeply regressive tax, with the poorest households hit hardest. This is the background to the deepening cost of living crisis and what the government should do about it. One thing is already obvious: a toxic brew of rising housing costs, dearer energy and higher taxes means ministers have to come up with something. Doing nothing is only an option if they are prepared to risk oblivion at the next election. Certain things are set in stone. Next week, the regulator Ofgem will raise its price cap in response to the sharp rise in the global wholesale price of gas. Energy suppliers will be able to adjust their tariffs from April and the indications are the average household will be paying £600 a year more unless the government steps in to help. Higher interest rates from the Bank of England are also inevitable and it would be a surprise if interest rates did not go up by 0.25 points to 0.5% this week. There is the likelihood of further increases as the year wears on. Despite the opposition of many Tory MPs, the planned increase in national insurance contributions – the £12bn health and social care levy – also appears to be done and dusted. Rishi Sunak could use the better than expected public borrowing figures to delay the increase by a year or abandon it altogether. Indeed, there is an argument that the Treasury would do better to allow the economy to get up a head of steam after the damage caused by the coronavirus pandemic rather than putting the squeeze on too quickly. That was what George Osborne did after the financial crisis, with the result that the economy slowed and deficit-reduction targets were missed. Neither option appeals to the chancellor. Delaying the national insurance increase until 2023 would bring its introduction a year closer to the next election, and Sunak would prefer to be cutting not raising taxes by then. Scrapping the increase altogether would represent the sort of fiscal laxity the Treasury has traditionally loathed: governments spending money but reluctant to impose the tax increases needed to pay for them. Sunak is definitely not a fan of the idea that the only real constraint on government spending is inflation, and that the Bank of England can always print more money to pay the state’s bills. Boris Johnson sometimes gives the impression he is a fan of modern monetary theory and, in any case, has a different time horizon to that of the chancellor. But this weekend’s joint article by the prime minister and the chancellor in the Sunday Times saying the national insurance increase “must go ahead” puts the issue to bed. Sunak will have his way – but at a cost. It will not be easy for the government to dig itself out of a deep hole but the priority should be to help those on low and middle incomes cope with rising energy bills. There is money available to do this because the scarring from the pandemic has been a lot less severe than originally feared. On some estimates, Sunak has £50bn to play with, easily enough to counter the energy crisis. Labour has proposed making the warm home discount more generous and expanding the number of people eligible to receive it. This makes sense, as does the idea of cutting VAT on energy bills, a move that would help all households. Although Sunak will get his national insurance increase, it is bad economics as well as bad politics. The levy is a tax on jobs and inflationary, because businesses will either employ fewer workers or try to pass on higher costs to their customers. Income inequality is high in the UK but wealth inequality is even higher, and it gets harder to make the case that capital gains should be taxed more lightly than income when those paid modest sums are being asked to pay more national insurance or are having their personal allowance frozen. The cost of living crisis is happening and if the government is too timid in response, the economy will struggle to cope with rising energy bills, higher taxes and falling real incomes. There is a risk demand will slow from the spring onwards once the short-term boost from easing Covid-19 restrictions has played out. Concerns about higher debt interest payments that come from rising inflation may then be the least of the chancellor’s worries.A true-life story that traces one woman’s tumultuous relationship with her serially unreliable father, Sean Penn’s Flag Day looks terrific. With its grainy, handheld camerawork and fondness for gloaming, magic-hour light, visually it feels like a cross between Terrence Malick’s Badlands and Barbara Loden’s Wanda. But the film, adapted by Jez and John-Henry Butterworth from a memoir by the journalist Jennifer Vogel, and starring Penn and his daughter, Dylan, makes heavy weather of the story at times. For all the bold stylistic decisions and visual energy, the actual storytelling tangles itself up in a convoluted, nonlinear structure, depleting some of the thrust and restlessness of the camerawork. Still, as forger, con artist and sometime bank robber John Vogel and his daughter Jennifer, the Penns give committed – and in Dylan’s case exposed – performances. Their real-life relationship brings authenticity to their scenes together; however, this fails to fully anchor some of the more showily histrionic moments.Legislation to allow Britain to hit banks, energy companies and “oligarchs close to the Kremlin” with economic sanctions will be introduced by the government this week, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said. The scheme is the latest attempt by the UK to dissuade the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, from launching an invasion of Ukraine, and was announced hours after Britain said it was willing to deploy more forces to Estonia and other Nato allies in eastern Europe. “We’re going to be introducing new legislation so that we can hit targets including those who are key to the Kremlin’s continuation and the continuation of the Russian regime,” Truss told the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme. “There will be severe costs on an invasion into Ukraine. And we would target Russian financial institutions, we would target energy companies, we will target oligarchs close to the Kremlin,” she added. Both the foreign secretary and the prime minister, Boris Johnson, are expected to visit Kyiv early this week, despite the pressure faced by Downing Street over the “partygate” scandal. A redacted version of Sue Gray’s report is expected to emerge on Monday. Foreign Office sources said Britain’s existing sanctions regime allowed the UK only to target those linked to the destabilisation of Ukraine; the new legislation will permit a wider targeting of the “strategic interests” of the Russian state. Any legislation will probably have to be sped through parliament as about 100,000 troops are massing in Russia and neighbouring Belarus, creating what Truss described as “a real threat of invasion”. The government has been accused of allowing Kremlin-linked money to flow easily through the City of London, and in some cases Russia-linked individuals donating to the ruling party. Last week, the Center for American Progress, a US thinktank close to the president, Joe Biden, warned that “uprooting Kremlin-linked oligarchs will be a challenge given the close ties between Russian money and the United Kingdom’s ruling Conservative party, the press, and its real estate and financial industry”. The thinktank proposed creating a joint US-UK working group to “prod stronger action from the UK government”. When asked about the thinktank report, Truss told the BBC: “We are doing more. We are introducing new legislation.” Britain, in conjunction with the US, has stepped up its rhetoric about the Russian threat to Ukraine, with London warning of a possible coup plot a week ago. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has talked down the risk, arguing that Kyiv has faced a constant military threat from Moscow since 2014. Russia denies it will invade, although the Kremlin said it was unhappy with the US response last week to its security demands. Moscow wants Ukraine never to be allowed to join Nato and has demanded a broad range of troop withdrawals from former Warsaw pact countries in eastern Europe. On Sunday, it emerged that Britain had offered to double its troop numbers in eastern Europe, where 900 lead a multinational battlegroup in Estonia and 150 in Poland, while Biden said Washington would deploy “not too many” additional forces – a few thousand at most – “in the near term”. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said on Sunday that combat troops would not move to Ukraine in the event of a Russian invasion. “We have no plans to deploy Nato combat troops to Ukraine,” he said, adding later: “There is a difference between being a Nato member and being a strong and highly valued partner as Ukraine.”Like many of the irresistibly catchy pop songs it showcases, Sing 2 follows a tried and tested formula. Hapless koala bear promoter Buster Moon (Matthew McConaughey) must risk failure, humiliation and being chucked out of the window of a luxury hotel to put on a show. His animal stars (including two pigs, an elephant, a gorilla and a porcupine) overcome various obstacles to perform to a non-stop soundtrack of pop and rock bangers. What’s more, everything rests on luring a reclusive star – in this case Clay Calloway (Bono) – out of retirement. It’s a formula, after all, that made a considerable hit out of the first film, which was also written and directed by Garth Jennings. While there are no surprises whatsoever here, the perky charm remains.When bitcoin mining company Bit Digital started shipping its energy-intensive computers out of China in early 2021, eyebrows were raised. “A lot of people thought we were being overly paranoid,” says chief strategy officer Samir Tabar, who helped relocate all of the company’s machines to the US and Canada. But the company’s paranoia paid off. China’s bitcoin mining ban last summer, driven partly by environmental concerns, sent the industry spinning into chaos. The announcement sparked a fire sale of the computers used to power bitcoin, with mining companies scrambling to ship more than 2m of the machines out of China. They arrived by the crateload in countries like the US, Russia and Kazakhstan. China was home to about 65% of global bitcoin production in 2020, according to an estimate by the University of Cambridge. Although the country banned bitcoin mining for a number of reasons, one was the massive energy consumption bitcoin required and the impediment that posed to China’s goal of carbon neutrality by 2060. Chinese regulators aren’t the only ones concerned by bitcoin mining’s environmental impact. The latest calculation from Cambridge University’s bitcoin electricity consumption index estimates that bitcoin mining consumes 133.63 terawatt hours a year of electricity – more than the entire countries of Ukraine and Norway. This figure keeps growing: bitcoin mining currently uses 66 times more electricity than in 2015. Bitcoiners like to say that China’s ban proved the resilience of the network. Although the “hashrate” – a measure of the global computing power dedicated to mining bitcoin – plummeted around the time of the crackdown, it had recovered by the end of the year. But bitcoin’s energy consumption now poses an existential threat to the mining industry, with a growing number of lawmakers around the world eager to follow China’s lead. Kazakhstan initially welcomed China’s stranded bitcoin miners as a potential boon to the economy. Lured by the promise of lax regulation and cheap coal power, an estimated fifth of global bitcoin mining production migrated there. But bitcoin’s rapacious energy demand created intense pressure on Kazakhstan’s ageing energy grid this winter. The threat of emergency blackouts soon led the government to permit grid operators to limit power supply to miners, leaving some facilities without power. Even in renewable energy havens, the future of bitcoin mining is far from assured. Iceland, which gets almost all of its energy from renewables, won’t welcome any more bitcoin miners to its shores. Regulators in Sweden say that bitcoin mining siphons energy from more productive industries, and are currently lobbying the EU to ban the practice outright. Norway-based bitcoin miner Arcane’s CEO Torbjørn Bull Jenssen dismisses this as a “very planned-economy approach”. But even in the free-market-loving US, an increasing number of lawmakers are souring on the industry. In theory, a greener bitcoin is possible. The digital coin’s energy consumption is tied to its underlying “proof-of-work” protocol (PoW). This is the decentralised consensus mechanism that secures the currency and prevents fraud or hacking, in the absence of oversight from banks or another centralised body. The role of bitcoin miners is essentially to verify transactions on the blockchain. Think of bitcoin mining as a contest where miners compete to solve complex cryptographic puzzles. The “winner” adds the next block of transactions to the distributed ledger (ie, the blockchain) and claims payment in the form of new bitcoins and a transaction fee. The miner using the most computing power is likely to solve the problem fastest, creating the incentive to expend more energy in order to “win”. This ballooning energy consumption is fuelling the popularity of a less energy-intensive alternative: proof-of-stake (PoS). Kathleen Breitman, co-founder of Tezos, a blockchain platform that allows users to create smart contracts, says that a friend of hers ran a cryptography mailing list when bitcoin was first announced. “Arguably the first bitcoin sceptic”, his first reaction was, “‘If this is successful, it’s going to absorb all the energy in the universe, and it’s going to be terrible.’” Tezos is built on PoS instead, which uses a consensus mechanism different from bitcoin’s. Rather than “miners” competing with computing power, different nodes of the distributed network compete by committing “stakes” of tokens. Staking a greater number of tokens – which risk being forfeited in the event of fraud – increases the likelihood that a node will be selected by an algorithm to produce the next block of transactions, receiving rewards in the form of more tokens. Because it’s the “stake” (ie, the number of tokens) rather than “work” (ie, energy expenditure) that secures the network, PoS reduces network power demand by more than 99% relative to PoW. Instead of warehouses stacked high with purpose-built machines, PoS can run on a dinky Raspberry Pi microcomputer. Although Breitman says environmental concerns aren’t what pushed her blockchain to pick PoS, it’s becoming more advantageous as scrutiny on PoW ramps up. Ethereum, the second-largest public blockchain after bitcoin, is planning to shift to PoS by the end of 2022, and a number of new blockchain applications such as Cardano and Polkadot have chosen to launch using this protocol. The European Commission is among the regulatory bodies trying to incentivise the industry to migrate applications from PoW to PoS but the bitcoin network has so far resisted any such move. It’s not that bitcoiners don’t care about the environmental impact – although a vocal minority on social media might give this impression, says digital assets lead at the Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance (CCAF), Michel Rauchs. The issue is that a majority of bitcoiners remain adamant that PoS is not a worthy replacement for PoW. Many bitcoiners believe that PoS subverts the fundamental principles of a decentralised currency that must remain outside the reach of governments and the banking system. “The problem with proof-of-stake is that it’s not trustless and it’s not censorship-resistant, and it’s not objective,” says Chris Bendiksen, research lead at digital assets investment company CoinShares. “There’s no real difference from a high-level perspective between proof-of-stake and consensus shareholder capitalism… Proof-of-stake is not a replacement for proof-of-work, it’s just a return to the pre-bitcoin system.” Some bitcoiners claim that the environmental debate is overblown because energy usage will fall over the coming years. This is because the profit miners receive for minting new coins is programmed to halve roughly every four years. Eventually, all bitcoins will be mined and miners will only receive transaction fees. “Since the [payment in the form of new coins] will go away and transaction fees won’t go up, electricity consumption will end up being much lower than the doomsayers believe,” says Pierre Rochard, a longtime bitcoin investor and developer. In other words, shrinking rewards should shrink the pool of competing miners. Whether or not this will be the case, reluctance to rewire bitcoin’s underlying protocol tosses the ball back into the bitcoin miners’ court to tackle the issue of energy consumption. They’re rising to the challenge – at least in rhetoric. Bitcoin mining is the cleanest and most efficient use of energy in the world out of any major industry, MicroStrategy CEO Michael Saylor, founder of the Bitcoin Mining Council (BMC), said in a recent briefing. “The only way you get more sustainable and more efficient would be to create an imaginary industry.” (More imaginary than bitcoin, that is.) The BMC is a body of bitcoin miners set up last year to address growing concerns over the cryptocurrency’s energy consumption. Its purpose is to promote sustainability within the industry, but it’s also part of the fightback against bitcoin’s image problem. The headline figure promoted at the meeting was that bitcoin accounts for only 0.1% of the Earth’s total energy consumption – which sounds a lot smaller than the frequent comparisons to small countries. (The 0.1% figure caught on fast among bitcoin miners – several quoted it to the Observer.) Rauchs said that the 0.1% figure sounded “roughly in line” with CCAF’s data. What’s more, 58% of the energy used to power the industry is sustainable according to the BMC. A report from CCAF in 2020 estimated this figure at a more conservative 39%, but Rauchs stresses this was only a snapshot of energy consumption at that moment in time, and couldn’t comment on the reliability of the BMC’s estimate without seeing the underlying data. Some bitcoiners argue that the cryptocurrency could incentivise a more rapid shift to renewable energy. Because bitcoin mining operations don’t have to be switched on all the time, they pair well with the intermittent nature of renewable energy according to the argument, and can compel energy companies to increase renewable energy capacity, as well as helping to balance the grid. Bitcoin mining company Marathon Digital Holdings, which runs operations in Nebraska, Texas and South Dakota, claims to have such agreements with power providers. “The company that generates the electricity can tell us to shut down our mining rigs,” says its CEO Fred Thiel, meaning “they’ll all of a sudden have 100-200 megawatts – whatever amount we’re consuming – available to put into the grid at a moment’s notice. We act like a big battery.” There isn’t evidence that this is happening at scale yet, says Rauchs, although it could become more important in future. However, bitcoin mining is not particularly unique in this regard, says Arvind Ravikumar, a petroleum researcher at the University of Texas at Austin. Electric vehicle charging and so-called “tier zero” data centres that don’t support critical functions are also suited to these “demand response” arrangements that can be paired with renewable energy on the grid, he says. “The idea that you have to create a new demand, like bitcoin mining, is not correct.” And the flipside is where growing energy demands incentivise defunct fossil fuel-powered stations to come back online. Controversially, bitcoin mining company Greenidge Generation Holdings reopened a former coal power plant in Dresden, New York, and converted it to natural gas, causing the plant’s greenhouse gas emissions to increase almost tenfold between 2019 and 2020. Discussions about Bitcoin’s energy consumption tend to wind up in a philosophical cul-de-sac about the inherent utility of the industry. Critics contend that this utility is zero, which can provoke defensiveness in its advocates. “There are old-school bitcoiners who are like, ‘Who cares about the energy consumption? Bitcoin deserves to exist,’” says Breitman. “It becomes an argument about values.” Many allege that energy overuse is simply the latest stick with which to beat bitcoin, and that the industry is subject to unfair moral scrutiny compared to others – like gold mining or Wall Street day trading. Rauchs is “actually pretty sympathetic” to that argument, saying bitcoiners are correct that hyperbole about bitcoin destroying years of climate progress is “completely out of proportion”. Whichever way you slice it, eliminating bitcoin isn’t a fast-track solution to global heating. Ravikumar says the most important issue is what the industry is doing to reduce emissions. “That’s the question we need to be focusing on – rather than what, if any, are the benefits of Bitcoin mining.”Coronavirus has hit the UK hard, with the country recording more than 18m cases and close to 160,000 deaths linked to the disease. The government figures below include confirmed cases only – some people who have the disease are not tested. Where are the UK’s current coronavirus hotspots? At the start of the pandemic, London bore the brunt of coronavirus’s impact before the centre of the virus shifted northwards. More recently, hotspots have developed again across the country, with London being hit earliest by the Omicron wave. Everyday life in the UK has been subject to varying degrees of restriction since March 2020, although national restrictions were relaxed in all four nations of the UK over the summer of 2021. Details of the English guidance are listed here, Scottish guidance here, Welsh guidance here and Northern Irish here. How is the disease progressing in the UK? Cases in the UK first peaked in early April 2020, before falling in late spring and summer. After reaching a record level in January 2021, cases declined sharply. They remained high but stable after the latest lockdown release in July 2021, but have since surged with the arrival of the Omicron variant. The number of tests available affects the number of recorded cases. The number of people in hospital with coronavirus rose sharply after records started at the end of March 2020, peaking in April. That figure began rising again in September and reached a new record in January 2021. It is now at a relatively low level but is increasing steadily throughout winter 2021-22. Deaths surpassed their first-wave peak in January 2021, with daily deaths once again standing at over 1,000. As with hospitalisations, the number of deaths is now at a relatively low level, although there has been an increase over the autumn and winter. In this graph, deaths are counted as people who have died within 28 days of their first positive test. Counting everyone with Covid-19 listed as a cause on their death certificate results in a higher figure (see note below). How does the third wave compare with the second wave? Since mid-May 2021, cases have shot up at a rate comparable to the start of the second wave in autumn 2020. However, hospitalisations and deaths remain much lower than at the equivalent time during the second wave. Scientists say this is down to the protective effects of vaccines. How is the vaccine rollout progressing? Since UK regulators approved the Pfizer vaccine in December 2020, the UK’s vaccine rollout has picked up pace. Until early July, hundreds of thousands of people were being vaccinated every day, although this then slowed down. The introduction of the booster campaign in October 2021 increased vaccine rollout once again. With first-dose vaccines open to over-12s in the UK from 20 October 2021, vaccines are available to everyone except younger children. However, in all age groups there is a persistent number of people who are not vaccinated. The lowest rates of vaccination are among younger age groups. While they were the last to be invited for vaccinations, there are concerns about vaccine hesitancy among younger people. What is the dominant variant? The Covid-19 virus has mutated significantly since it first emerged. A small number of the variants have become “variants of concern” because they are more transmissible, more dangerous or evade vaccines more than the original virus. The Alpha variant that emerged at the end of 2020 was dominant in the UK until it was overtaken by Delta in spring 2021. Since Omicron was declared a variant of concern by the World Health Organization in November 2021, it has entered the UK and spread rapidly. Data in the chart below is based on sampling tests in England and compiled by the Sanger Institute. These numbers lag case data by several weeks. How are case rates changing? Lockdown had brought down case rates for everyone. But different age groups have been affected differently. Throughout the pandemic working-age people between 20 and 60 have had the highest levels of infection. This has become more stark since the vaccine rollout has protected many of the more vulnerable elderly people in society, with case rates rising among the younger groups while staying relatively low among older people. Find coronavirus cases near you In the table below, you can find out the number of cases per 100,000 in your area, both for the last week and since the start of the pandemic. About this data This data comes comes from Public Health England, working with devolved authorities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. Differences in data collection and publishing schedules may lead to temporary inconsistencies. The government figures for deaths that are used in this tracker incorporate any deaths that have occurred within 28 days of a positive test. This means they are able to quickly capture deaths occurring in hospitals and care homes, both settings where testing is widespread. The ONS, along with its counterparts in Scotland and Northern Ireland, captures deaths data differently. They count all deaths where Covid is on the death certificate. About 90% of these deaths are directly due to Covid while it is a contributory factor in the remaining deaths. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as well as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.Sometimes things that are self-evident still need to be pointed out. So it is with one aspect of the crisis we now know as “partygate”, and an element of the story that both observers and participants have seemed to take for granted: the fact that all the disgrace and deceit revealed since December took place amid a level of plenty that millions of people will surely consider almost surreal. This is not just a matter of a suitcase full of booze, generous helpings of M&amp;S “picnic food” and the infamous fridge that held 34 bottles of wine. Consider the bit-part players: an interior designer whose wallpaper of choice costs £840 a roll, a London property developer (and Tory donor) famed for taking out an £80m mortgage, and a chancellor whose family is reckoned to be worth more than the Queen. Note also the centrality to the Boris Johnson soap opera of cake, from the kind he says he can have while eating it, to the confection he was “ambushed” with in the cabinet room. In this world, any privations demanded by lockdown were more than balanced out by the comforts of eating, drinking and ostentatiously spending, not least on what Johnson apparently terms “letting off steam”. Lexie often gets through a day by eating only toast, because, she told me last week, “my kids need to eat more than I need to eat”. She is disabled, and lives in rural north Wales, with her husband – who was recently made redundant – and four children, aged from eight to 18. Like so many other people, the benefits system leaves them unable to meet the cost of basic essentials, and their day-to-day predicament is now being made impossible by the mounting cost of living crisis, and everything it means for the price of food, petrol and heating. Inflation at the supermarket, she said, seems to fall in all the wrong places: “Chicken nuggets don’t seem to have gone up, but the food you should be feeding your children has. My children think it’s a treat when they get frozen vegetables mixed in a cheap jar of sauce and pasta. That’s as close as we get to fresh meals.” The lack of warmth is just as trying. “My kids are cold,” she said, “and I can’t tell them to switch on the heating: I have to tell them to put another layer of clothing on. They get up in the morning and they’re shivering, trying to get dressed.” Obviously, what is happening to Lexie and her family stands in vivid contrast to all the opulence and decadence at the top. But partygate also highlights one of the fundamental reasons why poverty and need are snowballing. With huge rises in fuel bills due to arrive in early April, the government has so far failed to act – partly, it seems, because it has recently been stuck in such a state of chaos. But it has also made deliberate decisions that will worsen many people’s predicament, from the hike in national insurance – which, in a jointly written article for the Sunday Times, the prime minister and chancellor have now confirmed – to the cruel snatching-back of the £20-a-week “uplift” in universal credit that Lexie told me had tipped her and her family into even deeper problems. Amid cake, “wine-time Fridays” and Johnson and his acolytes’ almost surreal levels of privilege, is that really much of a surprise? I was put in touch with Lexie by a project called Covid Realities, jointly organised by researchers from the universities of York and Birmingham, and the Child Poverty Action group. Between June 2020 and July 2021, it allowed people living in difficult and vulnerable circumstances to write – usually, like Lexie, using pseudonyms – about their experiences of life in the pandemic. In December, rising prices and the end of the universal credit uplift prompted the people in charge to ask for new material from their contributors, who have now added to a stock of intimate, striking testimony, describing how fragile millions of lives are as the pandemic seemingly begins to recede. Covid Realities also connected me with Erik, whose life was changed by a car accident, and who lives in the Surrey suburbs with his 15-year-old daughter, carefully self-rationing food, heating and hot water. “Last week was the first time for a while that I didn’t have enough money to buy milk or bread,” he said. After talking to him, I spoke to a single mother who writes her diary under the name Aurora. Recently widowed, she lives with her two children in a privately rented house in west London, close to family members who provide much-needed support. Thanks to the benefit cap introduced by George Osborne (who, amid an extensive list of post-politics commitments, now has a full-time job at a “boutique investment bank” called Robey Warshaw), she and her children receive an annual £23,000, but her rent totals £21,600 a year. “I’m in a huge amount of debt,” she told me. “I’m basically caught in this cycle. It’s never ending. And now the costs of everything are rising, and I don’t know what’s going to happen. We’re going to be made homeless, which will cost the government more.” She briefly fell silent. “We’ve just been ignored, people like me. And I’m doing the best I can. I’m desperate to find work. I’m desperate.” Her last spell of paid employment, she said, was at a call centre, but had come to grief when she couldn’t combine the shifts she was asked to work with the necessity of picking up her youngest child from school. Predictably, the ad hoc responses to rising living costs reportedly being discussed in government do not suggest any convincing answers. Rishi Sunak is said to be considering an extension of the warm home discount scheme that currently reduces some poorer households’ energy bills by £140 over the winter; there has been talk of a one-off payment of up to £500 to “struggling workers” (“That would sustain me for what – about a month?” said Aurora). Cutting VAT on fuel bills entails a saving of only 5%; bowing to Tory pressure to remove the green levies on fuel bills would threaten insulation programmes designed to reduce the living costs of people at the bottom of the income scale. Meanwhile, though poverty and disadvantage are kept festering by our cruel and miserly benefits system, the government seems to want to make things even worse. Never mind such obstacles to employment as expensive childcare and pitiful local public transport: last week, Johnson and his ministers announced a new scheme titled Way to Work, whereby unemployed people on universal credit will no longer be given three months to find their preferred job, but will instead be seemingly forced to take whatever work they can find after only four weeks. At that point, if they are deemed not to have made “reasonable efforts” to find work, part of their universal credit payments will be stopped. The same day, it was reported that, after proposing to spend £3,000 of public money on a diplomatic lunch replete with high-end wine and gin, Liz Truss used a government private jet for an official trip to Australia at an estimated cost of £500,000. Such are the almost feudal features of current British politics, which take you straight to the heart of why, as prices zoom up, deprivation will only deepen. People steeped in excess are so far from the pain they keep causing that it barely registers: glasses clink, engines roar, cakes arrive, and the sound is simply drowned out. John Harris is a Guardian columnistKerry Godliman’s show title, Bosh, is taken from a Greg Davies phrase on Channel 4’s Taskmaster: “Here comes Godliman, boshing along.” The idea is that the south Londoner is a practical person, brisky working things out and getting them done. But life gets in the way – which is where the comedy comes in. The brusque efficiencies of her mothering are contrasted with parenting books and their aspirational ideals. Teenage romance 1980s-style is celebrated contra later digital dating developments. Elsewhere, we find Godliman trying to book a holiday and discovering that, in the age of the internet, the process has been recast as a high-stakes race against time. As those examples imply, it’s not a conceit that greatly distinguishes Godliman from the many other comics exaggerating their dismay at modern living. Rare is the middle-aged joker without a routine educating young people about life pre-mobile phones – although they don’t all have lines as good as Godliman’s one about flirting and aubergines. Happily, that’s one example among many memorable word-pictures – like the one about using the breathing hole in massage tables to practise being a nun. In tandem with the 48-year-old’s mouthy persona – forthright of opinion but always happy to chuck herself under the bus – this ensures that Godliman’s 70-minute tour de familiar horizon never feels secondhand. The show’s rhythm adjusts for its final third, when the After Life star tells longer-forms tales of performing childbirth on Call the Midwife and losing her cat when moving house. Both prioritise eye-opening incident over comic structure; there are laughs along the way, but muted climaxes. Both sell Godliman herself as the butt of the joke – but only insofar as we all are. Her foibles (nostalgia for doilies; loving camping a bit too much) are no crazier than yours or mine, her perspectives always relatable – even when they’re as clever as her advice to the data-harvesting internet, that her erratic online behaviour is a deeply dubious guide to who she actually is. Her comedy may be more so – and if it reveals a recognisable comedy type, it does so with vigour, charm and plenty good gags. Kerry Godliman is at Bloomsbury theatre, London, on 5 February, then touring.There are carvings of dolphins, horses, boar, salmon, mermaids, a magnificently endowed leopard, George and the dragon, and a fox preaching to some chickens – a 500-year-old warning not to trust people in authority. The carvings, about 300 of them, at Carlisle Castle are the subject of a restoration project to save them from the elements and allow them to be seen more clearly than they have been for generations. They date from the 15th century and have always been something of a mystery. They are in a tiny room between two cells and the most likely theory is they were made by bored prison guards. “They are a nice snapshot, which you don’t normally get going around castles, of what was in people’s minds in the 15th century,” said Mark Douglas, an English Heritage property curator. The painstaking restoration project involves the restorer Alex Carrington carefully removing, by hand, hundreds of years of sediment and water damage without industrial equipment or chemicals. “I’m enjoying it,” said Carrington. “Because these walls have got problems. I find it fascinating working out what the problems are and how I can stop them getting worse. The days go quick.” One of the main jobs has been removing white crusts of salt using stencil brushes and scalpels. Black marks on some stones seem to be the result of hundreds of years of people touching them or brushing past. “It has been quite humbling,” Carrington added. “I spend a lot of time here on my own and I do think of the people who did the carving. They would have had a completely different mindset in a completely different time … you can’t comprehend it really. It would have been miserable here I think.” Some of the carvings are of animals that were emblems of families of status in the area – the Dacre family and the Percy family, for example. “Whoever the carvers were, they are likely to have been loyal to some of the most powerful lords in the north at the time,” said Juliet Fellow-Smith, property manager at the castle. “It’s a bit like football colours, you get your kudos from your association with your lord.” The fox preaching to chickens carving is likely to have been a satire on the clergy – be careful who you trust. The restoration has also exposed previously unseen or hard-to-see carvings, one of which shows a deer-hunting scene, another a knight in profile. “He’s never been so clear,” said Fellow-Smith. “He was always a bit lost until Alex started her work.” The reconditioning is part of a larger project to repair parts of the roof and walls to make the castle watertight. The castle, built in 1092 by William II, is the most besieged site in the British isles. The 12th-century ruler David I of Scotland died there. Mary Queen of Scots spent the first two months of her nearly 19 years of captivity there. It also featured prominently in the English civil war and Jacobite troops, under Bonnie Prince Charlie, fought over it in the 18th century. Fellow-Smith has known the carvings since she was a girl. “I’ve never seen them like this, it means an awful lot to me,” she said. “Like most local people I came here when I was at school. I was 11 and did a project on them, I remember them really vividly because it is a very direct connection to the past. “Someone stood here and carved these images on the wall and I’m now standing in front of them and I can bring my own imagination to what they mean. Anyone can stand in front of these carvings and get a feeling for another human being making pictures hundreds of years ago. “When I was a school child that was so amazing to me … it is just an ordinary person making their mark on a monument.”Everton are poised to sign Donny van de Beek on loan from Manchester United, and make him the first signing of the Frank Lampard era, after the Dutch midfielder decided he prefers a move to Goodison Park rather than to Crystal Palace. Everton are ready to pay Van de Beek’s full salary until the end of the season after he was identified by Lampard – who is expected to be confirmed as the club’s manager on Sunday – as a priority target. Crystal Palace offered to pay 85% of the player’s salary. The Netherlands international, who has had limited game time at United under both Ole Gunnar Solskjær and Ralf Rangnick, was also wanted by Patrick Vieira at Palace, who began their pursuit some days earlier. Van de Beek appeared ready to switch to Selhurst Park but has ultimately decided he wants to play on Merseyside following Everton’s intervention. There is no buy option included in the deal, with Van de Beek’s agent, Hasan Cetinkaya, in London to finalise the contract. A new midfielder is vital for Everton before Monday night’s transfer deadline with Abdoulaye Doucouré, Tom Davies and Fabian Delph all sidelined until March with injury. Phil Jones could also leave United on loan for Bordeaux after the clubs held productive talks over a loan.A debut solo album more than 15 years into your career would be a tricky transition for any musician; it’s hard to fathom how difficult it must be for Alice Glass. In 2017, she alleged that Ethan Kath, the other half of Canadian electronic punk duo Crystal Castles, had subjected her to years of sexual, physical and emotional abuse, starting when she was 15. (Kath sued for defamation; the case was dismissed.) The last words of Glass’s statement then were “I am still recovering”, and trauma casts a deep shadow over Prey/IV, four years in the making. “You’re not worth believing,” she sings on the scissoring, shuddering Pinned Beneath Limbs. “Don’t talk to your friends/ Don’t talk to your family.” Produced by her partner, Jupiter Keyes, formerly of LA digital noise-rockers Health, the album holds a thread of continuity with Glass’s musical past, but its pulsing beats, churchy-gothic synths and spurts of racing techno create a warmer, deeper space, allowing her soft tones – formerly so often shrouded in hails of digital noise – to emerge, speaking of self-hatred, pain and mutilation. There’s also the energy of recovery. On The Hunted, roles are reversed, predator becoming prey as Glass asserts “I’m stronger than you” over booming, glossy dubstep drops. “You’re a cliche/ You screw up everything,” she intones on Fair Game, mimicking Kath’s words. “Now,” she says, “I dance along to it and laugh.” The album title, too, contains a subtle reclaiming of power beneath the obvious connotations of the word “prey” – the final Crystal Castles album before Glass’s departure was titled III; the first with her replacement, Edith Frances, was titled I. With Prey/IV, Glass seizes control of the sequence, and the narrative, for herself.When transfer student Shion arrives at Keibu high school, only one girl, loner Satomi, knows the truth about her: the new girl is an AI robot undergoing covert field testing – and Satomi’s mother’s job hangs in the balance, depending on the success of the experiment. Unfortunately, Shion’s tendency to burst into song and hack the PA system to play a backing track soon alerts the other students to the fact that she’s slightly out of the ordinary. Yasuhiro Yoshiura’s strikingly beautiful anime is high-concept in its themes and unashamedly sentimental in its execution, and gets rather more interesting in its darker second half. Ultimately, like Mamoru Oshii’s 1995 film Ghost in the Shell and its sequel, Innocence, Sing a Bit of Harmony delves into the idea of what form an AI might take and whether it can love.Food The Mercado Central de Abastos is the heart of Cádiz and where we locals go to buy our fresh fish, seafood, fruit and vegetables. It also has a lot of cafes where you can order anything from fried fish to an empanada. My favourites are Lady Papa’s, which serves traditional tapas dishes, and a vegan stall called Las Niñas Veganas – it’s not easy to find vegan or gluten-free food in Cádiz, so this is special. The courgette croquettes are delicious. Although Casa Manteca is probably Cádiz’s most famous restaurant, no gaditanos (people from Cádiz) really go there any more because it’s too crowded. We might head to Cumbres Mayores, in the north-east of the old town, which has just as much history and atmosphere and good-quality ingredients. The best thing to order is chicharrónnes (fried pork skin). Five minutes’ walk from there, Ultramarinos Bar El Veedor is part deli, part cafe, and my favourite place to buy cold meats, cheese, anchovies and olives to take away or eat at the bar with a sherry. Inspiration For the past four months I have been working at La Cueva Del Pájaro Azul, the city’s most recent archaeological site. We have discovered a port and a shipyard that date back to Phoenician times – around the third century BC. These underground chambers then had a second life in the 1960s as one of the most famous flamenco clubs in Spain: the Blue Bird Cave. Taking a tour really gives you a perspective on how Cádiz is one of the oldest cities in Europe. For something more contemporary, I would head to Espacio Ecco. This art gallery in a former barracks has some great modern pieces and a good collection of street art and paintings that came out of the La Movida movement in the 1970s. Neighbourhood Many visitors to Cádiz don’t make it beyond the old city walls, but I really recommend a visit to Paseo Marítimo. This smart neighbourhood is on the Playa de la Victoria beach and is a really nice place for an evening walk, maybe stopping at some of the small shops and independent boutiques, then heading to one of the beach bars for a drink. There are also some really excellent restaurants here, such as Nahu Beach and Arsenio Manila. For something more down to earth, head to the eastern side of the city, overlooking the Bay of Cádiz and the José León de Carranza Bridge. There are amazing views of the port with all its ships. It’s a surprisingly peaceful, calm place: don’t miss the little seafood shack at the end of the dock called Viento de Levante. Locals love it. Green space La Alameda Apodaca, a park on the north side of the city, is very romantic, with lots of cobbled winding paths, fountains, trees and statues. The best time to go is just before dark, when you can watch the lamps come on as the sun sinks into the sea. If you’re in the new part of town, Varela Gardens is very popular and historically interesting: this is where many Phoenician and Roman cemeteries were discovered, and you can still spot a few burial mounds. Nightlife Circo Duende is where I always head for a beer. It’s in the artiest area of the city and has a bohemian feel and live music. For something a little fancier, you don’t need to be staying at the Alquimia Hotel or the Cathedral Hotel to have drinks on their terraces; both have amazing views of the city. In La Alameda, either La Colonial or El Kioskito de la Alameda are beautiful spots for a cocktail, with outdoor seating right next to the gardens and the sea. For dancing, Ykebana in Paseo Marítimo is always full of locals and has loud music until the early hours. Stay Many of the city’s grandest old mansions have been converted into apartments for short-term rentals. One of my favourites is Candelaria10 (from £105 a night for two), which is in a former monastery on one of Cádiz’s prettiest squares. Pilar Gil is a ballet dancer, archaeologist and art historian who has lived in Cádiz for 23 yearsThe first hint of what is to come is a large bared canine tooth, in Head 1 (1948). The painting featured in Francis Bacon’s debut London exhibition the year after it was made, and it greets you now in an opening room of its own at the Royal Academy. The human form in the painting, which emerges out of a black background within a sketchy geometry of a cage, has been reduced to a contorted mouth arising out of a body that suggests a side of lamb or a pork belly. It is that enlarged fang that holds your attention, though, gesturing not so much at the transformation of Jekyll into Hyde, but the sure evidence that the rough beast never went away. More than his earlier flayed carcass of a crucifixion, that first Head reveals the preoccupation in Bacon’s art that persisted right up to his death; the question that this often magnificent and properly disturbing retrospective nags at on every wall: just how animal are we? After his sexual adventuring in Berlin and Paris and London before the war, and his dabbling with interior design, Bacon seemed transformed as an artist by the knowledge of carnage. Excused active service on account of his chronic asthma, he’d volunteered for a while as an ARP, pulling bodies from the wreckage of the blitz. By 1948, a full picture of the horror of the death camps had emerged. Bacon was gathering and devouring everything from Nazi speeches to pathology textbooks. That bestial rage creeps into the stunning trio of early paintings in the next room, arranged as a triptych because of their common orange background. Figure Study I is a faceless form in a big herringbone coat, head down in a flowerbed. In the next, Figure Study II, a deformed body emerges from another overcoat, supporting the first of Bacon’s screaming mouths, cavernously black, turned to the viewer, vomiting bile. Finally in Fury (1944), a variation of Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion of the same year, Bacon conjures the first of many grotesque mythologies, where the human figure has become a mutation of body parts and a chapfallen, alas-poor-Yorick jaw, agape in horror. Faced with this opening brutality, you wonder where the exhibition – co-curated by Michael Peppiatt, once a co-carouser with Bacon in Soho and the liveliest of his biographers – will take you next. One answer is among those that Bacon himself found, in the 1950s. It will take you on safari. A series of mostly nightmarish paintings of animals – chimpanzees in particular – reminds you that Bacon became an enthusiastic observer of big game on visits to Rhodesia, where his mother lived after the war, witnessing what he called “the whole horror of life, of one thing living off another”. His painting, we see, in this context, started to put his lovers on display like animals in zoo cages, all flesh and torment. His nightly predatory hunt round Soho clubs fixed in 1952 on Peter Lacy, the former Battle of Britain fighter pilot, with whom he entered an obsessive sadomasochistic relationship. Lacy, he told Peppiatt, “wanted him chained to the wall, shitting and sleeping like an animal on a bed of straw”. He pictures Lacy in 1957, curled post-coitally on a sofa, all haunch and shoulder. Earlier, there are a pair of paintings of muscular outdoor couplings including 1954’s Two Figures in the Grass, in which the lovers are spied as if through field binoculars, and which solicited two complaints from outraged female visitors to the ICA in 1955. Some of these carnal scenes take inspiration from Eadweard Muybridge’s freeze-framed motion pictures from the 19th century. The film pioneer’s chaste wrestling scenes become powerfully erotic in Bacon’s hands. They are juxtaposed with owls swooping low with human teeth and gutter hounds who keep their noses to the pavement. Bacon once told his confidant David Sylvester that his ambition had always been “one day to make the best painting of the human cry”. You see here the different ways that ambition foundered for him. In place of anything like the wild sorrow he revered in the faces of Poussin’s The Massacre of the Innocents, he could summon variations of alienation and anguish. The four studies for howling popes that occupy one wall have never looked so savage; they see him experimenting with papal purple, livid as a baboon’s backside. Bacon’s animal instincts rarely separated lust from violence. A room of bullfighting pictures from 1969 find him still in thrall to the carnal dance of muscle. He saw bullfighting as “like boxing – a marvellous aperitif for sex”, and traced canvases in which matadors merge satyr-like with their quarry with thick, ejaculated streaks of white paint. The two triptychs of his doomed lover George Dyer that follow seem to put a stop to that idea of flesh as dramatic life. In the first group, the male figure is bluntly human, squatting on a lavatory, sprawled on a couch, rotating on a bar stool. In the second, made in 1972, some months after the alcoholic Dyer’s suicide on the eve of Bacon’s triumphant retrospective at the Grand Palais in Paris, his subject’s flesh melts and pools beside him, his animal body blackened out. That emotion is brought closer to home in the final room here. A triptych of 1987 offers a sequel to the earlier bullfight pictures: gored flesh and bandages and bloodied horns. The shattering autobiographical trajectory of this show culminates with Bacon’s last painting, made in 1991, the year before his death, and discovered in a private collection in 2016. It depicts an almost transparent bull, half in and out of darkness, pawing at handfuls of dust that Bacon scattered on the canvas from his own chaotic studio floor. • Francis Bacon: Man and Beast is at the Royal Academy, London, until 17 AprilThe energy in a Tessa Hadley novel typically flows from a character’s unvoiced longing or suppressed desire, gestured at in flashback over the course of a present-day narrative seamlessly encompassing the previous half-century, as in 2015’s The Past or 2019’s Late in the Day, titles that sum up the mood, if not the excitement, of her work. At first glance, Free Love breaks with all that. It takes us from 1967 into 1968 in the company of a flighty middle-aged mother of two, Phyllis, who quits married life in the stockbroker belt with a Foreign Office high-up after falling for a mouthy young dinner guest, Nicky, the would-be revolutionary son of family friends working in oil. An after-dinner search for a child’s missing sandal supplies the pretext for a clinch in the dusk; soon, Phyllis is knocking on the door of Nicky’s rundown flat in eye-openingly multicultural west London every Wednesday, under cover of visiting her father in Leamington Spa. If there’s folly here, it’s part of the novel’s trick to tempt us to see it as belonging only to Phyllis, when the tangled roots of the situation truly lie elsewhere. As Hadley shifts fluently between the points of view of the various parties involved, the novel turns as much on long-buried family secrets as it does the yearnings of itchy-footed middle age. Each member of Phyllis’s household, including her children, Colette, 16, and Hugh, nine, know something the others don’t; we’re in the dark, too, thanks to a twist that rests on Hadley not quite playing fair when, halfway through, the novel first accesses the thoughts of her husband, Roger. Hadley’s complex sentences are purring marvels of engineering, always weighted just so, cut-glass English with a continental inflection, fond of a comma splice, the dialogue marked with a dash. A brilliant writer of interiority who can also do great scenes, she has a gift, especially, for portraying the state of wanting to be wanted, or simply to be seen – a recurring longing in her fiction, whose characters often have cause to be careful what they wish for. We see Phyllis, aching and raw, privately exulting while getting the dinner on back at home; we see the electric thrill of a touch of hands between long-separated lovers; or Colette, drunk, wanting to go “all the way” with a man, “her consciousness swooping over her like a hawk”. If she shares a theme with Martin Amis and Michel Houellebecq – the pros and cons of the sexual revolution – her method couldn’t be more different: not comic grotesque or authorial hypothesis, but patiently inhabiting her characters, leaving it to us to gauge how their actions are shaped by the weight of experience, a technique that can’t help but elicit readerly sympathy. Yes, Nicky’s political grandstanding puts us in mind of Citizen Smith – when Phyllis extols the virtues of the NHS, he replies: “Keeps the factory workers healthy, so they can work for longer” – but Phyllis’s awakening at his hands isn’t mocked, exactly; Hadley’s too subtle, too generous for that. The climax supplies heady drama as well as the warm-hearted sense that no problem is too great to be worked through; as Roger tells a confidante, “It’s rather more like something out of a comic opera than Anna Karenina”. Still, we know he’s putting a brave face on it – we’ve seen him moping under Colette’s watchful eye – and he also isn’t yet fully aware exactly what’s going on, thanks to that aforementioned twist, a left turn back into familiar Hadley country of roads not taken. It’s long become customary for Hadley’s reviewers to point out that she’s flagrantly undersung – never longlisted for the Booker, for instance – yet the emerging consensus this time round seems to be that Free Love is below par. Call me soft but I don’t see it: almost every page struck me anew with some elegant phrasing, feline irony or shrewdly sympathetic insight. The real wonder is that she does this pretty much every three years; it’s easy to become ungrateful. • Free Love by Tessa Hadley is published by Jonathan Cape (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThree days after Sagar* arrived as a worker in Portugal from Nepal, he began to worry he had made a terrible mistake. “I had expectations to get good work, good money,” he says. “But the reality was different.” The only job Sagar, 21, could find was on one of the country’s berry farms in Odemira, a rural region on the south-west coast. Earning less than the legal minimum wage to work 16-hour days in 40C heat, he knows he is being exploited. But quitting could jeopardise his residency application – and that’s a risk he cannot afford to take. Sagar is one of more than 10,000 young men and women who have left their home countries to find work in Portugal’s £200m berry industry, picking fruit that will be sold in supermarkets across Europe. They are drawn to Portugal and the heart of Europe’s soft fruits industry by the dream of what many refer to as a “raspberry passport”. That’s because whether or not they entered Europe legally, upon arrival in Portugal, foreigners of any nationality can apply for temporary residency, as long as they have a work contract and can prove they are paying taxes in the country. Workers interviewed by the Guardian got jobs on farms through intermediary agencies without the need to prove they were yet a legal resident. Once a worker has acquired temporary residency they can then begin a five-year countdown to citizenship – and a much-longed for Portuguese passport. “It’s the colour of a raspberry, about to fall from the tree,” says Sagar. “The passport is the one big dream. It’s your life changer.” In the meantime, many overseas workers endure what they describe as exploitative conditions, fearful that changing jobs will nullify their residency application. “Everyone is very scared,” says Sagar. “Your taxes are connected with your work, and your papers are connected with your taxes. And if you lose one, you lose the other.” Sagar is halfway there. In just under three years, he will be legally entitled to a Portuguese passport, enabling him to live and work freely across the EU. The desperation for a passport leaves thousands of foreign workers in conditions akin to labour bondage, says Alexandra Pereira, a researcher at the University of Lisbon, specialising in Nepali migration to Portugal. “They feel trapped, not only by the legal procedures but also the loans they got to come here and the money they have to pay to the people who brought them,” she says. “It keeps them in this cycle of exploitation.” Berry pickers interviewed by the Guardian describe paying smugglers up to €18,000 (£15,000) to facilitate their entry into the EU. Rahul*, 28, took a precarious route across Serbia that saw him wading through rivers up to his neck. “I didn’t know if I would die on the way,” he says. “Nobody knows who I am, where I’m from. It’s a very, very difficult journey.” After risking his life to get there, Odemira proved a crushing disappointment. “I don’t know anybody here who cares for me,” Rahul says, suddenly tearful. He would return to India in an instant, but he owes €7,000 to his smuggler, and his parents sold their home to cover the rest of the costs. They’re relying on him to send money home. “My heart is broken. I’m missing my girlfriend, missing my mother and father. I have nothing to show them.” How long the process will take him is impossible to predict. Out of 40 migrant workers interviewed, one in four were still awaiting temporary residency, despite some filing their initial requests in early 2019. One 25-year-old woman says she filed her residency application to Portugal’s foreigners and borders service in 2019 but was told in June that her application no longer existed. She has had to postpone her wedding in India twice. If she leaves the country, her application is nullified. “For three years [my fiance] has been waiting for me. We have dreams for our marriage, for everything … but everything is spoiled.” Last year, the Portuguese government confirmed plans to shutter the service, but when this will happen remains uncertain. “The concern is that a large number of migrants may be stuck in a limbo until the new service starts working,” says the high commissioner for migration, Sónia Pereira. “It’s a cause of great anxiety.” Without permanent residency, the berry pickers worry the smallest misstep could threaten their futures. “We can’t complain,” says one man from India, who says he sometimes works for up to 11 hours a day with less than an hour’s break. “When there is no work, what will you eat? What will you drink? Nothing.” Sintab, a Portuguese labour union, has only managed to unionise 12 migrant workers in the region. “The rest of them were afraid to talk to us and then suffer reprisals,” says a former union employee, who asked to remain anonymous. In June 2018, a group of berry pickers in Odemira staged a protest about working conditions and lost their jobs, according to farmworkers. “Afterwards, everyone was scared,” says Sagar. “So the rest, who were thinking to protest, keep on doing the work and following the others, and the same pattern [of exploitation] keeps going on.” Fearful that their employers are watching their comings and goings, interviews with the Guardian take place after dark, as workers scout the streets to make sure nobody can see who is entering their homes. Crammed into small cottages by the dozen, they reveal bare mattresses on kitchen floors and bunks in draughty garages. In winter, temperatures at night can drop to sub-zero degrees. One worker says his bunk bed is infested with fleas. Others sleep in converted shipping containers and pre-fabricated dormitories on the farms. One young woman from Nepal shares a room with up to 10 others, metres from her employer’s office on a farm. Sometimes, she doesn’t leave the property for weeks at a time, she says. “They have almost no access to the outside world while they’re there,” says Aashima Budal, a PhD candidate at the University of Stavanger. “They often compare themselves to animals.” The workers’ arrival in Odemira has boosted a declining population and brought business to the quiet, rural community. Yet rights groups say support for the region’s newest residents remains inadequate. Earlier this year, videos surfaced of military police violence against the migrant community in Odemira in 2018 and 2019. In one instance, footage shows several officers forcing one young man to inhale a breathalyser filled with pepper gas. Sagar alleges that a police officer stopped him in the street and assaulted him in 2018. “He slapped me in my chest,” he says, miming someone pushing him with the heels of their hands. “Two times, he slapped me like that … It’s the worst experience I’ve had in this country.” He didn’t report the incident. “I didn’t have the courage,” he says. Portugal’s national guard told the Guardian it has a zero-tolerance approach to discrimination and that personnel involved in the incidents filmed in 2018 and 2019 have been suspended from duty during ongoing disciplinary proceedings. It has also organised awareness-raising training on human rights issues, including racism. The main public health centre in Odemira is also struggling to keep up with the growing population, says one senior employee, claiming language barriers and a lack of resources compromises the standard of services they’re able to provide to those working on the berry farms. “If you ask me … Is the care being given in an adequate manner [to the workers]? No.” Scared that any medical complaints could also affect their employability, the berry pickers say they often avoid seeking treatment for pre-existing conditions and injuries suffered at work. “If I go to the health centre, they will ask me so many questions,” says one man, who revealed infected cuts on his hands. “They can ask me about my card, my residency, so many papers. I want to avoid all the problems.” Everyone in Portugal has the right to healthcare, regardless of their residency status, says a spokesperson for the department of health, adding that the Odemira health centre has a 24/7 emergency unit and an interpreter available once a week. The Portuguese foreigners and borders service told the Guardian it was monitoring the situation in Odemira and that improving public service and speeding up the residency process are priority issues. For Sagar, life in Portugal has become an endurance exercise. After his seventh hour in the berry fields, his thoughts shift to home – and whether he will ever be able to afford the 8,000 km (5,000 mile) journey back to Nepal. “Maybe by the end of 2025, I will apply for the passport,” he says. “I just hope maybe I could get one, finally. And something will change after that … I will leave this place and go somewhere else and start a new life.” * Names have been changed to protect identityThe road I grew up on in Drumahoe, on the outskirts of Derry, has been on the news lately, and not in a way that makes me proud. Journalists stand at its junction with the main road from Belfast, pointing up at the purple flag of the Parachute Regiment fluttering high on a lamp-post. They explain its significance at this time of year: it was paratroopers who killed 13 unarmed civil rights marchers in the city on Bloody Sunday in January 1972. Family members of those killed have talked about the pain the flying of these flags causes them. Politicians, including some unionists, and even the Parachute Regiment itself have called it “unacceptable”. The flag flies because there are some in the unionist community who want to show that not everybody is mourning the dead of Bloody Sunday as its 50th anniversary is marked in Derry this weekend. It is a show of disrespect. Drumahoe has been flying this flag for years, as has the village of Newbuildings on the main road into Derry from Dublin. I saw one that had a sign pinned underneath it featuring the crosshairs of a gun – a warning to anyone tempted to remove it. In Drumahoe there are always union flags and Ulster flags flying, and sometimes there are also Scottish, Israeli and paramilitary flags. They stand like a weird forest. After the Anglo-Irish agreement in 1985, “Drumahoe Says No” was daubed on a wall along the main road behind our house, the white ghosts of its letters lingering on the red brick for years after it was painted over. Houses in Drumahoe are in demand. Lately a few developments have been built of the kind described as “exclusive”, which in estate agent language means expensive. Once the earth is cut for the foundations, however, flags appear and put a different slant on “exclusive”. Their message is: houses for Protestants. When we sold our old family home last year, someone plastered an Ulster Defence Association bulldog sticker on the for sale sign. A woman who lives in one flag-festooned estate near Derry told me that her area is actually quite “mixed”, meaning people from both Protestant and Catholic backgrounds live there. She said most did not want the flags but they remain because everyone knew the men who put them up. They were aggressive and had paramilitary connections. Some people simply cease to notice these territorial markings. My mother once took a photo of my daughter in her garden. She was up a tree with a large union flag on a lamp-post behind her, apparently sprouting from her head. When I said it was a pity about the flag, my mother said, “What flag?” It used to be called triumphalism, this flaunting of Northern Ireland’s Britishness. Now it looks more like desperation. When the state was set up in 1921, unionists felt secure. But the Good Friday agreement is based on power-sharing, and unionism has lost its majority at Stormont. A census to be published this year is expected to show that there are more Catholics than Protestants – this is already so among young people. The May election could see Sinn Féin take the first minister role. Under the old unionist regime, the nationalist majority in Derry was disenfranchised – now it is reflected in local and UK political institutions. The old binary is breaking down anyway. Young musicians who play in loyalist bands by day go to gigs in republican areas at night – music is the shared passion, not division. While some unionists are still militant about calling the city Londonderry, and some nationalists insist on Derry, for the most part people are amiably willing to use either or both. Long, hard cross-community work on parading has taken much of the strife out of the annual burning of the effigy of “Lundy the traitor”. (He was a governor of Derry who wanted to surrender the city to Catholic King James in 1689 rather than endure a siege.) The campaign for truth and justice for those who died on Bloody Sunday led to the Saville inquiry. Its finding that those killed on Bloody Sunday were innocent, and the prime minister’s apology in 2010, led to attempts to prosecute some of the paratroopers for murder. Soldier F, as he was known, was to be tried in Derry. In 2019 senior DUP figures, including Gregory Campbell, who lives in Drumahoe and is MP for East Londonderry, along with local Northern Ireland assembly member Gary Middleton, posed under a banner that had the Parachute Regiment’s insignia on it along with the claim that loyalist Derry is “still under siege” and the slogan “No surrender”. The Soldier F case collapsed in 2021. This year, Middleton saw sense and called for the Parachute Regiment’s flags to be taken down. The commemorations for Bloody Sunday this year included plays, exhibitions, debates and concerts. The Irish taoiseach attended. It has been gracious and dignified. People from all communities were invited to join a walk along the original route of the march on Sunday. Unionist leaders were also invited, but none came. It looks bad. Last week Colum Eastwood, the SDLP leader and MP for the constituency, called at Westminster for an apology from the British army for coming to Derry to “murder” civilians. He was heckled by the DUP MP Sammy Wilson. That looked bad, too. As a Stormont election looms, the DUP, humiliated by the Brexit debacle and by the prime minister, is poking at the deep old roots of sectarianism. Those who put up the Parachute Regiment’s flag are full of incoherent rage. They believe Protestant civilians killed by the IRA have not been given the same attention as those who died on Bloody Sunday. They want recognition for “the exodus” that saw many Protestants effectively driven out of the city side of Derry by the IRA during the conflict. They feel betrayed and neglected by unionist leaders who have taken their support for granted and done little to improve their lives. One man told me that those responsible are “giving two fingers” to everyone else. “They’re saying – we can do this and you can’t stop us,” he said. Susan McKay is an Irish writer and journalist whose books include Northern Protestants: On Shifting Ground This article was amended on 4 February 2022 to say that pending census results are expected to show more Catholics than Protestants (rather than to show an overall Catholic majority) in Northern Ireland.The UK’s windfarms generated a record amount of renewable electricity over the weekend as Storm Malik battered parts of Scotland and northern England. Wind speeds of up to 100 miles an hour recorded in Scotland helped wind power generation to rise to a provisional all-time high of more than 19,500 megawatts – or more than half the UK’s electricity – according to data from National Grid. National Grid’s electricity system operator said that although it recognised the new milestone towards the UK’s ‘net zero’ carbon future, it was “also thinking of those affected by Storm Malik”. The deadly storm caused widespread disruption over the weekend, leaving thousands without electricity and killing two people. Many of the areas affected by Storm Malik were also hit in December by Storm Arwen, which caused the most severe disruption to power supplies since 2005, leaving almost a million homes without power for up to 12 days. The winter storms have followed a summer of low wind power generation across the UK and Europe, which caused increased use of gas power plants during a global supply shortfall. Gas markets around the world reached record highs due to rising demand for gas as economies have rebounded from the economic shock of the Covid-19 pandemic. In the UK, electricity market prices reached an all-time high of more than £424.60 a megawatt-hour in September, compared with an average price of £44/MWh in the same month the year before. The UK’s weekend surge in renewable electricity helped to provide a temporary reprieve from its heavy reliance on fossil fuel generation in recent months, which has caused market prices to reach record highs. The market price for electricity on Saturday fell to £150.59 pounds a megawatt-hour, the lowest level since 3 January, while the price for power on Sunday, when wind was expected to fall, jumped to more than £193.50/MWh. The new wind generation record bettered a high recorded last year when the gusty May bank holiday weekend recorded 17.6GW.Boris Johnson has been warned that the future of his Conservative government rests on how it tackles the looming “cost-of-living catastrophe”, as Guardian analysis shows that swathes of Tory-held seats in the “red wall” will be among those hardest hit. The prime minister is under growing pressure to set out measures to help millions of families avoid crippling rises in food and energy bill in coming months, with some Tory MPs calling for the national insurance rise in April to be delayed or even scrapped. Analysis of official data by the Guardian shows that nearly 2m households in Conservative seats are already in fuel poverty, according to the UK government’s definition, including more than 194,000 in key red wall seats won from Labour in 2019. Restive Tory MPs are growing increasingly concerned at the lack of any significant new measures to help alleviate the pressures on families, with Downing Street appearing paralysed by the “partygate” row. Jo Gideon, the Conservative MP for Stoke-on-Trent Central, which has some of the highest levels of fuel poverty in the country, said Johnson’s government would be judged at the next election on its handling of the cost of living crisis as some of her constituents “have to choose between heating and eating”. She added: “Ultimately people vote for the party and leader they think will do the best job of balancing the economy, providing stability and providing the basis for them to live their lives to the best outcome. “I don’t think anyone knows how short term the energy prices [rise] is and therefore our economic strategy has to reflect the fact that the economic position is shifting according to these global influences.” Downing Street has said Johnson is committed to introducing the £12bn national insurance rise in April, amid suggestions the prime minister was “wobbling” after pressure from MPs concerned about the impact on household budgets. The tax rise, badged as a health and social care levy to pay for the growing NHS backlogs and crisis in care homes, is due to come into effect in April 2023 but is preceded by a 1.25 percentage point rise in April this year. At the same time, the energy price cap is expected to rise to £2,000 a year in April, an increase of more than 50%, amounting to £600 a year for the average household. Gideon, who chairs an all-party parliamentary group on England’s national food strategy, said she wanted to see some immediate relief to ensure that “nobody should go hungry” and suggested that Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, could look at postponing the national insurance tax rise. She said: “We need to address the challenges in social care. Whether the timing needs to be looked at is something for the chancellor and I’m not going to second guess that.” Of the top 50 areas in England with the highest rates of fuel poverty, 40 are held by Labour and most are in parts of the country that would be considered key political battlegrounds at the next general election. The average majority in the 28 red wall seats won by the Conservatives in 2019 is just 4,500 votes, leaving some newly elected Tory MPs jittery about what a leading thinktank described as a “cost-of-living catastrophe”. An Ipsos Mori poll last week gave Labour a nine-point lead over the Conservatives, with Keir Starmer’s party far more trusted on “levelling up” and the cost-of-living crisis but still behind on handling Britain’s economy. Liam Byrne, the Labour MP for Birmingham Hodge Hill, which has the highest fuel poverty rate in England, said it was critical that the government cut VAT on fuel prices and replace the £20 a week uplift to universal credit, which ended in October. He added: “The biting cut to universal credit has left us with the worst child poverty in Britain and record queues at food banks. A generation is now growing up in poverty as families have to make that appalling choice between heating and eating.” The Resolution Foundation estimated that the number of families experiencing “fuel stress” – spending at least 10% of their budgets on energy – will treble to 6.3 million overnight when the new energy price cap comes in on 1 April. Jonny Marshall, senior economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “The sharp rise in energy bills this April will increase the number of households in fuel poverty, and treble the number of families in fuel stress. This is a problem that will affect families throughout the country, many who have not faced unaffordable bills before, and particularly those in red wall constituencies. “As such, the government’s immediate priority should be to announce bold, targeted support for the millions of low-income households most affected by the coming energy bills crisis. Longer term, addressing the causes of high energy bills – an over-reliance on natural gas and poorly insulated homes – will see energy costs become more manageable for all.”If you are an alcoholic or addict of some kind and you get amnesia, would you remain an alcoholic? Jane Ricard, Autun Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply Yes. The levels of alcohol dependency you have built up would mean that you would suffer withdrawal and craving for alcohol consumption. You would feel an impulse to consume alcohol, despite not knowledge of your backstory relating to alcohol consumption. Perhaps, rehab and recovery would be easier for an amnesiac as, once the intense craving and cold turkey was overcome, the reason, trauma suffered and knowledge of habitual drinking patterns could be more easily dissociated from in the mind of the amnesiac. wenders14 You had better hope your medics know you’re an alcoholic, or spot any early symptoms. Delirium tremens can be fatal, and a real possibility for anyone who stops drinking suddenly. The central nervous system won’t care that you don’t fancy a drink suddenly. Cold turkey is not a good idea for alcoholics. mylf01 My mum was addicted to smoking for 30 years when she had a stroke and was in a coma for a week. Thankfully she came to and rehabilitated over the following months and years, but interestingly one thing that went away was a craving for nicotine. She says she remembers smoking, but that longing was no longer there and she has never smoked since. Perhaps it was the period unconscious that broke the connection, or the brain injury itself – but it was a curious effect of what happened to her. Bobbipyn This is a question often posed about stammering. Would you forget you stammered? There’s probably a genetic aspect (research seems to imply), but would be interesting to know. Especially since I’ve stammered for well over 60 years. philipl Yes, the addiction remains. I’m a neuropsychiatrist and we see a lot of alcoholic patients with brain injuries and memory problems. Memory is very complicated and made up of lots of parts. “Amnesia” normally refers to episodic memory (what you’ve just done for example). The memory of what alcohol is and how it affects you is still there, even if you cannot remember how you were injured, safe in your semantic memory. Also it is very unusual to forget your life story (autobiographical memory) so the knowledge you are an alcoholic tends to be retained. Even if it is not consciously recalled, any environmental cues such as a bottle of whisky soon prompt you to drink again. Although not 100% consistent, the same applies to all addictions including overeating and smoking. JanetElwes I’m an alcoholic and found this question quite ironic, as blackouts are part of the charm of excessive drinking. I self-medicate in order to forget, simple. If I had amnesia? I think the traumas that led to this would still reside in my subconscious. I may be baffled by the physical withdrawal at first; “why am I shaking/sweating/anxious?” but a quick Google would give me a definitive answer and the solution. Not_Always_A_Moron “Addiction” produces psychological dependency and physical dependency. A drug-dependant person experiencing amnesia may have no memory of the ritual substance use or repetitive means of administering the drug (alcohol too is a drug), but the body, excruciatingly withdrawing, would symptomatically “remember” that it was being deprived of something physiologically vital to its existence. So, the drug-dependant amnesiac, by not being able to remember the means by which to ameliorate the agonising withdrawal, would experience extreme physical discomfort and allied psychological distress, until such time as the body has detoxified. iainhamilton As a social worker, I once worked with a woman who developed Korsakoff’s syndrome, as a result of chronic alcoholism, was hospitalised, and lost the previous 10 years of her memory. This covered the time she developed dependence on alcohol, and when ready for discharge, she had forgotten she had been an alcoholic. TheMaskedAMHP I cannot see that memory loss would change an individual’s propensity to relapse. However, if an alcoholic doesn’t remember having a drink problem then presumably at the onset of memory loss, he or she will soon enough have a drink and find out if they have a problem. Personally I’m glad that I can remember being alcohol dependent. I can remember how bad I felt physically, the harm I caused to close family and at least some of the stupid things that I said and did. Remembering addiction and its recurrence but most of all remembering what I learned in recovering ensures, I hope for ever, that I pass the pub by unvisited and supermarket shelf undisturbed. WalterBMorgan OK, so you would still have a physical addiction, but would you immediately recognise the antidote for your withdrawal? Sure, in a western country where alcohol is readily available you’d soon work it out. But imagine if you landed in a strict Muslim country by an unlikely twist of fate. Would you then figure out that you were an alcoholic? nigelscamelcoat Amnesia is probably similar in some ways to hypnosis. I believe that hypnotherapy has some success in curing smoking addiction, but in general not so much with alcohol. JohnWig People with ARBD (alcohol-related brain damage) often have significant amnesia including autobiographical (life story) and short-term memory impairment. They often still have a compulsion to drink and indeed might not remember that drinking has been a problem for them. Muttonina My nanna was a very heavy smoker and drinker – to the stage of regularly forgetting things and occasional blackouts. As dementia started to “bite”, it seemed that she forgot that she loved her drinking and smoking. By the time she died, she had gone a number of years without drinking or smoking. jaden62 Not a chance from my professional experience. By the time the DTs (delirium tremens) kick in and the person is in full-on withdrawal mode from their alcoholism, the effect of amnesia will be negligible. I have never nursed any alcoholic that has not had some withdrawal symptoms unless it has been a very gradual reduction before cessation. AwakenstoEmptiness Your body would still crave alcohol. What would be interesting would be if the question was about cocaine, which is not really a physical addiction more a mental one. ramned I was an IV heroin addict for more than 20 years – now six years clean without the help of NA or anything similar. I was very much helped by my use of ketamine (again I have not used for six years). I would take so much ketamine that I would forget who I was, what my name was. The shock of discovering I was a drug addict, that this hovel was my home, as memory returned and I saw my situation with fresh eyes, forced me to change. I don’t know how closely ketamine dissociation resembles amnesia however. Garmadon A friend of mine was an alcoholic for about five years with some major health problems and time spent in intensive care. Eventually his relatives were told that he would be dead by the weekend but that came and went. He started to recover but was seriously ill and placed in a nursing home for two years until deemed well enough to leave. He has been diagnosed with Korsakoff’s syndrome and a brain scan has revealed global brain loss. I would say he has the mental age of about 12 so can take care of personal things but is assisted at home by his partner. He no longer has any thoughts about alcohol. container There are different forms of alcoholism. In general it is drinking sufficient alcohol to produce physical or social detriment, but there are some family groups who will binge drink because they lack the capacity to limit their intake. Alcoholism, as a non-metabolic drug abuse, is associated with personality disorders (PTSD from childhood trauma) and adult PTSD. Chronic alcohol abuse causes neurological damage. If there is associated thiamine deficiency, it will cause damage to the cerebellum leading to ataxia and balance disturbance. It is partially reversible. It may be caused by giving an alcoholic glucose without covering them with a thiamine booster. Another form is Korsakow’s psychosis, which is complete antegrade amnesia and such people do “forget” to drink alcohol. Such people become incapable of caring for themselves. They have degeneration of the mamillary bodies in the hypothalamic area of the brain. Amnesia may be transient and global in which case the sufferer will not remember any acquired habits. Amnesia may be organic (brain injury, dementia, encephalitis etc), or psychogenic – behavioural triggered by a traumatic event – and is completely reversible. Organic amnesia is worse in the acute phase due to oedema and transient neuronal dysfunction, and even when this phase completes neuroplasticity (formation of new synapses etc) will still produce clinical improvement. David BrookmanIs there a better calendar we could use or invent? Evie Sutton, Manchester Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.At the end of a steep woodland trail, surrounded by sturdy beech and ash trees, a freshwater spring bubbles into a basic stone well, rippling in the low winter sunlight. On nearby branches and around the mouth of the well colourful cloth rags – or cloots – have been hung by visitors, as an offering to a water spirit or local saint and an entreaty to be healed. The clootie well near Munlochy, a village on the Black Isle peninsula across the Beauly Firth from Inverness, is a place of traditional pilgrimage and modern curiosity. It is also now a cause of community consternation, after a well-meaning stranger cleared away many of the offerings. “I’m sure the person who cleared up thought they were doing something good,” says Claire Mackay, a herbalist who lives on the Black Isle, “but the fact they took it upon themselves, weren’t a local and did it without the permission of Forestry and Land Scotland [which manages the site] has upset a lot of people.” Some neighbours have fulminated on the community Facebook page – even suggesting the individual may henceforth be cursed for “desecrating” the sacred site – while others acknowledge the site was already in need of attention before the offerings were swiped last weekend. The well had gathered an accumulation of eccentric offerings during lockdown, including bras, pants and a hi-vis jacket. The damage wrought by Storm Arwen in late November also blew down many of the cloot-covered branches. Verity Walker, a local author and heritage consultant, can remember the “clootie trees” being trimmed or cleared when she passed the well as a child. It is an ancient tradition that now coexists alongside modern faiths, she says. “When my daughter injured her foot, I hung a sock – it has to be biodegradable and related to the part of the body that you want to recover.” Mackay is optimistic that the initial outrage can be channelled into a more organised approach to maintaining the site. “The clean-up should have been a community decision,” she says. “But now we can treat it as a clean slate and hope it has planted that seed about the need for people to leave more natural things.” Paul Hibberd, a regional visitor services manager for Forestry and Land Scotland, points out that there is already signage asking people to leave “only small, biodegradable offerings” at the well. Local rangers visit regularly to tidy and “remove the most inappropriate items”, he adds, but staff are aware this is a site that “people feel a very strong connection with”. The build-up of debris “also highlights how much plastic is in modern clothes”, Hibberd adds. “That’s part of the problem with items not breaking down.” Clootie wells, which are also found in Cornwall and Ireland, date far back into pre-Christian times and the practice of leaving votives and offerings for spirits in wells and springs. The healing well at Munlochy has been linked to Saint Boniface, who worked as a missionary in Scotland around AD620, and is probably an example of early Christianity absorbing more ancient Celtic traditions. Pilgrims performed a ceremony that involved circling the well three times before splashing some of its water on the ground and saying a prayer. They would then tie a piece of cloth that had been in contact with the ill person to a nearby tree and, as the rag rotted away, so that person would be healed. There are plans for a community group to care for the area on a regular basis, with more than a hundred local people already expressing an interest. Mackay has plans for storytelling at the well and input from local historians, as well as outreach into schools to explain to children how to leave votives and cloots without harming the environment. “It’s a symbolic act,” says Walker, “an act of meditation and connection, an act of faith even if you’re not sure what you have faith in, and that’s only to be encouraged.”The chief executive of the US satellite company that is buying Inmarsat for $7.3bn (£5.4bn) has said it is not “stealing” Britain’s crown jewel in the space communications race, and is confident the deal would be cleared by a potential investigation by the government to assess the threat of a foreign takeover to national security. Rick Baldridge, the chief executive of Viasat, was in London with his team last week to meet government agencies, Inmarsat management and media as part of a mission to pave the way for clearance of the California-based company’s biggest ever deal. “This is not a step-in-and-steal deal,” Baldridge said. “We have a longstanding relationship in the UK, we didn’t just come here for this deal. It isn’t about ripping out cost to make the numbers. I don’t think people here will see a lot of change.” Baldridge, who says Viasat UK has had responsibility for encrypted classified UK information for years, pointed out that there were no issues raised with Inmarsat being taken private by a private equity consortium with a large proportion of non-UK based investors three years ago. “Inmarsat has already been sold to private equity,” he said. “They are already 75% owned by non-UK based investors, probably more than that. We have had business over here in information security, primarily with the MoD, for over a decade.” However, in the intervening years the geopolitical climate relating to the takeover of assets considered of national strategic importance has rapidly changed, with the takeover of firms such as Arm, a key global player in the semiconductor industry, to aerospace and defence businesses such as Meggitt and Ultra Electronics, all being assessed over the threat to national security. Inmarsat – which was founded in 1979 and has its headquarters in London, floated in 2005 and has about 1,800 staff globally – is the global leader in providing communications for the maritime and aviation industries. Its technology was used in the hunt for the missing Malaysian Airlines flight MH370 in 2014, and it is a bidder for a £6bn contract to upgrade the Ministry of Defence’s secure communications network. In January, the government gained beefed-up powers through the National Security and Investment Act introduced this month to potentially block some foreign takeovers. It is understood that about eight deals are provisionally being assessed for full scrutiny under the new enhanced regulatory powers. “We have a very strong relationship with the MoD and space agency here,” Baldridge said. “In terms of a national security investigation, no one has to suggest it has to be done, [the government] are going to do an investigation, it is part of the process. It became law in January, we knew that at the time [of the takeover]. If they do the work, talk to the MoD, the space agency, they will see they have a long-term, good relationship with Viasat.” Viasat, which employs about 200 staff in the UK of a total of 6,000 globally, has pledged to keep Inmarsat in London as its international headquarters. “We have a fundamental independence strategy,” Baldridge said. “There is a great fit between the assets that they have and where our aspirations are. It is about putting two companies together to have them grow collectively. There will be some synergies but the real goal over the next five to 10 years is that we were going to have to come here to grow the business anyway. We care about financials but the main change you are going to see is investing.”For two sets and more, Rafael Nadal trailed an opponent 10 years his junior who had built a fortress behind the baseline and outplayed him from all parts of the court. Even with all of Nadal’s trademark fight, the deficit was thorough and clear, and as Daniil Medvedev inched towards a grand slam title while in the greatest form of his young career, Nadal would have left with few complaints after a run that was already beyond his own imagination. All Nadal could do was keep his head up, focus on each point as it came and search for solutions until the end. He did so, as he does every single time he steps on to a tennis court, and before a manic crowd on Rod Laver Arena, Nadal produced one of the greatest masterstrokes of his endless career. From two sets down, Nadal somehow recovered to defeat Medvedev 2-6, 6-7 (5), 6-4, 6-4, 7-5 after five hours and 24 minutes and, in the process, win a record 21st grand slam title. Despite all that Nadal has already achieved, all of the impossible comebacks he has engineered, this may just be the greatest triumph of all. Nadal had arrived in Melbourne on the back of a six-month layoff following surgery on a chronic foot injury that forced him to consider the possibility that he would never return to tennis. As he prepared to return, he was unable to practice after being bedridden by Covid in December. At 35 years old, the sixth seed was not delusional enough to think that such preparation was sufficient to win seven best-of-five-set matches against the finest players in the world. Somehow, it was. It required him to use every last tool in his vast toolbox, one that he has grooved over his 20-year career, forcing himself far out of his comfort zone. Yet he found the right solutions by the end. He now takes sole ownership of the all-time record, breaking his tie of 20 with Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer. At a tournament that has played host to many great moments but so many of the toughest losses and strokes of bad luck in his career, it stands as an entirely fitting way for Nadal to win his second Australian Open title, completing his set of at least two titles at each grand slam. Nadal had lost his last four finals in Australia between 2012 and 2019 while also suffering through some of his most disappointing injuries in the country. “Tonight has been very special,” Nadal said. “I give it everything that I have inside, believe me. I am super, super-tired in all ways. I even can’t celebrate. But was the day to give everything, no? I enjoyed. I enjoyed the fight. I enjoyed the emotions. At the end have this trophy with me means everything today, no?” As Nadal reflects on his efforts, Medvedev, the second seed, will have to digest how he squandered the opportunity to win a second consecutive grand slam tournament, losing his cool in front of a crowd cheering for his demise and despite his bold efforts at the end, never regaining his control over the match. The crowd made its allegiances clear from the beginning, with Nadal entering the arena to a standing ovation while Medvedev’s arrival was greeted with some additional boos. But early on, it took an enormous effort for Nadal to just win points as Medvedev imposed himself on the match, taking the first set with ease. Nadal opened the second set searching desperately for a solution. He threw down backhand slices, drop shots, net forays, and numerous serve and volley attempts. he just fell short in the 86 minute set, serving for the set at 5-3 and also holding a 5-3 lead in the tie-break. The match was moving from Nadal at speed, and he soon found himself down 2-3, 0-40. As he battled, Medvedev became increasingly irritated by the raucous crowd and attempted ill-advised drop shots, then sarcastically applauded the stands. Nadal broke serve at 4-4, he served out the set and he continued to build his comeback in the fourth, hitting some of his best form of the match and ending the set on top of the baseline, crunching backhands as he pushed the match to a decider. With momentum behind him, Nadal pushed ahead for the first time since the opening set. He harassed Medvedev in his service games, generating breakpoints at 2-2 and he broke serve with a thunderous running forehand down-the-line winner. Nadal held on through numerous tough holds but as he served out for the title at 5-4, he faltered, netting a backhand on break point. No matter, the Spaniard immediately wrested the break back and at his second attempt, he served one of the greatest wins of his life out to love. As he celebrated a victory that not even he thought he was capable of, Nadal stared at his team and shook his head in wonder at what he had just done.UK-registered patents and intellectual property rights on vaccines and medicines would immediately be waived in a pandemic under a proposed amendment to the health and social care bill that is backed by the People’s Vaccine Alliance. The amendment, tabled in the House of Lords by the Labour peer, Shami Chakrabarti, is expected to be debated this week. It would seek to avoid a future shortfall of vaccines in poorer countries as has occurred during the coronavirus pandemic. Describing the situation as “immoral”, Chakrabarti said: “We are failing because of insufficient sharing of our vaccine supply and not allowing generic vaccine production in the global south. “Some of the arguments against are patronising, verging on the racist – that the south is incapable of production and so on. Yet a report before Christmas suggested that there were over 100 manufacturers in Africa, Asia and Latin America who – with knowledge-sharing and patent waiving – could produce MRNA vaccines. At the height of devastation in India, the Serum Institute was producing vaccines to export to Europe whilst bodies were floating down the Ganges.” Experts blamed the emergence of the Omicron variant on the failure to vaccinate the world. The UK, among other wealthier nations, has been accused of hoarding vaccines and opposing waiving the multinational Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Trips) agreement during the pandemic to protect big pharma. Under the amendment, upon the World Health Organization (WHO) declaring a pandemic, the health and social care secretary would immediately have to waive intellectual property rights relating to vaccines and medicines where necessary to combat the pandemic internationally. They would also be required to support and implement any proposal to temporarily waive aspects of the WTO’s Trips agreement. The amendment is also signed by Labour peers Doreen Lawrence and Paul Boateng, and Chakrabarti says it also has cross-bench support. The amendment would also dictate that, when the government invests in health research or development, it would receive a proportionate share of any resulting intellectual property and profits, which it would be obliged to reinvest in further public health-related research. Research carried out prior to the pandemic showed that the NHS was spending more than £1bn each year on medicines that the public had helped fund. Chakrabarti said that the bulk of investment into the early and riskiest research and development comes from public and philanthropic sources (97% for the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine). “Ordinary people and small businesses have made all sorts of awful compromises to rights and freedoms in the pandemic but big pharma, much like big tech, has only been enriched,” she said. Saoirse Fitzpatrick, advocacy manager at StopAids, part of the People’s Vaccine Alliance, said: “There is a growing realisation that if public money is funding the development of vaccines and medicines then there needs to be public stewardship over that process to make sure products are accessible and affordable at the end. And in cases where public money hasn’t played a role, we need to be using all the legal tools available to get access to those treatments and vaccines at the best possible price for the NHS and patients around the world.” A government spokesperson said: “The innovation we need to tackle Covid-19 is facilitated by the existing international IP framework, and the Trips waiver would dismantle this framework despite there not being evidence for needing to do so. “While we recognise and share concerns regarding the level of vaccination in some parts of the world, we are working on tackling the underlying issues including manufacturing and supply constraints, pressure on health systems, and vaccine confidence.”Saturday Night Live kicks off with an emergency meeting inside the Oval Office, where President Joe Biden (James Austin Johnson) and a team of advisers discuss the standoff between Russia and Ukraine. Almost as dire as the assembly of Russian troops at the Ukrainian border is the former’s disinformation campaign within the latter. Ukraine has been flooded by fake news stories on Facebook (such as “Neil Young to Remove Music from Spotify Unless Ukraine Surrenders”), pro-invasion memes and TikTok videos, and TV commercials featuring Aaron Rodgers (Pete Davidson), who recently “left the Packers to fight for Russia”. In order to combat this, the White House introduces their new secretary of defense, vicious junior high student Mikala (Chloe Fineman), who nixes Biden’s proposal of a drone strike in order to break Russia down psychologically by sending mean DMs to Putin. This cold open is SNL at its worst, unoriginal (the show’s continued reliance on social media material is getting more pathetic by the week), annoying (Fineman continues to grate any time she’s not playing the straight man) and nowhere near up to the task of tackling as heavy a subject as impending war. America’s greatest living actor, Willem Dafoe, hosts for the first time. Despite his long and storied career, he accepts criticism about his acting being over the top, admitting that he’s “not one of those subtle actors like Nicolas Cage or Al Pacino”. He’s interrupted by a vacationing couple from his home town of Appleton, Wisconsin (Aidy Bryant, Mikey Day), who compliment him on being in the Spider-Man movies, while confusing his work in Platoon and The Last Temptation of Christ with Full Metal Jacket and The Passion of the Christ. To his greater dismay, they correctly remember him from Speed 2: Cruise Control. At a New York apartment meeting, tenants yell about increased maintenance bills, threaten to murder their neighbor’s dogs, demand the banning of teens from the building and, in the case of Dafoe’s grizzled old-timer (his costume being a clear homage to his frequent director and close personal friend Abel Ferrara), reminisce about the dirty, dangerous New York of old: “Back in my day it was all pimps and whores, junkies and perverts … you could go to CBGBs and Iggy Pop would puke on your face! And we all liked it!” This character should have been the center of the whole sketch, but unfortunately, he’s shuffled off almost straight away. Now I’m Up is an R&amp;B song from Chris Redd, Kenan Thompson and Ego Nwodim about the various causes of insomnia: smartphone interruptions, anxieties over illness and mortality, a partner’s sharp toenail, etc. Dafoe brings his singular sinister energy (and some pretty solid musical chops) to the proceedings, playing a creepy late-night infomercial pitchman who gets in on the singing. The 29th Annual Badminster Dog Show “celebrates those canine freaks who prevent their owners from having company or intimacy”. Contestants include Luna, deathly afraid of “beeps … plastic bags … men in hats … the sound of spoken Spanish”; Pigeon, a “sexual predator who’s been banned from every dog park in the state of Maryland”; Blueberry, who refuses to walk after being driven insane from sliding on the floor one time; and Gizmo, a “total package” with “bad feet, bad skin, bad teeth, bad anal glands, and a bad brain”, as well as a “weird little penis”. The adorable mutts do a lot of the heavy lifting here, but as far as ensemble character sketches go, it’s superior to the previous example. A commercial for Nugenix sees retired baseball player Frank Thomas (Keenan Thompson), quarterback Doug Flutee (Kyle Mooney), and Dafoe (as himself) confront a fortysomething stranger over his inability to “get hard”. Despite being best known as a dramatic actor, Dafoe’s comic chops are unmatched, and he shows them off here to great effect, going from 0-to-60 as he torments the poor guy, hits on his wife, pretends to be British, and personally undergoes the horrific process of getting a Nugenix-enhanced erection. The night’s musical guest is Katy Perry. Against an Alice in Wonderland-inspired backdrop and backed by a troupe of dancing mushrooms, she performs When I’m Gone. On Weekend Update, Colin Jost notes that in light of the US economy having grown at the fastest rate since Ronald Reagan’s presidency, Biden has “even started using Reagan’s old catchphrase: ‘Where am I?’” Michael Che reports on an auction of personal items from the late Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s library: “They’ve sold the books and the desk, but to honor Ginsburg’s legacy, they’re gonna hang on to the seat for way longer than they should.” (This joke gets some groaning disapproval from scolds in the audience.) Jost then invites the Hall of Fame quarterback Peyton Manning to the desk to discuss last week’s NFL playoff games. It turns out Manning missed them because he got sucked-in by the Netflix series Emily in Paris and binge-watched the entire second season. He gives an impassioned gameday-style breakdown of the show’s romantic drama, various subplots and fashion. Manning is the only NFL player who’s ever acquitted himself well on SNL, and his endearing performance here is a season highlight. Particularly funny is his dramatic declaration that his new favorite show offers “a fresh take on feminism – FINALLY!” Then Davidson and Fineman play the title characters from Disney’s Beauty and the Beast. Belle uses a magical mirror to look in on her beloved father (Dafoe, doing a very broad and funny French accent). Unaware that he’s being spied on, he lights a bunch of candles, plays some European dance music, self-flagellates his hindquarters with a leather whip, and speaks dirty talk to a picture of his late wife (“I just wish you were holding me close, kissing my neck, stroking my hair, stomping on my groin, spanking my ass, biting my ass, so many wonderful things with my ASS!”) A new Please Don’t Destroy short sees the group’s dynamic thrown out of whack by Connor, a smart-ass 10-year-old that Martin has inexplicably started hanging out with it (he assures John and Ben that they’re “not hooking up”). Connor’s presence proves particularly irksome to John, leading to a confrontation that ends with a fight over a porterhouse, a Heimlich maneuver, a Nickelback needle drop and a trip to a nightclub with Colin Jost. The young actor who plays Connor is a real find, displaying a real comic talent and stealing the show. Perry returns to the stage for a performance of Never Really Over. Then Dafoe plays a self-help author being interviewed on a local morning news show. The show’s anchor mispronounces the title of his new book, Knowing Yourself, as Blowing Yourself, leading to the expected overload of double entendre (“It’s a feelgood book. It’s about learning how to love yourself by going down deep and embracing the part of you you discovered down there”). The last sketch of the night sees Dafoe play an older office temp named Jeremiah. Attempting to join in on an impromptu musical number with his office mates, he ends up causing “a million dollars-worth of damage” after he throws a chair through a 15-story window. He tries to redeem himself the next day but ends up defenestrating one of his co-workers. As is often the case with the closing sketches, it feels rushed and disjointed. Despite the roughness that bookended things, the show made good use of Dafoe, even if it did fail to produce any instant classics (given how game he was, it really should have). That said, his strong work, combined with an excellent guest appearance from Manning and a great new Please Don’t Destroy segment made this one of the stronger episodes of the season. Along with last week’s episode, the show is on the upswing again. Hopefully, it can keep the momentum going when it returns in late February.Otherwise, much as I want to stay in this moment until I expire, we are done. Thanks all for your company and comments – it’s been a trip. Ta-ra! Here’s Tumaini Carayol’s match report. I don’t know about you, but I cannot wait to read it “I am just destroyed now,” Rafa tells Eurosport. He can’t believe how he “resisted a match like this” – that’s a gorgeous turn of phrase – and again praises Medvedev. And here are Nadal’s quotations in full: “Good evening everyone ... good evening or good morning, at least. “First of all I know it’s a tough moment, Daniil, you are an amazing champion, I’ve been in this position a couple of times in this tournament, having chances to have the trophy with me, but I don’t have any doubt that you have this trophy a couple of times in your career, because you’re amazing, so I want to congratulate you. “It was one of the most emotional matches of my tennis career and to share a court with you is just an honour, so all the best in the future. “[Addressing the crowd] I even don’t know what to say guys. For me, it’s just amazing, being honest, one month and a half ago, I didn’t know if I was going to be able to be back on the tour playing tennis again. And today I’m here in front of all you with this trophy with me, and you don’t know how much I’ve fought to be here. I can’t thank you enough for all the support I’ve had since I arrived here, you are just amazing.” “Without a doubt it’s been one of the most emotional moments in my tennis career. Having the huge support that I received, during the three weeks is just going to stay in my heart for the rest of my life, so many, many thanks.” “I honestly can’t thank enough all the guys that are there – all the team, all the family, the part of the family and the team that are not here ... You know how hard the last year and a half has been. In the low moments, you have been there every single moment to support, and without you, guys, nothing of this would be possible, so thank you very much for everything. “I don’t want to forget anyone, all the volunteers, everybody who made possible this amazing event, all the sponsors, Kia, that is my personal sponsor since I started playing tennis, thank you very much for supporting tennis. “Thanks so much to Tennis Australia, these have been very tough times to organise tennis tournaments, the last two years especially, you’ve been doing an amazing job. Craig [Tiley], I know how tough it was for you and for all your team. But you are great, you’re always supporting tennis and all the players in general. I wish you all the very best and I can’t thank you enough for all the support we have from you. “One month and a half ago I said maybe there was a chance that’s going to be my last Australian Open ... but now that’s plenty of energy to keep going, so thank you very much! I really can’t explain the feelings that I have right now, but I’m going to keep trying my best to keep coming, next year, thank you very very much and see you soon.” The crowd roars. Medvedev leaves the court; I’ve not a clue what he does now. Here are Medvedev’s quotations in full, courtesy of my colleague, Luke McLaughlin: “Tough to talk, after five hours-thirty, and losing ... I want to congratulate Rafa because what you did today, I was amazed ... During the match I tried just to play tennis, but after the match, I just, you know, asked him - “Are you tired?” [Laughs]. “It was insane. The level was very high ... you raised your level after two sets for the 21st grand slam ... I thought you were going to get tired, and maybe you did just a little, but still won the match. So, you are an amazing champion. I think you guys [Nadal, Djokovic and Federer] have a good rivalry, still, it’s not over yet. Congrats, it was unbelievable, and congrats to your team, of course. “Then I want to thank two guys in my box ... they were here all week ... thanks for sharing this tough moment with me. But, you know, we tried our best, and hopefully we can have more victories to come. Usually there is my wife is in the box, yeah, I think probably the TV is broken right now ... She is my biggest support, so I want to thank her also. My team ... thanks a lot guys. “To my sisters, my parents, I love you all, if you are still watching, I want to thank you for your support, and I’m going to try to be better next time. “I want to thank Tennis Australia and especially Craig, tournament director is a tough job, and this year, I don’t know, you will tell me if it was the toughest in your career? But I think you’re an amazing tournament director and I hope you stay for at least 15 years or maybe 10 years ... “Last but not least, I just wanted to thank my team again, thank you guys.” He’d wondered if this would be his last Australian Open, but now he’s energised for more, and can’t bring himself to take his hand off the trophy, his fingertips lingering on the handle. It’s a beautiful, sensual image. Nadal congratulates Medvedev and is sure he’ll win a couple of these through his career. He talks about on of the most emotional matches of his career, saying it’s an honour to have shared the court with his opponent, then moves onto himself. He wasn’t sure he was going to make the tournament and now look! He’s grateful for the support he’s received, thanking his family for the support over a tough 18 months then everyone else he can think of. I’m not going to lie, I had a hectic one last night, but I appear to be crying my eyes out as Nadal lifts the trophy. What a world! Here comes the man... “It’s tough to talk,” he says, then laughs at how “insane” Nadal is, congratulating him and his team; this is quite some menschlichkeit on display. He thanks his team and his wife, speculating that her telly might now be broken, saying he’ll try to be better next time. Ouch. Nadal is now in lusciously mauve overshirt; it’s dazzlingly affirming. But here comes Medvedev to receive his plate, and he does a good job of smiling – that’s great to see. I can barely follow the talking that’s going on now, something about a 21st major, I don’t know. The presentation ceremony is underway, and it’s nice to see the players exchanging cordialities – they now have a bond that’ll be there forever. Medvedev is on the edge as he receives official commiserations – I hope he’s kind to himself, because he looks as distraught as you’d expect him to. He’ll know, though, that he’s a special character, which should provide some level of comfort, but for the fact that competitors of his ilk tend not to experience comfort in defeat. Some things just defy analysis, because sometimes we have to just say we don’t know. We could sit here deconstructing the match, talk about forehands, drop shots and whatever other pontifications we might come up with. It’s a load of nonsense though because that match was about the human spirit that resides in one man, and those of us who aren’t him can recognise it, love it, and treasure it – but never have a hope of understanding it. We’re going to be processing this final for as long as we live. I can’t wait to try. Nadal stands stock-still for a moment, nonchalantly tosses his racket, greets Medvedev, and my eyeballs are sweating. He goes to celebrate with his team, tears in his eyes, and what a privilege to be living in these times! Six months out, back he comes, makes the final, two sets down, back he comes, and we’re looking at the greatest men’s tennis player of all-time! I’ve never, in all my life, seen will and skill like it! But poor old Daniil – he was almost home, and then he wasn’t anywhere close. Oh man, what a homo sapiens he is, and he’ll be back. But he’ll never, ever get over this, and that’s hard enough for me to take, never mind him. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 7-5 Medvedev The crowd go wild as Nadal tramps to the baseline, and another terrifying rally unfolds – he defends, then opens his shoulders when the opportunity arises, and that’s 15-0 ... then a gigantic serve makes 30-0! an ace follows, his third of the match, and here come three match points! I’m all over the place here, I don’t mind telling you, I’m not even sure I exist, and OH MY LIFE! HE HAS DONE IT! RAFAEL NADAL HAS DONE IT! Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 6-5 Medvedev* What it must only take to toss a title, then find enough of yourself in the emotional maelstrom of sickening and exhausted reality to save your life. We wind up at deuce, neither man able to string points together, and a remorseless forehand from Nadal, monstered down the line, earns him break point; Medvedev’s serve rides to rescue yet again. But a backhand then drops wide, and though a big serve lands on the T, a spent forehand couldn’t follow it up! Nadal will now serve for the match, the championship and the history of tennis – again! *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 5-5 Medvedev Nadal chokes! Yes, course he does sweetheart. He makes 30-0 in seconds ... then hooks a forehand long to give Medvedev a sniff! ... then unloads the suitcase at a second serve and misses! 30-all it is, and Medvedev annihilates the groundstrokes of a desperate man to earn the put away, which he hammers into the court with great vengeance and fuuuurios anger ... then Nadal nets! Daniil Medvedev, you are a hero! Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 5-4 Medvedev* OH MY ABSOLUTE COMPLETE AND UTTER DAYS! Nadal reads Medvedev’s forehand, picking up on the half-volley to paint a winner down the line for 0-15! Medvedev, though, ain’t going no place, making 30-15 via backhands and forehand put-away ... only to plop a double at the worst possible moment! 30-all it is, Nadal sending a backhand wide, table tennis-style, and finally Medvedev finds a drop that works to force Nadal to serve for it: to serve for 21 majors, with an epochal comeback of world-creating proportions. Gird yourselves, people. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 5-3 Medvedev We hit the five-hour mark as Nadal unleashes another petrifying forehand, but Medvedev slyly ups his pace to catch yerman unaware; 15-all. Nadal is standing in the middle of court, daring Medvedev to take him on ... and he does, a backhand winner flicked past him making 30-all! This is stupendous, stupefying, stupid stuff, the absolute zenith of humanity – of the seven-odd billion people doing whatever they’re doing, this is where it’s at, and Nadal secures his hold! He’s a game away from 21! Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 4-3 Medvedev* If Nadal brings it home, he’ll likely end his career with more majors than Roger Federer, who looks unlikely to win another; Djokovic is another matter, but he’s not had to work as hard for his given how many of them have dome once the other two were past their best. But that’s not for quite now - Medvedev holds to love, and will shortly have another hack at saving himself. Can he find something when there’s nothing left to find? *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 4-2 Medvedev Medvedev can see his life running away from him while Nadal is sprinting towards the light, the absolute state of his forehand punishing 15-0. A big serve down the middle follows, good enough for 30-0, then out of naewhere Medvedev finds a backhand winner cross-court; he’s going to need more of them, and fast. We end up at 40-30 – a chance for Medvedev in the scheme of things, which reminds us how desperate his situation is, and he hangs in the next rally long enough for Nadal to hook a forehand wide! Deuce it is, from 40-15, and for both men these are the days of their lives; I’ve no idea how they’re not in tears at the enormity of it all and I’m pretty close myself. Back and forth we go, Nadal the calmest man in the court, but Medvedev steps into an inside-out backhand to earn himself advantage! Not for long, his opportunity quickly extinguished, but a forehand error from Nadal hands him another ... quickly confiscated via booming serve. In maximum half an hour’s time, one or both of these will be in tears, and though he’s down, Medvedev is back on the upswing, frittering another break-back point with a poor backhand. But it’s not enough! Nadal thunders down an overhead, and he’s two games away! Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 3-2 Medvedev* From 0-15, Medvedev finds his big serves, but he’s no other weapons and Nadal astonishes a forehand cross-court for 30-all! Another winner follows to set up break point ... and again Medvedev finds the serve he needs! The skill and stones to keep going big on the big points! But here he is needing more of the same when Nadal’s forehand is again too much, then an absolute nonsense of a forehand, on the retreat and onto the line, puts Nadal in front for the first time in four and a half hours! It’s not often we get to use the word awesome when we actually mean “awesome”, not “fairly good”, but Rafael Nadal is awesome and then some! *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 2-2 Medvedev Nadal is just an absolute sadist, forcing Medvedev about the court until he fancies a forehand winner prior to standing there like butter wouldn’t melt. Yeah, Rafa old mate, no one will notice – there’s his love hold. “‘I hope, at least, that it’s Mrs Elswood sweet, the undisputed divinity of the cucumber world,” tweets Arthur Kaletzky quoting me back to myself. “As a fellow native Muscovite I doubt that. We like the non-sweet malosol’nyye (slightly salted, unsweetened) pickled cukes.” Doesn’t that mean they then taste of cucumber? Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 1-2 Medvedev* It’s hard to see Medvedev putting together four good enough points to break, but that doesn’t mean he won’t break – Nadal is capable of making errors. In the meantime, a welcome love hold buys him brief respite. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 1-1 Medvedev I’m struggling to process the enormity of a Nadal win here – it’d be up there with the best we’ve seen in any sport, not in terms of quality but in terms of mentality, significance and the unfathomable resilience of the most stubborn competitor of all-time. And it looks likely too! Nadal holds to 30, putting Medvedev back in while he’s still reeling from the stress of his previous hold. Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 0-1 Medvedev* Nadal has a particular genius for gauging the tempo of a match and changing tactics on the fly – the drops he’s been hitting have put miles into Medvedev’s legs. During changes of ends, Medvedev has been drinking pickle juice, which tells us either that he’s feart of cramping or knows a fine beverage when he sees one; perhaps both. I hope, at least, that it’s Mrs Elswood sweet, the undisputed divinity of the cucumber world. Anyhow, here comes the final set: hang onto your souls, because this is going set them ablaze. And oh Daniil: he opens with a double, again unhappy at crowd noise between the faults, and he’ll be feeling peaky in the extreme; if he loses this, he’ll take it to his grave – these are the stakes. Stakes that ratchet up again when Nadal spirits a backhand winner down the line and on the run for raise break point, Medvedev finding consecutive big serves to reverse the situation. But now it’s Nadal making every rally an occasion – if Medvedev doesn’t get ahead via that first strike, he no longer has the weapons to dictate. And it looks after him here, helping him close out for 1-0; check to Nadal. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 6-4 Medvedev Nadal’s mauve top looks resplendent as he quickly makes 15-0, then Medvedev cracks a backhand into the tape having opened out the point for himself in decent style. A forehand winner follows, Nadal abruptly changing direction, and a serve into the body seals the set! I can barely believe what I’m seeing, even though I’ve seen it over and over again, over the course of nearly two decades! Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 5-4 Medvedev* Aaaarrrgggh! Medvedev is labouring and Nadal is reading him like he wrote him, waiting to dematerialise a forehand winner down the line because he knew exactly where the ball would be. Two coruscating backhands then raise set point, and though Medvedev saves it, even if he forces Nadal to serve for it, he’s losing the physical battle now – to a man 10 years his senior! I feel like every sentence I write about Nadal requires an exclamation mark, and after Medvedev eventually closes out, he’ll now serve for a decider! *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 5-3 Medvedev Nadal hooks a forehand long, inviting Medvedev into the game ... then he does it again having opened the point with a super serve! What on earth is going on?! But Medvedev can’t tear himself away from these poor drops, another one effectively ceding a point he was in control of for 15-30. Nadal, though, has suddenly dropped, another forehand error giving Medvedev two chances to level the set ... that are ripped from him in short order! He just can’t win the crucial points at the moment – he looks tired, especially when wrong-footed by a Nadal forehand. An ace follows, his second of the match, and he’s a game away from bestowing a decider upon us! I don’t know, I really don’t. Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 4-3 Medvedev* Medvedev rushes through a love hold, but time is running out for him in this set; the mere prospect of a decider has introduced frisson to strides, presumably the world over. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 4-2 Medvedev The win predictor is still saying 90% Medvedev – based on what, who knows? – but two terrific backhands get him 0-15. The quality of tennis isn’t quite where it has been, but the intensity is off the scale with the errors and exhaustion a central part of that. At 15-all, Nadal finds two ridiculous backhands to steal a point he was never in, then an inside-out forehand on the half-volley followed by a pick-up at the net secure the consolidation! I can barely feel my fingers here, this is something else! Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 3-2 Medvedev* Nadal’s backhand is working better than at any time in the match, and successive winners get him 0-30! Medvedev facilitates the second of them, playing a poor volley when he could easily have let the ball bounce, then another jazzer of a backhand raises three more break points! But how well does Medvedev saves the first two, the second via lovely backhand slice volley, then Nadal looks mystified when he overcooks a forehand that was right there for him. Deuce it is, and on game point, Medvedev misjudges an overhead, sending the ball vaulting into the sky, then a poor volley allows Nadal into the net with a choice of winners available to him; he picks the forehand cross-court. Two shrieking forehands from Medvedev get him back to deuce, then a big serve saves a further break point ... but again, Nadal finds a big shot when he needs it, changing direction with the forehand to raise a sixth break point. Which Medvedev saves, this time when Nadal doesn’t seize upon a poor drop allowing the forehand winner. But break point number seven soon follows – this is yet another pivotal game – and Nadal is bang on top here, drawing Medvedev to the net then passing him ruthlessly! Suddenly, it’s Nadal hitting winners and control the pace of the rallies! Can he hold onto the advantage this time? *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 2-2 Medvedev It’s just totally befuddling, what Nadal is doing out there. This should not be possible, this is not possible, and I barely know what to do with my little self – but Medvedev isn’t wasting time being awestruck as I am, creaming a backhand down the line for 15-30 before staying in the next point with frankly astonishing de-fence, only for Nadal to laugh at all of it, crunching a forehand onto the line with a cartoon cackle. In my mind, anyway. At 30-all, though, sends a forehand long, then again! Medvedev is the hardest man in the world, securing yet another instant break-back. Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 2-1 Medvedev* You know what, that’s not entirely true – Andy Murray represents values of kindness, decency and integrity – but broadly speaking, and for me at least, he’s not been passed down through generations of my family. But back on court, Nadal raises two break points having just saved two – he is a joke – then Medvedev saves one with an ace, only to hand over the second with a double! The crowd boo him – I’m sorry, but they’re idiots, plain and simple – and he salutes them, which is understandable for reasons of self-respect. But you wonder if it’s also a distraction, and for the first time he’ll be feeling the match slipping away. These are not words I supposed to type. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 1-1 Medvedev Medvedev calls for the trainer – that’ll be addressed at next change of ends – then Nadal outlasts him to make 15-0 with a forehand down the line. Medvedev, though, burns a backhand flat and cross-court for 15-all and a double follows; big moments coming up and Medvedev gets himself into position, only to play a poor drop that facilitates Nadal’s winner. But Medvedev doesn’t get distracted, a great backhand down the line setting up a forehand that Nadal fails to get back ... just ... and that’s 30-40, for as long as it takes Nadal to spring the entirety of himself into a violent forehand down the line. That is borderline illegal, but a wafty forehand hands Medvedev another break point ... which he wastes by netting a backhand when nicely set! To deuce we go, and this is absolutely urgent stuff, the intensity unremitting; if Nadal can somehow take this set, we could be talking about an all-time classic, and he gets himself into it by holding, eventually. “Re: ‘I’ve got to say, I don’t really understand going to watch a tennis match and not wanting both players to play their best,’ emails Michael Meagher, “What’s to understand? If you’re a big fan of one guy you want him to win and it helps if the other guy plays badly. You always want Man Utd to beat Liverpool: sure it would be great if they’re both brilliant and Utd win but you’re not sorry if Liverpool are shite and Utd win. Why would you feel differently if it’s individuals you have those feelings about rather than teams?” I don’t think supporting a football team is the same as supporting an individual. An individual represents themselves, a football club represents a lot more. Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 0-1 Medvedev* Off we go again, the crowd amped, pumped, and numerous other horrible words – Medvedev is not enjoying being the bad guy, at all, and at 30-all his minerals are out for inspection. I’ve got to say, I don’t really understand going to watch a tennis match and not wanting both players to play their best – it’s an individual sport, not one with teams representing family and identity. Medvedev holds to 30, and will now hurl everything into his quest for a break. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 6-4 Medvedev Nadal wastes a forehand down the line to 15-0, and for a fleeting moment he looks 10 years younger. A serve-forehand cross-court combo then make 30-0, and this is just ridiculous behaviour, all the more so when a backhand winner coaxed down the line raises three set points! Nadal is feeling himself here! Another forehand down the line follows, and just look at that! Bow down! Rafael Nadal is Rasputin! Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 5-4 Medvedev* Nadal corrals Medvedev into hitting down the line, ready to send the ball cross-court in response; 0-15. Moments later, it’s 15-40, another jazzer of a point resolved when Medvedev stretches into a loopy backhand get down the line. But he can’t save the second break point, Nadal’s backhand too good, and having been under the pump for almost the entire duration of the set, the ludicrous man is now about to serve for it! *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 4-4 Medvedev Nadal nets a forehand for 0-15, and for how much longer can he stave off the pressure? Well, he runs around his backhand to punish a winner for 15-all, then Medvedev goes long, wide and wide in successive points, and that’s Nadal’s easiest hold in quite some time. Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 3-4 Medvedev* If Medvedev can rattle through another quick hold here, Nadal will be back serving before he’s recovered from his previous effort. At 0-15, the umpire has to tell the crowd to can the calling out – it’s such peculiar behaviour, it really is – then on 30-15, Medvedev plays a super point, only clout his clean-up into the net! A glimmer for Nadal, but a backhand winer, ripped cross-court from well inside the baseline, then another into the corner, see Medvedev home. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 3-3 Medvedev Here we go again, a tired forehand down the line flying wide to give Medvedev 0-15; Nadal looked spent in that rally, trying to force a winner just to get the point over, and the same error again has us contemplating the end. All the more so when Medvedev hoists an incredible defensive lob, admittedly from a ball he should never have smelt, eventually yields a murderous forehand down the line that gives him 0-40 and what seem like three effective match points. He saves them all! Of course he does, what an absolute freak of nature he is, and when Medvedev goes long on the backhand, having opened up the court superbly, Nadal has game point. He can’t convert, but eventually toughs out another mini-epic of a hold, outlasting his man in another devastatingly exhausting rally. Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 2-3 Medvedev* Nadal sends a racket back to the stringer, then Medvedev sends a backhand cross-court and dipping over the net for 15-0! How did he find so oblique an angle? Medvedev is serving very nicely again, sealing another love hold with a banger out wide. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 2-2 Medvedev Nadal could use a comfy hold here – a break looks in the post – and what a volley he finds to finish a point dominated by Medvedev for 30-0. But from 40-0, Medvedev makes 40-30, and it’s dicey yet again ... before a thunderous forehand cinches the game. Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 1-2 Medvedev* A love hold, sealed with an ace. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 1-1 Medvedev You fear for Nadal now, because Medvedev immediately wades into his serve, a barrage of booming forehands earning 0-15. If he can find his top level or something close to it, he might run away with this set, and a forehand winner down the line makes 0-30; what does Nadal have left? Er, plenty, obviously, a belting serve facilitating a forehand whipped down the line before another serve/forehand combo ties up Medvedev so completely that he has to return from above his head, on the crouch. Nadal, though, goes long on the forehand at 40-30 and he’s back to where he was in set one: everything a struggle. But when he needs first serves he finds them, a 195km/h winner securing the game – eventually. Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 0-1 Medvedev* Medvedev nips off for a change of outfit – what does he think this is, Eurovision? – leaving Nadal to stew over losing a set in which he was forever ahead until he wasn’t.Ah, Nadal has left too, and I don’t think he can play much better than he did in that set, which isn’t to say he’s at the top of his game, just that his opponent is too good for him sustain a level beyond where he currently is. And right on cue, he starts set three well with a booming forehand, gets to 15-30 ... then Medvedev suddenly reverses momentum in the next point, annihilating a backhand winner cross-court when 15-40 looked inevitable. We end up at deuce, Nadal saving one game-point with a forehand into the corner and Medvedev wasting another with a double – he looks flustered, losing patience with the ball-kids for whatever reason. That’ll sort it. Nadal then misses break point with a half-arsed backhand, and eventually successive aces secure a colossal hold. *Nadal 2-6 (5)6-7 Medvedev But a fine return from Medvedev, chasing out wide, catches Nadal on his way in with a ball that dips onto his tootsies, then the crowd think Nadal has won another terrific point when Medvedev drills into the net with the court gaping ... but they’d not heard the out call that preceded it. All of a sudden, it’s Medvedev looking the stronger, and he earns his first set point ... then seals it with a glooooorious backhand down the line! Well might he noise up the crowd! He is so, so close and what a set (of tennis) that was! *Nadal 2-6 6-6 Medvedev (5-3) The match hits the two-hour mark as Medvedev trusts himself at the net to put away a volley for 3-3. Both men are expending a frankly terrifying amount of energy here – if Medvedev can win this, you couldn’t see Nadal outlasting him to win three sets on the spin – but he might not need to, more forehand behaviour regaining the mini-break! *Nadal 2-6 6-6 Medvedev (3-2) In a breaker, I’d almost always back the bigger server, but this is Nadal, and it’s he who gets the mini-break when a poor first volley causes a wide second one. Nadal is really turning up the forehand power here, but after a succession are returned like it’s nothing, he nets and we’re back on serve. Nadal 2-6 6-6 Medvedev* Medvedev swipes a backhand long for 15-all, and what a sapping set this has been and still is. Beautiful. Medvedev sends Nadal to hither and yon for 30-15, but another lush drop sets up 30-all ... so an ace banged down the middle and another dominating serve and drive-volley quickly secure the breaker! Medvedev is an all-round animal – he does pretty much everything superbly or better. *Nadal 2-6 6-5 Medvedev Ah, I owe an apology: the disturbance earlier was a protest at the treatment of refugees; well done that person. Back to the present, Nadal nets a weak backhand for 30-all, and we might now be living the crucial stage of the match: a break here will seem a lot like curtains, but Medvedev goes long on the backhand – you don’t see that happen often. Still, we end up at deuce when Nadal nets again, and he does just enough to make advantage only to go wide on the forehand, picking up a short ball – you don’t see that often either. He closes out, though, guaranteeing himself a breaker – at least. Nadal 2-6 5-5 Medvedev* Has Nadal’s chance gone? Medvedev powers through a hold to 15, the first serves back and ensconced, and Nadal now has to go to the well again, just a couple of minutes after fighting so hard to achieve disappointment. *Nadal 2-6 5-4 Medvedev Nadal nets an overhead for 0-15, then spoons a forehand; he’s still getting very little for free, which is why errors, technically unforced but really the weight of pressure, are pockmarking his game. he gets to 15-30, though, then Medvedev really steps into the point, unfurling the drive backhand to raise two break-back points. Nadal saves the first with a serve-volley ... and the second with a monstrous inside-out forehand to the corner, setting up the put-away! Onto deuce we go, whereupon Medvedev sticks a backhand onto the final fibre of the sideline! Naturally, we then pause for the removal of some kind of intruder – what a twonk – before another gorgeous drop saves Nadal again! Absolute hands! This is developing into exactly the match we hoped – though let’s be real, we need Nadal to win this set – but he’s struggling, another drop opening the court only for one to catch the frame and land fractionally long! Yeah, alright, Nadal obviously dredges an ace from the deepest recesses of his soul to save another break-back point ... but botches his first set-point with a tired backhand into the net. This is expletive brutal in the best possible way, and Medvedev’s ability to make every point an occasion is just too much! Down advantage, Nadal goes long on the forehand, and that is an unbelievable game from Medvedev, who just would not let go! Nadal 2-6 5-3 Medvedev* Medvedev’s first double of the match gives Nadal 15-all, and though a backhand down the line puts away a short ball, at 30-all here comes another chance. AND MEDVEDEV NETS A BACKHAND! Nadal’s slice puts him under pressure, zoning low over the net – Medvedev’s first serves have vanished here – and a tremendous point from Nadal, a drop so good it incites a slip, seals another break! Nadal will now serve for the set! *Nadal 2-6 4-3 Medvedev Is Medvedev back into it? He makes 0-30 before a wickedly swerving second-serve, right onto the edge, facilitates the clean-up, then we have a point like so many others: Medvedev dictating, Nadal unable to find a route into the rally, and a long backhand gives us 15-40. Yup, that was Medvedev’s dip, it lasted three games – good luck with that Rafa old pal – and another error – another backhand that drops long – secures the break-back! “Somewhere I read that the calling is an automated system,” says Andrew Benton, “all done by modern tech, no live voices involved, only pre-recordeds. And no human error! Can that be so? Are there no lines-people on court?” I’m not sure about that. I was in the discotheque last night, I admit, but I’m absolutely certain the voices are changing – though perhaps that’s part of the show. Nadal 2-6 4-2 Medvedev* Medvedev could use a cheap hold here, and an ace gives him 30-0, then another seals his first game in three. *Nadal 2-6 4-1 Medvedev The calling of “Out!” ramps up another level as Medvedev goes long – there was definite pleasure, and a kind of pedagogical disappointment, in that – and an ace, his first of the match, gives Nadal 40-15. Then a serve out wide allows a simple volley at the net, and MOmentum – we’re in Australia, so – has switched! Nadal 2-6 3-1 Medvedev* All Nadal can do is keep holding; he needs Medvedev’s level to drop, otherwise he’s hoping for a point here and there, because he doesn’t have the game to dominate. Goodness, we’ve finally got here, after all these years. But he gets 0-15 and a second serve – in the context a chance – then Medvedev goes long on the backhand! A sniff! And HAVE A LOOK! At 15-30, the longest rally of the match, 40 shots, at the end of which Nadal invents an angle, a backhand slice from the corner that arcs to the opposite side of the court, dropping over the net and away! That is ridiculous, and with two break points Nadal converts the second! Are there any tougher competitors in the entirety of sport? I am in absolute awe! *Nadal 2-6 2-1 Medvedev Better from Nadal, dictating the first point of the game with his forehand, but he still has to work like a beast to win it; he’s getting nowt for free. Incidentally, is it just me, or has the calling of “out” gone up a notch this tournament – whoever’s doing it seems to be taking serious pleasure in the definitiveness of his style, almost offering the players out. Anyway, from 30-0 we end up at 30-all – Nadal just can’t get a breath – but he wins the next two points to hold again. Nadal 2-6 1-1 Medvedev* In theory, a couple of big forehands is all it takes to alter the flow of this, but Medvedev is doing a brilliant job of taking them away, patient in the rallies as he works Nadal about the court, not allowing him to set. But a long forehand off a net-cord gives Nadal a sniff at 30-15 ... and a fifth ace immediately follows, then a serve out wide and simple clean-up at the net. Nadal just can’t get anything going. *Nadal 2-6 1-0 Medvedev Can Nadal find something? At the moment, it’s hard to even imagine what that might be, because Medvedev is just too good, asking all the questions. He’s moving so well that it’s tricky for Nadal to manufacture angles – he just gets to everything in good time – but this is a better service-game for him, getting the forehand going to dictate a couple of rallies. Even so, an error means he winds up at 40-30, under pressure even when Medvedev barely exerts any, before he closes out for his first game in six. Nadal 2-6 Medvedev* This is not something you see often, Rafael Nadal floundering in a final; I’m feeling quite emotional typing it. But he paggas a forehand winner to remind himself that he still can ... then an ace follows, of course it does. Medvedev is serving beautifully here, and he soon earns himself two set points, Nadal nets on the return, and that is five – games – in – a – row for Medvedev, who eases to the first set 6-2! *Nadal 2-5 Medvedev Nadal opens the game with his first double of the match, then another follows! Medvedev is telling here, and he outlasts Nadal in the next point, a long rally that he finishes with a forehand down the line, pouncing onto a short ball and punishing the winner. 0-40, Nadal goes long with a forehand volley, and this is one-way traffic! Medvedev has the double-break and, for the now at least, Nadal’s number! Nadal 2-4 Medvedev* If anyone’s going to win easily, you’d assume it’ll be Medvedev – Nadal needs to grind him down, and currently, that’s not looking likely. But Nadal opens his shoulders on a forehand, turning up the pace and surprising Medvedev, who nets; 0-15. Medvedev, though, is so composed out there, an ace giving him 30-15 – he’s only missed two first serves so far – then at 40-15, Nadal gets the sonic-boom forehand going ... before Medvedev closes out the consolidation, and that’s three in a row for him now. *Nadal 2-3 Medvedev Pressure again, Medvedev making 0-30 on Nadal’s serve, and when Nadal goes long on the backhand – at the end of a really well put-together point by Medvedev, working his man about the court – we have three break points. And only one is required, Nadal looping another tame backhand over the baseline! Medvedev looks the better player, and this had been coming. “I still can’t believe Nadal is playing for his 21st Grand Slam title,” emails Yash Gupta. “I wasn’t much into tennis until nine-year-old me watched Nadal beat the greatest of all and my favourite, Roger Federer, in the 2008 final. Since then, there have been questions almost on a yearly basis: can he continue? Can his body handle all this? In many ways watching Nadal play brings the excitement in itself. Sorry Daniel but let’s go Rafa.” I’ve no dog in this one, both are amazing. I can take pleasure in either winning. Nadal 2-2 Medvedev* Medvedev’s serve is very nicely grooved and Nadal is trying to vary his responses, taking the pace off to set up the forehand. But Medvedev’s backhand is also working nicely, and he holds to 15. “Rafa in 4 or Daniil in 5 or Rafa in 5 or Daniil in 4,” tweets John McEnerney, “but I don’t see this being done in 3 by either of them. As Mills Lane &amp; Marvin Gaye say ‘Let’s get it on’. Ding-dong battle coming up.” That’s it – you can make a case for absolutely anything. *Nadal 2-1 Medvedev Nadal goes long with a backhand, and it’s Medvedev with the rallying edge at the moment. Nadal, though, has plenty of time to adapt – there aren’t many, if any, who are better – but he’s being directed around the court at the moment, and at the end of this latest point, a 26-shotter, Medvedev absolutely clatters a backhand winner flat down the line. 0-30, and the first little opportunity of the match. And there it is again, but at the net, Medvedev races to the net and goes straight down the middle with both corners available; somehow, Nadal flicks a pick-up from by his toes for a clean winner, then puts away a stop-volley with 15-40 looking inevitable! This has looked like a break to love, but he we are, at 30-all and cooking! Nadal’s backhand is causing him aggro here, and Medvedev picks it out, prompting a response to drop long; again, Nadal then rescues himself with a volley! He has been almost perfect at the net so far and he’ll be pursuing the tactic I shouldn’t wonder, because he needs to keep the points short. Anyway, Nadal saves another break point on advantage, with a vicious, spitting service, then closes out quickly, and he has is finding what he needs when he needs it. But for how long? Nadal 1-1 Medvedev* Nadal keeps Medvedev waiting just a few seconds – his dedication to the art of gentlemanly gamesmanship is delicious. For all the good it does him: Medvedev holds to 15, sealing the game with an ace out wide, and he’s picked up where he left off against Tsitsipas. *Nadal 1-0 Medvedev There’s a decent racket as the players pause before the start, then Nadal takes the first point of the match with a trademark forehand whip. It might just be the greatest shot in the history of the sport, but he hooks one wide for 15-all. Then Medvedev goes long on the backhand return and wide on the forehand – the players aren’t quite settled yet, Nadal netting a forehand for 40-30, then a backhand for deuce. The rallies are starting to come now, Nadal looking to dictate with that forehand, and he quickly closes out to get on the board. “Yes the colour is tone-perfect,” says Anna McCarthy, “as if it represents him being fully realised somehow.” It’s got a level of clarity to it, or something. I am lost in it. Right, here we go! Of course, these two have Major-final history: they met at the US in 2019, Nadal winning in five after Medvedev fought back from 0-2 down. But things have changed a lot since then: Medvedev is much better, while Nadal has been out for six months; just getting to this point is a ridiculous piece of work on his part. The trophy sits by the net and the players perform the toss. Nadal wins and opts to serve. Out he comes, in his usual affirming shade of mauve. I think it might remind me of something from my childhood, because I find its vividness almost moving. This is Nadal’s 17th Australian Open. Effort. Here come the players! Thinking more about the match-up, I wonder if it’ll be settled by the battle of the forehands: Nadal’s loopy, hooky, kicking brute v Medvedev’s flatter whipcrack. Again, I’m finding myself leaning Nadal, but it might just be conditioning. It’s brilliant that people, Nadal included, are surprised that Nadal has been playing tennis well. Of all the things! Whatever next?! And yet, it is surprising. Sport! Medvedev’s interviews have become as unmissable as his tennis over the last bit. He’s got just the right mix of honesty, earnesty and edge, somehow humble and likable while nurturing indiscriminate grievances. A heady mix. Mac has gone for Medvedev in five, which sounds fair, but you could pretty much pick and justify any outcome. Both our finalists have been back from the brink. Medvedev did brilliantly to fight back from 0-2 down to Auger-Aliassime, saving a match point, while Nadal did likewise against Shapovalov – though his was a more compliant opponent. We could be here some time. We’re now watching the wonderful Ash Barty. What a human being she is, and if she can keep at it there are a fair few Slams out there for her because no one can match her consistency or equanimity. Not gonna lie, I’m still buzzing from yesterday’s men’s doubles. Winning a major with my best mate is extremely high on my to-do list, and seeing Kyrgios and Kokkinakis pull it off did my soul good. He can’t do it again can he? Er yeah, he can. In 2017, Rafael Nadal won the US Open without beating a single top-20, opponent, the only time that’s ever happened. And though this won’t be that, there’d still be something of the sneak about it: in the weaker half of the draw, with no Novak Djokovic (and no, Novak Djokovic), then Alexander Zverev eliminated early. But to win the final, he’ll have to go some. Daniil Medvedev is a serious business and, having won Flushing Meadow, holds himself like a champion and knows he can do it when he really needs to. We still can’t be certain about him - he’ll probably turn up - in the way we can be certain about Nadal - he’ll definitely turn up. But this has the makings of a terrific contest, because the match-up is tight. Historically, Nadal struggles - relatively speaking! - against tall players with good backhands - think Murray, Djokovic, Wawrinka and early Del Potro - because their height neutralises his biggest weapon, the high forehand into the aforementioned good backhand - and Medvedev is absolutely in their category. One way of looking at things. Another, though, would note that Medvedev tends to win matches by serving big, keeping a good length and not missing from the back - he doesn’t hit many winners off the ground, so if he doesn’t make his first serves he can struggle to close out big matches because he’s relying on his opponent missing. Nadal, on the other hand, is similar in that he doesn’t miss many from the baseline, but different in that he also hits plenty of winners. That’s one reason this blog leans towards a 21st major rather than a second. But the main motivator is that number and what it means: Nadal knows he won’t get many more goes at being tennis’ most, er, winningest man of all time, which is to say he’ll be absolutely feral out there, in the best possible way. Get settled, because this is going to be great. Play: 7.30pm local, 8.30am GMTAlex Preston’s fourth novel sprang from the notion of crafting a “grown-up” Moonfleet, he explains in his acknowledgments, adding “I hope this is close”. For anyone who’s familiar with J Meade Falkner’s swashbuckling 1898 tale of smuggling and shipwreck, the answer is a boisterous yes, but readers for whom that evocative title draws a blank need know only this: you’re in for a treat. Its short, salty chapters are crammed with murder, treason and illicit embraces, with chases, battles and perilous high-seas skulduggery. There is international espionage, a whisper of witchcraft, and a cast of orphans, rogues and redcoats. There are, should you still need persuading, maps. Winchelsea takes its title from its East Sussex setting, a crumbling town whose heyday is long passed. It opens there in 1742, when heroine Goody is barely 16 years old. Saved from drowning as a babe, she is the adopted daughter of a French herbalist and one Ezekiel Brown, a local who straddles two worlds, being both physician and – like all Browns before him – “cellarman”, allowing smugglers known as the Mayfield gang to stow their spoils in the maze of tunnels that run from his home, Paradise, down beneath the streets and out to the seashore. But Ezekiel is also a Catholic, and he’s been diverting profits to the Jacobite cause – reckless behaviour that soon leaves Goody running the operation. She seeks out her older brother Francis – also adopted, and Winchelsea’s first dark-skinned resident, having escaped from a slave ship as a boy. Together, they become smugglers, aligning themselves with the rival Hawkhurst gang to avenge Ezekiel’s death. They continue, also, to send funds to “the king over the water”, AKA Charles Stuart. While there is incident aplenty in Goody’s passage from untested child to storied adult, there are insights, too. Preston, a critic for these pages, muses as ably on fatherhood as on what a person’s heart does in the moment before they fire a fatal shot, and through his patchwork narrative (most of Goody’s story is “filtered” through the pen of another) plays with notions of literary ownership and authenticity. Although convincingly anchored in the 18th century, Winchelsea remains, too, a product of its own time. Goody sees how uneasy Francis is, for instance, watching morris men caper in blackface, and she is also an outsider, feeling most comfortable “neither as woman nor man, but in the space in between”. Note, too, her name: for all the cinematic gore that spills from these pages (a threat such as “give us one mote of trouble, we’ll wring your liver” is meant only in the most literal sense), notions of right and wrong aren’t entirely cast aside. What holds the novel together as much as its driving plot are its incantatory atmosphere and spellbinding language. Nights are noisy with owls and fieldfares, “their lonely twits falling down through the dark”, while meaning oozes via sound and rhythm from antique vocabulary such as “fallalery” and “yelloching”. Winchelsea closes in the way of all truly cracking yarns: with the tantalising promise that there might just be more adventures to come. • Winchelsea by Alex Preston is published by Canongate (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWhile Cate Le Bon’s last album, 2019’s Reward, was written in relative seclusion in the Lake District, at least that was through choice. The disorienting pandemic isolation that was the backdrop to the creation of her sixth LP has resulted in a far more introspective record. Composed entirely alone (she’s described it as an “uninterrupted vacuum”) and recorded with her longstanding collaborator Samur Khouja, Pompeii is noticeably more subdued than much of her earlier work. Where once there was a playfulness in the arrangements, the slow and austere songs here sound as if they’re carrying the weight of the world on their shoulders. There’s little respite in the lyrics either, which frequently add to the feeling of claustrophobia: “Did you see me putting pain in a stone?”, “I’m kicking at the corner/ Recycling air”. There are still plenty of moments to savour: a succinct guitar solo on Remembering Me that says all it needs to in 10 seconds; strident brass flourishes on Running Away; the relative lightness of touch on the gorgeous Moderation and Harbour; the occasional echoes of Julia Holter and mid-70s Bowie throughout. Indeed, on one level it works well as a companion piece to the collective lockdown experience, right down to the uniformity of pace and mood. Whether that’s a period anyone wishes to revisit, however, is a different matter.The greatest lesson Ruth Slenczynska learned from the Russian composer Sergei Rachmaninov was that sounds have colour. Nearly 90 years ago, the nine year-old Slenczynska was practising one of Rachmaninov’s preludes when he asked her to join him at the window. It was springtime in Paris, and the avenues were lined with mimosa trees laden with fluffy, golden blossoms. “He said: ‘You see that? That’s what you want to bring to your sound – gold.’ I said: ‘Show me.’ So he sat down at the piano and put colour into his sound, he made it meaningful. And a little kid can copy anything,” she said. Next month, Slenczynska, who has just celebrated her 97th birthday, will release her latest album after signing a global record deal. Born in California to Polish parents, the pianist gave her first recital at the age of four and was heralded as one of the greatest child prodigies since Mozart. She made her debut with a full orchestra in Paris at seven. “Playing music is like taking a ride on a bus – you mustn’t let your passenger get off until he arrives at his destination,” she said. “Keep them interested in a beautiful way. I still try to do that.” Each track of My Life in Music, released by Decca Classics, recalls a pianist or composer Slenczynska knew personally. Her friends and mentors have included a string of 20th-century classical music giants. Not only Rachmaninov – she is considered to be his last living pupil and often wears a Fabergé egg necklace he gave her – but also Artur Schnabel, Josef Hofmann, Egon Petri, Alfred Cortot and Samuel Barber. She is quick to point out, however, that the life of a child prodigy was not easy. Slenczynska’s father, Joseph, a one-time head of the Warsaw Conservatory, was a tyrannical figure determined that she become a successful musician at any cost. She remarked in her 1957 autobiography, Forbidden Childhood, about the emotional stress of having to practise nine hours a day without room for mistakes. “Nobody chooses to be a prodigy,” she said now. “I was pushed very strongly by my father, who thought it was a way to make money. Really, I was never a child.” Slenczynska withdrew from performing when she was 15 and eventually cut off her father completely. She enrolled for a psychology degree and did not return to the concert stage until 1951. Since then, she has recorded 10 LPs for Decca Classics while holding a series of university teaching jobs. She has played for Michelle Obama and five US presidents, including Herbert Hoover, John F Kennedy, Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, as well as performing a four-hand duet with Harry Truman. Slenczynska was in Washington for a concert when she received a mysterious phone call asking if she could alter her plans. The next morning, she was picked up “by a gorgeous car” and driven – to her surprise – to the White House. “We got to a great big double door, with a marine on each side. I walked in and there was Mr Truman, president of the United States. He shook my hand and said: ‘Would you like to play the duet with me?’” The president, it transpired, had been practising a Mozart sonata and wanted to play with the best. “We sat down on the bench together and it went very well. He played very musically and attractively. Afterwards everyone applauded. Then I was pulled away and I said: ‘I didn’t even get a picture!’” Years later, after a concert in Kansas City, she had an unexpected visitor. “It was a nasty, cold evening with sleet coming down. I was changing backstage, when there was a knock at the door. I thought it was the lady who brought me. I opened the door and Mr Truman came in. ‘You played four hands with me once, remember?’ he said. And we had the most marvellous chat.” For all the huge changes she has lived through since her childhood debut, Slenczynska’s commitment to the art of music and performance has remained steadfast. During the first Covid-19 lockdown in 2020, she uploaded home recordings of Beethoven’s sonatas to YouTube to celebrate his 250th birthday. Her next recital, to mark her own, takes place in Pennsylvania on 6 February. Her age, she says, has “kind of crept up on” her. “All at once you look back and say: ‘Oh, my goodness, that happened 50 years ago.’ I still keep on my dresser a picture of my lovely husband. And every once in a while, it dawns on me – he died in 2000. But I’d marry him again if I could, he’s still my sweetheart.” Does she have any regrets? “No,” she says, “looking back doesn’t do any good. Look forward, and make that as beautiful as you can.”Sir Crispin Tickell, who has died of pneumonia aged 91, was a career diplomat. He advised four prime ministers, had formidable intellect and displayed impeccable timing when intervening in policy. For example, when John Major was desperate for a big idea to present to the Earth Summit in Rio in 1992 to help the UK seem visionary, Tickell reached into his briefcase and pulled out his plan for the Darwin Initiative, a scheme to protect biodiversity in the poorest countries. He had been working on the idea for some time and been waiting for the right moment to appear. Major was delighted with it, the scheme was launched in a speech at Rio and Tickell became the first chair of its advisory committee. In a long career he had often found himself in the right place at the right time. In 1956, as a junior Foreign Office official, he dispatched a Royal Navy destroyer to deter a threatened Argentinian invasion of the Falkland Islands, an intervention that was successful. He was involved in many negotiations on behalf of the British government, from arms control with the Russians, to entry talks to the European Community in 1972. But perhaps his greatest contribution to forming policy was on the environment. In 1977, while taking a sabbatical at Harvard he wrote Climatic Change and World Affairs. This was one of the first, and for at least a decade, the only book on the coming climate crisis, and what governments should do to prevent it. He argued for mandatory international pollution control, something that is finally taking shape. Margaret Thatcher credited him with convincing her of the science of global warming and the danger that it posed for the planet, which resulted in her speech on the subject to the Royal Society in September 1988. This brought climate change into the mainstream of British politics. Tickell was also concerned with the controversial subject of world population and the fact that extra billions of people were inevitably going to cause problems for biodiversity and the climate. But rather than draconian measures to curb population growth his emphasis was on being positive – better reproductive health, education for women and lifting millions out of poverty. He thought economic security was the best way to reduce family size. Whenever the government position allowed him to do so he helped to steer environment goals in the right direction – and was proud of his successful efforts as permanent secretary at the Overseas Development Administration (1984-87) to put an end to all aid for anything to do with tobacco. Tickell was born in London, the son of the writer and historian Jerrard Tickell and his wife, Renée (nee Haynes), also a writer. Their son was described early in his career as one of the brightest men of his generation, attending Westminster school and graduating from Christ Church, Oxford in 1952 with a first in modern history. He then went straight into the Coldstream Guards as a second lieutenant to do his national service before joining the Foreign Office in 1954. His first job was to look after the British Antarctic Territory, something that was strongly linked to the politics of South America and the Falklands, but was also central to the academic study of this pristine wilderness and the science of climate. There followed a series of postings to British embassies as his career progressed, including The Hague, Mexico City and Paris. By 1970 he was private secretary to various chancellors of the Duchy of Lancaster and his impressive grasp of detail was found to be vital in the negotiations for the UK entry into the European Community. He married Chloe Gunn in 1954 and they had two sons and a daughter. The marriage ended in divorce in 1976. Tickell’s career continued to prosper and a second posting to Mexico was as ambassador, a job that allowed him to indulge his passion for studying the pre-Columbian art of the region. It was during that posting that the Queen knighted him, in 1983, on board the Royal Yacht Britannia while she was on an official visit to the country. His final diplomatic post was as British ambassador to the United Nations and permanent representative on the UN Security Council from 1987 until 1990. It was in this post that he played an active part in the talks to end the Iran/Iraq war. But in no sense did Tickell retire after that. He chaired Major’s government panel on Sustainable Development from 1994 until 2000 and was a member of two Labour government taskforces. He returned to Oxford to be warden of Green College from 1990 to 1997 and was chancellor of the University of Kent from 1996 to 2006. He became president of the Royal Geographical Society (1990-93) and of the Marine Biological Society (1990-2001). He found time in 1996 to write a biography of Mary Anning, the now celebrated Lyme Regis fossil hunter who was his great-great aunt, and he continued to give lectures on a variety of subjects well into his 80s. Tickell was showered with honorary degrees and fellowships in the UK, US and in Europe, and had a minor planet and a Mexican volcano named after him. In 1989 he was appointed GCMG. All his life he believed in staying fit, being a cycling commuter on a folding bike from his home in St John’s Wood to the Foreign Office, and latterly going on long walks near his home, a converted barn in the Cotswolds. True to the civil service tradition he always remained politically neutral. He is survived by his second wife, Penelope (nee Thorne), whom he married in 1977, and the two sons, James and Oliver, and daughter, Oriana, from his first marriage. • Crispin Charles Cervantes Tickell, diplomat and academic, born 25 August 1930; died 25 January 2022The only lingering question as Viktor Hovland celebrated a sixth tournament win in under two years was how Rory McIlroy was simultaneously taking out his frustration. McIlroy needed a birdie at the 72nd hole of the Dubai Desert Classic to claim the title for a record-equalling third time. Par would have been sufficient for the Northern Irishman to join Hovland and Richard Bland in a play-off. Instead, disaster and drama struck; McIlroy found water with his approach to the par five. After a bogey six consigned McIlroy to third, the four-times major winner was a picture of agony and anger as he made a speedy exit from the Emirates Club. It did not look a wise idea for anybody to get too close. McIlroy’s denouement will sting long beyond departure from the UAE. Onlookers will speculate over whether McIlroy was correct to take on the last green from 260 yards. He had miraculously saved par from a bush on the previous hole, perhaps rendering a further dice with danger unwise. The counterpoints relate to McIlroy’s regular – and regularly successful – policy of being aggressive and that he was hardly planning to mis-hit a fairway wood. McIlroy did not become essential viewing by playing percentages. McIlroy knew as soon as his shot was airborne that it would find the pond that protects the 18th green. As a putt for par slid past, McIlroy knew his fate. Dubai has been good to McIlroy but it has also been the scene of the occasionally painful blow. Hovland had finished eagle-birdie to reach 12 under par. Bland, enjoying a career resurgence at 48, converted from 22ft at the 18th for the same aggregate. Yet McIlroy, playing further back in the field, had holes to spare and the trophy within his grasp. For the second time in the desert in little over two months – McIlroy was also in pole position to win the DP World Tour Championship – capitulation was to prove the theme. Hovland, the outstanding 24-year-old from Oslo, will rise to world No 3 after this triumph. He has the leading duo, Jon Rahm and Collin Morikawa, firmly in his sights. “I have quite a lot to prove to be able to beat those guys but this is a good start,” said the Norwegian. “It is very rewarding to see all the hard work paying off. I guess being No 3 is pretty crazy but that stuff can vary week-to-week. I’m not going to let that stuff dictate my mood or how I do things.” On the first replaying of the 18th, Bland lipped out from 6ft for a four. Hovland tapped in for precisely that after comfortably finding the putting surface in two. Having only turned professional in the summer of 2019, Hovland continues to provide cause for great European hope. Hovland’s 66 was the finest round of day four and five fewer than McIlroy. “I posted a good number to make it interesting for the guys behind me,” Hovland added. “I knew that I could post that good score today. I played some good golf this week but I didn’t quite get the same momentum that I did today.” Hovland’s eagle at the 17th came after he drove the green at the dog-leg par four, with his putt rolled in from 33ft. “I might make that putt one in 20 times,” he added. The quintet that shared fourth included Justin Harding, who led going into the final round, plus the English duo of Tyrrell Hatton and Sam Horsfield. Tommy Fleetwood, playing in the company of McIlroy and Harding, slipped to a 75 for a tie for 12th. Pádraig Harrington, at 50, secured a top 10 finish.Dominic Cummings has said it is his “duty to get rid” of Boris Johnson as prime minister, describing it as “sort of like fixing the drains”. The prime minister’s former chief adviser called his former boss a “complete fuckwit” whose only preoccupations were “Big Ben’s bongs” and “looking at maps” to “order the building of things” in his honour. Cummings, who has sent evidence to the Cabinet Office inquiry led by Sue Gray, said it was imperative Johnson was removed from office. Speaking to New York magazine, he called it “an unpleasant but necessary job” and said it was legitimate to remove a prime minister who had won a big election victory if they were not up to the job. Johnson is expected to be handed a heavily redacted version of the Sue Gray report into alleged breaches of lockdown rules in Downing Street early next week, as allies briefed over the weekend that an operation to save him from a vote of no confidence was winning round MPs. The prime minister is expected to travel to Ukraine on Tuesday and release the long-awaited levelling up white paper on Wednesday as a show of purpose to his restive MPs. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, one of those in contention to replace Johnson should he be forced out, said on Sunday Johnson was “absolutely” the best person to lead the Conservative party into the next general election. “There is no contest. There is no discussion,” she said. “He has achieved an 80-seat majority for the Conservative party. He has delivered on the Covid vaccine programme, the booster programme, he’s delivered on Brexit and he will do a fantastic job winning the next election for the Conservative party.” Johnson’s chief of staff, Dan Rosenfield, was in the spotlight on Sunday as the Sunday Telegraph revealed he had been at the first day of the England v India Test at Lord’s on 12 August, three days before Taliban forces entered the Afghan capital. Rosenfield, along with the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, and Johnson’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, is among those expected to be criticised in the redacted version of Gray’s report – which the Metropolitan police have asked to be stripped of details of the most egregious alleged rule-breaking while a police investigation is carried out. Johnson has told angry MPs he will oversee a full clearout of the No 10 operation, which the Guardian understands could include a number of close allies of his wife, Carrie Johnson, who have had a power base in No 10 since the departure of Cummings and his associates. Cummings revealed one of the most damaging No 10 lockdown gatherings on his Substack, where Reynolds had emailed staff inviting them to drinks in the garden and to “bring your own booze”. Cummings has said Johnson was warned about the gathering, which the prime minister has admitted to attending but claims to have thought it was a work event. The former adviser told New York magazine Johnson was driven entirely by what would be in the papers the next day. “In January 2020 I was sitting in No 10 with Boris and the complete fuckwit is just babbling on about: ‘Will Big Ben bong for Brexit on 31 January?’” he said. Asked if it was fair that he was mounting a campaign to remove his former boss, Cummings said: “What’s fairness got to do with anything? It’s politics. All this is not fair. The fact that someone wins an election doesn’t mean that they should just stay there for years, right? If you’ve got a duffer, if you think someone can’t do the job, or is unfit for the job. “You know, as he said to me: ‘I’m the fucking king around here and I’m going to do what I want.’ That’s not OK. He’s not the king. He can’t do what he wants. Once you realise someone is operating like that then your duty is to get rid of them, not to just prop them up.” Cummings also told the magazine Johnson acted as if considering “what would a Roman emperor do? So, the only thing he was really interested in – genuinely excited about – was, like, looking at maps. Where could he order the building of things?” Cummings said Johnson fantasised about “monuments to him in an Augustine fashion”.A Holyrood politician who received death threats after she called for a more realistic debate about paedophiles has described how the experience prompted her to disclose her own abuse as a child. Speaking in detail for the first time since the row earlier this month, the Scottish National party MSP Karen Adam told the Guardian she was hurt by “the injustice of being called a ‘paedophile enabler’ when I’m actually a survivor of this myself. But it was a great cost to me personally, and I felt that my arm was twisted to do so.” Adam, 46, who was elected last year, became embroiled in a fierce debate after responding to the conviction of Ghislaine Maxwell. She wrote on Twitter: “Paedophiles and predators are people. Not bogeymen under the bed. Not Mac-wearing flashers in the street, faceless and nameless. They are our family, friends and colleagues.” On reflection, she concedes that amount of nuance is hard to put across in a tweet. “But in my experience, it is often the most unlikely, unsuspecting people around us who do these things and that’s how they manage to get away with it,” she said. “And that’s why it’s hard for children and young people to come forward because they feel nobody’s going to believe that uncle so-and-so has touched them inappropriately, because he’s a part of their family.” She said nothing had prepared her for the backlash that built through the early days of January. Alongside many who supported her point, brutally critical responses flooded in, describing her views as “shocking”, “degenerate” and branding her a “paedophile sympathiser”. She was told to kill herself and threatened with being “put through a wood chipper”. A Police Scotland investigation continues. “I felt heartsick,” she said. “It started to dawn on me that this was not accidental, that people were perhaps purposely misrepresenting my words.” Chris McEleny, an Inverclyde councillor and general secretary of Alex Salmond’s Alba party, responded that Adam’s view was proof that “the SNP has been captured by ideological zealots”. Alba, founded by the former first minister last spring before failing to secure any seats in the Holyrood election, issued a press release describing the tweet as “grotesque” and saying “to attempt to humanise the most vile behaviour in society is an appalling error in judgment”. McEleny later said he “rejected in the strongest possible way” any threats made to Adam and issued a plea to conduct political discussion online “in a much nicer way”. Adam claims abuse came from US-based Trump supporters, Tommy Robinson supporters and Alba supporters – as well as those advocating gender-critical viewpoints and British unionists. “They’re purposely misrepresenting my words for political gain and to support political movements. I’ve seen this before. The more open I am about my progressive views, the more I am called a pervert, or a predator enabler, for supporting trans rights, for supporting LGBT rights overall,” she said. The MSP for Banffshire and Buchan Coast, which covers parts of Aberdeenshire and Moray, had previously spoken in public about being the parent of a child who has experienced sexual abuse. “My daughter has been quite outspoken about her own experiences, and I always ask her permission before I discuss anything,” she said. She had never before disclosed her own abuse, even to close family members, but the ferocity of the backlash changed her mind. “I felt I had to disclose my own story to take the focus away from her,” she said. It was the first time her father knew what had happened. “It was overwhelming. I couldn’t eat. I felt so sick. I couldn’t sleep. My mind was buzzing at night-time. I had put it behind me and moved on. And now I’m confronted with it all again.” Adam’s experience might initially be dismissed as another flare-up of online outrage and political point-scoring. But the personal consequences have been real enough, and reveals some uncomfortable truths about the reality of being a woman in Holyrood, the pitfalls of social media and the weaponisation of certain subjects in an ongoing culture war. While she is grateful for the support she has received from colleagues across the chamber, Adam says being a woman in public life in Scotland in 2022 is “extremely difficult”. She said: “I’ve come across a lot of misogyny …I’m often infantilised, people question my decisions, even in regards to setting up my staff team. And this is just everyday stuff, without even getting to the abuse.” She added: “The most important email I received during this whole time was from a survivor who told me that they felt incredibly empowered because this was spoken about in a public sphere. You’re taught to feel shame and stigma and not talk about these things. It’s time for that to end.” In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800; adult survivors can seek help at Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalStephen Breyer, the supreme court justice who announced his retirement this week, “did not want to die on the bench”. So his brother, the federal judge Charles Breyer, told the Washington Post at the end of a momentous week in US politics. Democrats, meanwhile, rejected Republican complaints that Joe Biden’s pledge to nominate the first Black woman to the court meant he was prioritising politics over qualifications, or endorsing racially based affirmative action, or that the new justice would be too liberal. The Democratic chair of the Senate judiciary committee hinted at claims some criticism may be racially motivated, saying he hoped Republicans were not “doing it for personal reasons”. Breyer’s decision to step down, at 83, gives Biden the chance to nominate a liberal replacement. The pick will not alter the balance of the court, which conservatives dominate 6-3 after Donald Trump capitalised on ruthless Republican tactics to install three justices in four years. But progressives campaigned to convince Breyer to quit, many citing what happened when Ruth Bader Ginsburg died on the court in September 2020. Republicans who held the Senate confirmed her replacement – the hardline Catholic Amy Coney Barrett, nominated after Trump promised to pick a woman – before the November election. Democrats should be able to confirm Biden’s pick without Republican votes but they face losing the Senate in November. With that in mind, the campaign to convince Breyer picked up speed. Breyer spoke about how the court should not be politicised but one activist, Brian Fallon of Demand Justice, told the Post: “You have to view this as a political fight. It’s not a legal fight.” Charles Breyer told the Post his brother “was aware of this campaign. I think what impressed him was not the campaign but the logic of the campaign. “And he thought he should take into account the fact that this was an opportunity for a Democratic president – and he was appointed by a Democratic president [Bill Clinton] – to fill his position with someone who is like-minded. He did not want to die on the bench.” On Sunday, Dick Durbin of Illinois, chair of the Senate judiciary committee, told NBC’s Meet the Press: “I didn’t feel that external pressure was really helpful at all. [Breyer] had to make this decision. It is an important and timely decision in his life as to the right moment. And I didn’t want to push him, and I didn’t.” But a congressman who campaigned for Breyer to retire, Mondaire Jones of New York, told the Post that though “people adore Ruth Bader Ginsburg … the fact is, due to decisions or non-decisions around retirement, made by her, we got Amy Coney Barrett.” The Post said the White House did not pressure Breyer. “None of the justices want to be told when to leave,” Charles Breyer said. “They want to decide themselves. And that, I think, the president and others recognised. It actually worked out.” Republicans have signaled a willingness to make life uncomfortable for Biden’s nominee – as revenge for what happened to Brett Kavanaugh. Trump’s second pick, replacing the retiring Anthony Kennedy, faced accusations of sexual assault. He vehemently denied them. Democrats prominently including Kamala Harris, then a California senator, vehemently attacked him. Harris is now vice-president, presiding over the 50-50 Senate with a vote to confirm Biden’s pick. On Friday, the Republican senator Roger Wicker told Mississippi radio the Kavanaugh confirmation was “one of the most disgraceful, shameful things and completely untruthful things that [Democrats have] ever, ever done”. Wicker also predicted that Biden’s nominee would get no Republican votes. He said so in part because the GOP expects a more progressive choice than Breyer, who Wicker called a “nice, stately liberal”. But Wicker also complained about “affirmative racial discrimination [for] someone who is the beneficiary of this sort of quota”, at a time when the court seems poised to rule such practices unconstitutional. The White House reminded Wicker of his unquestioning support for Barrett. Speaking to ABC’s This Week, Durbin said Republicans should “recall that it was Ronald Reagan who announced that he was going to appoint a woman to the supreme court, and he did, Sandra Day O’Connor, and it was Donald Trump who announced that he was going to replace Ruth Bader Ginsburg with a woman nominee as well. “African American women, if they have achieved the level of success in the practice of law and jurisprudence, they’ve done it against great odds. They’re extraordinary people … they’re all going to face the same close scrutiny. “… I just hope that those who are critical of the president’s selection aren’t doing it for personal reasons.” Tom Cotton, an Arkansas Republican senator, told Fox News Sunday Republicans would probably not support Biden’s pick “because I’ve seen dozens of his nominees to the lower courts and they’ve almost to person been leftwing ideologues”. Cotton also complained about Democrats’ treatment of Clarence Thomas, who was accused of sexual harassment in a stormy confirmation process, Biden playing a leading role as a senator from Delaware, in 1991. Most expect Democrats to move quickly. Durbin told NBC: “A great deal depends on the nominee. If the person has been before the committee seeking approval for a circuit court, then the committee knows quite a bit about that person. “If there are no new developments for someone who’s been before the committee in the previous year or two, it makes a real difference.” A leading contender, Ketanji Brown Jackson, was confirmed to the DC appeals court last June with Republican support. She replaced Merrick Garland, Biden’s attorney general who was nominated to the supreme court by Barack Obama in 2016 but blocked by Republicans. “I can just say this,” Durbin said. “It’s going to be fair, it’s going to be deliberate and we’re going to be timely about it too. This is a lifetime appointment to the highest court in the land. We should take it seriously.”In 1997, Radiohead’s bassist Colin Greenwood was asked about Pink Floyd, a band whose name kept being mentioned in relation to their then-new album OK Computer. His younger brother Jonny was a fan, he said, and had made the band watch the 1972 film Pink Floyd: Live at Pompeii. “Dave Gilmour sitting on his arse playing guitar, and Roger Waters, with long, greasy hair, sandals and dusty flares, staggers over and picks up this big beater and whacks this gong,” he protested. “Ridiculous.” It’s a quote that comes to mind while watching the live stream of the second gig by the Smile, the latest project from Jonny Greenwood and Thom Yorke – an album’s worth of material performed in the round before an audience, the band’s three members in a kind of circular cage made of LED strip lights – and considering what the difference is between the music they’re making and that of Radiohead. The most obvious point of departure is that the drum stool is occupied by Tom Skinner, of acclaimed London jazz band Sons of Kemet, whose presence noticeably alters the band’s rhythmic flow. He’s perfectly willing to play a pounding Neu!-inspired Motorik beat on We Don’t Know What Tomorrow Brings, but more often you notice the stuff that divulges his jazz chops: the suppleness and slipperiness about his playing, the emphases that don’t always appear where your rock-trained ears expect them. Equally, it’s hard to avoid the feeling that, in the Smile, Greenwood and Yorke are allowing their prog rock tendencies full rein, unencumbered by band mates’ grumbling about sandals and flares. Greenwood’s guitar riffs are complex and knotty – there’s a particularly fantastic, percussive example driving Thin Thing – the time signatures are frequently lurching and awkward, the songs’ structures are uniformly episodic. “Don’t bore us, get to the chorus,” sings Yorke on Open the Floodgates, presumably in character as the kind of unconscionable simpleton who requires such artless baubles: there certainly aren’t any choruses here. There are, occasionally, beautiful melodies (Free in the Knowledge definitely has one amid the acoustic guitars and synths softly wailing like distant sirens; it recalls the kind of thing Neil Young once might have written) but, at risk of sounding like said unconscionable simpleton, they’re often sketchy and meandering. What you remember about these songs aren’t the tunes, but the sounds and dynamics: the techno kick drum on The Same, which is programmed slightly out of kilter with the electronics so it appears to lurch drunkenly rather than tether the song; the woozy bed of analogue synthesiser drones on Speech Bubbles, the naggingly odd piano riff on opener Panavision. Elsewhere, there are notable similarities between what’s going on here and the sound Yorke and Greenwood make in their day job. Yorke’s voice, high and keening, is one of the most distinctive in rock; Radiohead’s latterday desire to meld rock and left-field electronica is much in evidence; the lyrical mood of the 14 songs they play is, well, very Radiohead, filled with dread and crushing but inevitable disappointment – “somebody is telling lies”, “what will become of us?”, “shame on you”, etc – emotions that one suspects have been sharpened by the fact these songs were formed during the Covid pandemic and the Boris Johnson administration. Free in the Knowledge even suggests revolution, albeit in that shaky, doubtful way familiar from Radiohead’s You and Whose Army? “When we get together, well then, who knows?” sings Yorke, but it doesn’t feel like a call to arms, more a distracted mutter. “OK I guess if you like this kind of thing,” offers Thin Thing. It’s far too harsh a judgment to say: well there’s the review written for you. Nevertheless, there’s certainly a grain of truth within it. It’s a performance that’s intriguing rather than dazzling, intermittently spellbinding, filled with fascinating ideas that don’t always coalesce. The Smile is available to stream on demand for a 48 hour period from 2pm GMT on 30 January. This review was updated on 30 January 2022 to correct an error: the concert was not sponsored by Spotify. It was further amended on 31 January 2022 to correct a misspelling of Jonny Greenwood’s first name as “Johnny”.That the narrator and author of this Florida-set debut share a name is no coincidence. This is raw, semi-autobiographical fiction at its most painfully honest, which could only have been written from actual experience of a teenage descent into addiction, criminality and young offender institutions. The first traps laid for the 14-year-old David, who’s run away from home to hook up with a girl, are appalling; he’s plied with crack by an old man at a bus stop and subsequently abused. What swiftly follows is the chaos of a desperate search for drugs, interspersed with rehab, reflection and reoffending. The total absence of plot makes All Day Is a Long Time feel more like a memoir. Add the science of substance abuse and its effect on the brain and body, and the book can be teeth-grindingly gruelling. But in David’s quieter moments, when Sanchez’s writing has a fine, almost hallucinatory quality, it’s also a thought-provoking portrait of the vulnerability present in family life and how easily that can turn into damage. It’s telling, too, that even when the narrator is high, he spends days in the public library trying to make sense of himself and the world in the work of Hemingway and Melville, Descartes and Faulkner. The latter is an obvious influence on the bravura stream of consciousness in the final pages. So though the ending for David is left open, the biography in the endpapers offers succour: “David Sanchez lives in Tampa, Florida. All Day Is a Long Time is his first novel.” Literature has saved him. • All Day Is a Long Time by David Sanchez is published by Sceptre (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyUS coalmining giant Peabody Energy has repeatedly submitted incorrect greenhouse gas emissions reports to the Australian government, prompting questions about the reliability of national climate data based on company assessments. The Clean Energy Regulator found Peabody had a history of filing inaccurate reports required under the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act due to calculation errors, poor record-keeping and inconsistent data collection and analysis. The mistakes were in both directions, leading to significant under- and over-reporting of emissions from the underground Wambo coalmine in New South Wales. The total error was large – when added up, out by more than 51% of the total emissions from the site – but the under- and over-reporting largely cancelled each other out. It meant the submitted total was 5.4% lower than what it should have been. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Peabody is the fifth-biggest coalminer in Australia, owning two thermal coalmines (used for electricity generation) and five metallurgical coalmines (for steelmaking). The company has agreed to hire an external consultant to compile its emissions reports using industry best-practice reporting methodologies, and to commission an independent auditor to examine its mines and other facilities. Annica Schoo, the lead environmental investigator at the Australian Conservation Foundation, said there were “more and more examples” of companies submitting emissions data that did not stand up to scrutiny. It follows Dutch scientists examining satellite imagery and finding the amount of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, leaking from some Queensland coalmines was greater than has been reported. Schoo said the company reports lodged with the regulator were used to help fulfil Australia’s international obligations under several treaties, including the Paris climate agreement, and as part of the government’s annual projections of future emissions. “The accuracy of this data is critical to getting on top of the climate crisis. The lack of care Peabody has shown is completely unacceptable,” she said. In response to questions, the regulator said there were no broader concerns about the accuracy of emissions data submitted to the government, and ensuring the data was accurate was “an enduring compliance and enforcement priority”. Emissions reports were reviewed and assessed, and that assessments drew upon a range of information sources, it said. A spokesperson for Peabody said the company understood the importance of accurately capturing and reporting emissions and had “at all times genuinely sought” to act in compliance with the act. “The reporting issues identified were completely unintentional and the result of calculation errors, which we have taken immediate actions to rectify,” they said. “An independent expert auditor has thoroughly reviewed our systems. We have already acted on many of his recommendations and our processes will be regularly reviewed to embed necessary improvements.” Schoo said the regulator had “done the right thing” by requiring Peabody to address its emissions reporting but it was a concern that it was the first compliance action of its type since the safeguard mechanism – which was promised to prevent increases in industrial emissions but in practice often hasn’t – was introduced in 2016. Richie Merzian, the climate and energy program director with the Australia Institute, said the “enforceable undertakings” agreed by Peabody following the reporting failures were an example of the regulator being “all bark and no bite”. “We are left with rising emissions from Australia’s major polluters, enabled by loose reporting requirements,” he said.Derby County clearly have no intention of giving up. Their hopes of finding new owners remain up in the air which is where substitute Krystian Bielik, making his first appearance for a year after an ACL injury, found himself six minutes into added time, with his back to goal, to score the equaliser with a brilliant scissor kick. “As a team, we’ve been writing our own scripts this season,” Wayne Rooney said. Bielik’s goal was one overhead the club’s administrators won’t mind. Rooney’s team gave their fans every reason to chant “We’re Derby County, we fight till the end” on a day when thousands marched from the city centre to the game to mark their support for the club. Now the Derby manager, having declined the invitation to be interviewed for the Everton job, just needs the club to be saved. The season’s biggest Championship crowd, of 32,211, gave a sense of just how important this club is to its community. Rooney was not happy with the quality of his team’s performance on the field, however. Birmingham deservedly led through goals from Lyle Taylor and Scott Hogan before Luke Plange pulled one back in the 87th minute, but the sheer sense of occasion spoke volumes. “With no Premier League this weekend, with this game being live on Sky and across the world, it’s a reminder this is a massive club, with a massive fanbase,” Rooney said, “and it’s got a future. The administrators are working hard but Middlesbrough, Wycombe and the EFL [among Derby’s creditors] have to be sensible. It’s people’s livelihoods at stake.” Such matters are beyond Rooney’s control although he confirmed there will be no more player departures before tonight’s transfer deadline. What is in his remit is his team’s performance although with so many academy graduates having to play week in, week out, it is not surprising they are showing signs of fatigue. Taylor, seven minutes into his Birmingham debut on loan from Derby’s fiercest rivals Nottingham Forest, sent the ball back where it had come from inside the far side-netting after Onel Hernández prodded the ball wide. Birmingham have taken five points out of nine this week to alleviate their own relegation fears but it is more than the prospect of a mere demotion which made this such an emotional occasion for Derby. Club poet Jamie Thrasivoulou gave a stirring pre-match address to the sellout crowd, although the prospect of this being Derby’s last game before liquidation was allayed after Quantuma, the administrators, and the EFL had jointly announced a month’s stay of execution on Thursday. Derby were chasing shadows for the first hour as Birmingham controlled the game, with debutant Juninho Bacuna impressive. It was no surprise when Hogan volleyed in Ryan Woods’s cross from the right 11 minutes into the second half. The only surprise was that Birmingham were not further clear, Hogan allowing Ryan Allsop to save when clean through two minutes before half-time. Lee Bowyer was furious with his team for not winning, and particularly with his 10-goal striker. “That game should have been finished, done,” the Birmingham manager said. “Scott Hogan should have scored at least three goals today. How he hasn’t got a hat-trick today I don’t know.” Derby improved after Bielik came on but it remained a chaotic match. At one point Richard Stearman was the only defender back against three Birmingham attackers as Rooney let even Curtis Davies off the leash. Plange, one of five academy graduates appearing for Derby, halved the deficit after he cut back inside on to his right foot and finished powerfully. Rooney said he told the players at half-time they would be scoring in stoppage time and, sure enough, when Stearman headed Tom Lawrence’s free-kick back across the penalty area, Bielik took off to extend the sense that, hope against hope, Derby know how to pull off the most unlikely of comebacks. That the midfielder damaged his shoulder as he hit the ground did not dampen the manic celebrations that ensued.The vaccine sceptic and anti-lockdown campaigner Laurence Fox has said he has coronavirus. The actor, who finished sixth in last year’s London mayoral elections, tweeted a picture on Sunday of a positive lateral flow test. Above it, he wrote: “In other news, felt shivery and crap yesterday. Turns out I have been visited by Lord Covid at last and have the Omnicold (if the LFT is to be believed!) On the #Ivermectin, saline nasal rinse, quercetin, paracetamol and ibruprofen. More man flu than Wu-flu at the moment.” Ivermectin is an anti-parasitic treatment used mainly on animals but which is approved in different doses to treat some parasitic worms in humans. It has not been proved to be effective at preventing or treating Covid, but has been promoted by vaccine-sceptic public figures such as the comedian and podcast host Joe Rogan, who said he used the drug to treat himself when he became sick with Covid, and the Fox News host Tucker Carlson. Fox’s tweet came four days after he posted a picture of himself wearing a T-shirt with a slogan saying, “No vaccine needed, I have an immune system.” In another tweet posted on Sunday, he said he was on day two of the virus. After a number of people commented in response to Fox’s tweet asking where he had got the ivermectin and why he was taking it, he responded by saying: “Not only do you only have to sign a form saying you feel well to get into Mexico, but you can also buy drugs like Ivermectin over the counter that the vaccinaholics don’t want you to get hold of here. I’m so happy to be joining the natural immunity club. Going to have a nap.” Launching his mayoral campaign last year, Fox said he would not get the Covid jab until after 2023, by which time he claimed all the tests needed to convince him of its safety would be completed. He has also cast doubt on the UK’s death toll from the pandemic, claiming that some doctors were seeking to add non-Covid deaths – including that of his mother in 2020 – to the official tally to support the “government’s fear-based narrative”. And Fox has questioned the scientific basis of long Covid, which the Office for National Statistics estimates is affecting 1.3 million people, or 2% of the population, in the UK, based on people self-reporting symptoms that last more than a month after a Covid infection.Manchester United have said Mason Greenwood will not return to training or play matches “until further notice” after a woman accused the player of assaulting her. The allegations, accompanied by video, photographs and voice notes, were released on Instagram on Sunday morning and were deleted shortly afterwards. Manchester United said in an earlier statement: “We are aware of images and allegations circulating on social media. We will not make any further comment until the facts have been established. Manchester United does not condone violence of any kind.” Greater Manchester Police said they were “aware of images and video circulating on social media. Enquiries are ongoing to establish the full circumstances.” Greenwood, 20, from Bradford, has played 129 times for Manchester United, including 24 appearances for the club this season. He has one England cap. The Guardian has approached Greenwood for comment, but have yet to receive a response to the allegations.I was trembling. Not because I was about to do something risky or scary – quite the opposite. This was a situation I had been in many times before, but I was nervous about what was going to happen next. I was on the Concert Hall stage at the Sydney Opera House looking at an audience of about 2,000 people. Not to perform music, thankfully. I’d been invited to speak about why Australia should abolish its private schools. Typical symptoms of performance anxiety include dry mouth, sweaty hands, trembling knees and racing heartbeat – I experienced all these and more. Even my vision had changed thanks to the bright spotlights turned towards me. Standing alone, I caught sight of the beautiful white birch panelling of the Concert Hall’s interior. It reminded me of my home country. For the Finns, the birch is a sacred tree. Birch trees play an important part in the Kalevala, the Finnish national epic. Suddenly I felt more comfortable. It was time to do what I’d come to do – to tell the audience why Finnish parents don’t ever need to worry about finding a good school or paying for their children’s education, and why Australians wouldn’t need to do so either if they didn’t want to. Imagine that. This episode happened in September 2012 during my second visit to Australia. I’d enjoyed many conversations and debates with Australians over the years, but that day at the Opera House became my most memorable public talk to that point. It still is the highlight of my working life. Six years later I returned to Sydney with my wife, our two young boys and six large suitcases. Sydney would be our next hometown after living in Finland, Croatia, Italy and the US. Our boys had gone to kindergarten in Helsinki and both my wife and I worked on education issues in Finland and internationally. You may consider us an education family. We certainly considered our new home to be an education nation. Its schools and teachers are admired by students and educators overseas, and I had met scores of Australians who speak to and teach others about education and how to make it better. Not so long ago, Australian education was highly ranked internationally. But that is not so any longer. One reason I had moved to Sydney was to join a group of colleagues and educators to figure out how to fix that situation. The first thing my wife and I realised was that there is a wide range of all sorts of schools, especially in Australia’s urban areas, so that parents can choose the right one. As a newly arrived family, our first task was to find schools for our boys: a primary school for our older son and a preschool for the younger. Back home the solution would have been a no-brainer: the nearest neighbourhood school or kindergarten in Helsinki. Private schools don’t exist in Finland: most children attend their nearest public school. Which means that parents never pay for their children’s school education, never drive their kids to school nor pack lunchboxes every morning while worrying whether they can provide enough good food to keep their kids going through the day. In Sydney, everything was different. Most early childhood education providers in our neighbourhood promised innovative programs to teach early reading and maths so that our son would be prepared and ready to go to kindy at the age of five, whereas in Helsinki, children in early childhood education are allowed to develop and learn at their own pace and start primary school at the age of seven. Finnish schools are expected to be ready to welcome all children as they are rather than expecting them to be ready for school. The price of what was on offer in Sydney was far beyond what we could afford. Daily fees for early childhood education and care were about the same as we’d paid in Helsinki for a month. And so we did what so many other Australian parents do – wait a year until the public kindy would become an option for our youngest boy. Australian public primary schools still serve families and children in their own communities. As in Finland, Australian children have the right to attend a public school in their own neighbourhood. But things are changing thanks to evolving supplies and demands. Today over 30% of Australia’s primary school children choose not to use that right, instead attending one of the many independent schools that are increasingly available – especially in cities and larger towns. “Which school did you choose for your boys?” So many new colleagues and friends asked me this before we had even arrived. Given that I think school is an essential part of building a strong and cohesive local community, our boys attend the local public school. Sometimes I tell those curious about this that I am doing a social experiment with my own children by sending them to a public school in Sydney and then writing a piece about it. But frankly, I don’t need further evidence to know the public school down the road is the best option for my boys. The problem with choice In pursuit of excellence, an odd dogma has become common in Australian education policy across the past two decades: if education could only act more like a marketplace, excellence would prevail. Emphasis on school choice and the subsequent competition between schools isn’t a homegrown Australian idea; it’s been influenced by the global education reform movement dominant in the UK and the US since the 1990s. But it seems like Australia has stronger faith in the power of a marketplace than many other countries. Public policies at federal and state levels encourage parental choice in pursuit of individual educational excellence by offering attractive financial support to non-government schools. Go figure. During the past decade, according to the 2021 Report on Government Services, combined commonwealth and state government funding for private schools increased by more than six times that for public schools. At the same time, private school fees have tripled since 2000. As a result, the proportion of students in government schools has declined and the independent school sector has been slowly growing. Everybody wants to be excellent. Schools pursue excellence, and parents seek excellent education for their children. Consumers in the marketplace are happy when they get bang for their buck. The 2021 Australia Talks National Survey found that 92% of parents at independent schools were satisfied with the education their child was receiving. And yet research shows that public schools do as well as private schools after differences in students’ socioeconomic backgrounds are considered. But happy clientele in the education marketplace doesn’t guarantee a good education for every child. The cost of the pursuit of individual excellence in Australian education – rather than a systemic excellence that would provide high-quality education for all – has been gradually eroding equity of education. As is often reported, many international organisations, including Unicef and the OECD, rate Australian education as unequal and highly segregated, leaving too many children behind. At the same time, the overall average performance of Australian students compared with their peers in other countries has been slipping during the past two decades. When colleagues overseas ask what I think about Australia’s school system, I tell them that it does offer world-class education, but not for everyone. I have seen thousands of schools around the world. But some of the best schools I’ve found are here. Why, then, is our educational performance not what it used to be just two decades ago? The main problem, as I see it, is neither curriculum, quality of teachers nor leadership in schools. It lies elsewhere. And understanding that problem is key to better education – not just for some but for the entire nation. To borrow (possibly apocryphal) inspiration from Albert Einstein: if I had an hour to solve Australia’s education problem, I’d spend 55 minutes thinking about the problem and five minutes thinking about solutions. Einstein is also claimed to have said that no problem can be solved from the same consciousness that created it. In other words, we need a new way of thinking. We have one of the world’s most examined, researched and reviewed school systems, but when it comes to taking the evidence and respective recommendations seriously, we find ourselves in the same old debates and confrontations over and again. As international experts have reminded Australia’s education system leaders, we have now lost a decade due to inability to learn from ourselves and from others about how to build a more equitable school system for all children. ‘Equity and excellence are inseparable’ Education is a complex social system, and complex systems are not easy to understand. Not necessarily because they are structurally complicated – complex systems often have simple design – but because the interaction between their parts is unpredictable. Sydney has a concrete example of such simple complexity: the Opera House, which is among the most fascinating buildings of the 20th century. Its ingenuity is in its simplicity, yet it was extremely complex to construct. Look at the Opera House carefully, and you’ll see fundamental design principles inspired by organic nature and experiential character, or form and function: simple complexity. In this respect, the Sydney Opera House and a racing bicycle have one thing in common: remove a part, and it won’t work as it was designed anymore. As I see it, the Opera House represents a metaphor for a modern education system. The Finnish education system is a Nordic design, with simple and practical form and function. Compared with Australia’s education system, it looks deceptively simple when the core purpose is exposed: the learning, wellbeing and happiness of all children for common good. Many have tried to discover the secret of Finland’s school system, but very few have succeeded. The secret lies in its design. So let’s start with a design question: what is the leading idea in education system design? Today two of three Australian schools are public. Alongside these public schools – which cater to over 80% of Indigenous students, disadvantaged children and children with greater special educational needs – a privately managed, fee-charging and largely government-funded school sector has been steadily growing for two decades. From the system design point of view, this hybrid system sees schools operate under a wide range of regulations, funded jointly by parents and two separate levels of government using fiscal arrangements that are hard to understand – even for experienced education-system leaders. In this respect, the Australian school system is an outlier among other advanced nations. At the outset the Australian education sector looks like a marketplace, evolved on the assumption that parental choice is the best driver of whole-system improvement, just as consumer choice works in a real marketplace by pulling prices down and lifting quality up. Therefore, insisting on parents’ freedom to choose their children’s education facilitates the opening of new kinds of schools and encourages “healthy” competition among schools to better serve families’ diverse individual needs. Market mentality also dominates politicians’ responses to parents’ concerns about quality of education. In January 2020 the then-federal minister of education Dan Tehan urged unhappy parents to “shop around” to ensure they get good value for money. That Australian educational performance shows no sign of improving despite continuous national recommendations and international advice demonstrates that school systems have a design error that increases inequity across both the public and private schooling sectors. An inconvenient truth is that significant financial resources added to education from both state and federal budgets have not made Australian education any fairer. This is linked to the second dimension of the challenge: the structural problem of Australian education. Many other education systems suffer from structural failures – I have worked with several governments around the world in this space. Using an international lens offers a comparative perspective that is often helpful. In the big picture Australian education is an outlier also in a sense that schools in different parts of the country are more socially segregated than in most other rich countries. Currently, Australia’s school system concentrates disadvantaged students in disadvantaged schools (that is: where more than half of students come from disadvantaged homes), which has unintended implications for student learning. Much political and public debate focuses on excellence. And Naplan has been held up as the basic driver of improved educational excellence since 2008, annually testing the basic knowledge of all year 3, 5, 7 and 9 students and linking their scores to public school scorecards through the My School website. Naplan has been researched and reviewed and a constant topic of public and professional debates since its inauguration. And, against initial expectations, research has found convincing domestic and international evidence that too strong a focus on externally determined and narrow academic learning outcomes is associated with deteriorating performance. What’s lost in these debates is a sharper focus on equity and its linear relationship with excellence. The main finding is this: there can be no national educational excellence without stronger equity of outcomes. Australia should accept – as many nations acknowledged a decade ago – that equity and excellence are inseparable. What’s surprising is that there are still some people who refuse to accept that educational equity is something to worry about. It is paramount to understanding the state of education that we see education as a system of interrelated elements. When we fail to see it this way, we often also fail to understand why it doesn’t work as well as it should. Rather than ask whether the system’s design and structure are adequate to produce expected outcomes (say, excellence and equity) when we consider stagnated or declining school systems performance and student learning, we pay attention to those who work on the frontline of schooling – teachers and principals. Perhaps teachers are not prepared to teach well enough? Maybe the curriculum is outdated? What if the problem is that we don’t have enough data about how teachers teach and what students learn? These and other similar questions distract from broader structural aspects that need reform. Consequently, Australia’s education system has latterly evolved in a piecemeal fashion, with frequent fragmented education reforms adding new layers to the work of schools without removing any unnecessary functions. Let me be clear. Of course it is necessary to upgrade education by improving its integral parts. We need to fix problems related to the teaching profession, including teachers’ workload, teaching conditions and remuneration. We must redesign curriculum systems so that all Australian children better understand the world around them and their own potential. And high-quality early childhood education and care must be accessible to all children before they go to school. These and other measures are all necessary – but they are not enough to guarantee each and every child a fair go. ‘Fixing Australian education isn’t that difficult’ So if the problem is more about the system’s design and structure than fixing its parts, what should be done next? First and foremost, we need a genuinely wide and majority consensus (and understanding) that the current structure should be redesigned so that policies and practices can be created to reduce prevalent inequities. Our complicated hybrid system is an offspring of an inherited colonial education model and a cocktail of more recent and haphazard reforms in the 21st century that were mandated without considering the commonly agreed purpose of schooling. This is a global phenomenon. When new governments take office, new education reforms often follow. Only states with less politicised education systems and more sustainable political systems – such as Finland – have the luxury of not responding this way. Where education is overly politicised, governments often want to leave their mark by rushing to introduce education reforms without deeper contemplation of their possible side effects. Instead of making schools better, teachers are asked to do more on top of all their previous duties. Through this, Australian schools have become crowded places – like a Christmas tree decorated to the point that we can’t see the tree anymore. In principle, fixing Australian education is not that difficult, and there have even been moments in the past when this could have happened. I first visited Australia in 2012. That February, just minutes before boarding my flight to Melbourne, I received an email from an Australian colleague. Attached was the 300-page document now known as the Gonski review, released to the public that very day. My maiden trip to Australia couldn’t have started more optimistically. The purpose of that trip was to meet with state and territory education-system leaders, speak to teachers about international trends in education and address politicians at Parliament House in Canberra. The newspaper I bought at Melbourne airport had this headline: “Surplus before schools as Gonski report decries student advantage.” If Australia followed Gonski’s recommendations, I concluded, it would be on a good course towards realising the goals of the Melbourne Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians (2008). A decade has passed since the Gonski review, and its recommendations – never fully implemented – are now part of history. Much of the momentum to make those sorely needed structural changes, especially regarding funding, was watered down by political speculations and ideological confrontations. Education reforms continued to ignore evidence from abroad and research from Australian scholars. Many educators were left disappointed and some remain upset, for good reason. Somehow it feels that we are back to square one. Disappointment has gradually turned into frustration: is it really true that the Australian education sector can’t be changed? Much of the rest of the world has now chosen different directions and some countries are making early progress, such as Scotland, Sweden and some American states. Can Australia change course before it’s too late? The simple solution requires us to stop doing things that are not linked to improved teaching and learning. Keeping consequential school accountability, standardised testing and a narrow focus on academic curriculum in the driver’s seat of education policy is not just unnecessary, it’s also harmful to building the professional trust in teachers and schools that is one condition for moving forward. More complicated, but equally crucial, is to accomplish bipartisan political consensus on the values and principles upon which school education is based. This includes a shared understanding of the purpose of education and how it serves to create a stronger national sense of “common good”. This is not a radical ask. All high-performing education systems have succeeded not because one side won an ideological confrontation but because all have reached out to one another for agreement. Too often, political decisions fail to address that “common good” in favour of privileges for some. The need for courage Back to the Sydney Opera House. The idea of this place being designed by a Danish architect was hard for many Australians to accept. Construction was an engineering nightmare: nothing like this had been built before. The final cost was more than 10 times the original estimate, and many people thought the whole project was ridiculous and unnecessary. The decade-long political fiasco of its construction almost ruined the original idea of the building, ending with lifelong damage to many relationships and erosion of public trust in bureaucracy and politics. Isn’t this a bit like trying to build a new Australian education system? We have an alternative education system envisioned in the Alice Springs (Mparntwe) Education Declaration and inspired by the Gonski review but it’s widely rejected and misunderstood. Many seem to believe that this country has such a unique history and culture that restructuring its education system is too complicated. And, just as it happens with arts and design, when politics becomes the main driver of decisions, things begin to go wrong. Of course, today, the Sydney’s Opera House is a Unesco world heritage site, one of the world’s most famous and admired structures. The solutions that will fix the Australian education system are within our reach and – unlike the Opera House’s construction budget – do not require more and more financial investment. What is needed, more than money, is the imagination and political courage to implement the bold new ideas that would successfully convert yesterday’s failures into new opportunities for tomorrow. Australia built an Opera House in Sydney that many thought would be impossible. Similarly, we can rebuild a school system that offers good education and a fair go for all. Transforming Australia’s school education systems is not only mission possible; it’s a moral obligation for a country that calls itself an education nation. Both history and science underscore that trust in teachers as professionals is the way to educational equity and excellence. That evidence is clear – and the road ahead should be too. • This is an edited extract from Griffith Review 75: Learning Curves, out now. Pasi Sahlberg is professor of education policy at the University of NSW. He is the author of Finnish Lessons: What the World Can Learn from Educational Change in FinlandTen years ago, two days before Christmas, I headed down the Great Ocean Road in search of surf. I ended up surfing at Gibson Steps, on the Shipwreck Coast near the 12 Apostles. It’s a place you can only surf when the seas are calm, because the coastline down there is often battered by large Southern Ocean swells and the ocean’s often windy and wild. It feels a bit more exposed – you can look down one end of the beach to the other and see no one. My wife and two boys, then aged six and eight, were with me and it was nice and sunny with really clear water – one of those summer days when nothing really happens. I’d started surfing when I was a few years older than my sons were that day. My folks would drive me down the coast from Geelong to Torquay to catch waves. But it wasn’t until I became unwell after I finished Year 12 that I started surfing as much as I could. I’d spent a month in hospital with orbital cellulitis, a life-threatening infection of the soft tissues of the eye socket. At one point, the doctors called my family in to say their goodbyes – they thought I wouldn’t make it. The only thing that got me through was watching surfing on the sports channel in the Royal Children’s hospital – it made me reprioritise what I wanted to do with my time and I started surfing as much as I could when I was better. That day, I headed out to surf around lunchtime. There was one other surfer in the water, a boy around 14. He was a pretty good surfer and was on a road trip from Queensland with his dad, who was filming him from the beach. He was telling me about his trip, when out of the blue he got spooked and said he’d seen a massive fin and pointed a fair way out. I couldn’t see anything. I was trying to settle him when a pod of around 40 dolphins turned up. I told him it must have been one of the dolphins, but he was still uncomfortable. As I was reassuring him, we saw a dark shape in the water, coming towards him at full speed. I could see it was a dolphin, but he panicked as it went directly underneath him and jumped off to the side of his board, using it for protection. The dolphin headed towards the beach and disappeared, and so did the boy. When I turned around, he was gone – he’d caught the first wave he could back to the beach. I’d seen fins before, which ended up being nothing to worry about, like a sunbaking seal putting up a flipper, so I still wasn’t worried. But, when I looked up, I saw the dolphin heading towards me in the exact same way. It went directly under the middle of my board: really close, really fast. I got a weird feeling that this dolphin was trying to tell me something, because it was acting differently, and seemed to have a definite purpose. I looked towards the beach and saw my wife playing with our sons in the sand. It gave me a strong feeling that I should go in. When I got back to shore, the boy’s dad showed me his handicam footage. It showed a large dorsal fin of a shark, confirming what the boy thought he’d seen. I don’t know if the shark would have come closer to us, but dolphins are really smart animals. At that moment, I felt glad to be out of the water. I like to think that dolphin was warning us, saving us from danger. I decided to surf a different spot the following day.Australia’s sovereign wealth fund, the Future Fund, has invested more than $90m in weapons manufacturer Raytheon Technologies, whose laser-guided bomb was allegedly used in an airstrike on a detention centre in Yemen this month killing nearly 100 civilians. Documents released under freedom of information laws show the Future Fund, which invests on behalf of the Australian government, had $91.22m invested in Raytheon as of December last year. Amnesty International claims that a laser-guided bomb was used in an attack by the Saudi-led coalition on a detention centre in Sa’adah in north-west Yemen on 21 January that killed at least 91 people and injured 200 more. It was described by the UN as “the worst civilian-casualty incident in the last three years in Yemen”. Amnesty International’s arms experts who analysed photographs of the remnants of the weapon used in the attack identified the bomb as a GBU-12, a 500lb laser-guided bomb manufactured by Raytheon. Lynn Maalouf, Amnesty International’s deputy director for the Middle East and North Africa, said Yemeni civilians were “paying the terrible price for Western states’ lucrative arms sales to Saudi Arabia and its coalition allies”. “The international community has a responsibility to close the gates to all arms sales that are fuelling the needless suffering of civilians in the armed conflict.” The Future Fund’s investment in weapons manufacturers has attracted significant public and parliamentary scrutiny. In December, a separate FoI request revealed the fund had invested in a Chinese state-controlled arms conglomerate, the Aviation Industry Corporation of China, that has sold combat aircraft to the Myanmar military, which is accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity. The Future Fund has more than $157m invested with 14 publicly traded companies that have done business with the Myanmar military. The Future Fund controls about $200bn in investments made on behalf of the Australian government, including investing the superannuation of Australia’s public servants. However, a government bill currently before parliament is seeking to shield the Future Fund from freedom of information requests, exempting the fund from releasing any details about its activities including information about which companies the fund has invested in and how much. The fund has previously argued before a Senate committee that the changes are necessary because of the “administrative burden” associated with complying with requests and because of confidentiality concerns from investment managers it worked with. Rawan Arraf, the executive director of the Australian Centre for International Justice, said the Future Fund was dismissive of efforts to hold it to account and the proposed legislation was an active attempt to undermine transparency around public funds. “The Future Fund must immediately review its entire portfolio and divest from arms companies and those entities aiding and abetting international crimes,” she said. In a speech to the UN Security Council, the chairperson of Yemen’s Mwatana for Human Rights, Radhya al-Mutawakel, said the international community needed to end arm sales to countries “that have a track record of violating human rights law and international humanitarian law”. “Arms-exporting countries have a responsibility on their shoulders, and it is unreasonable to turn a blind eye to their role. “We observed the poor villages that never knew any of the modern technology – no smartphones, no computers – but were targeted by the latest bombs and projectiles dropped by the latest aircraft manufactured in the richest and most urbanised countries.” She told the Guardian: “Instead of investing in the bloody destruction of other communities, Australia must end arms sales to Saudi Arabia and the UAE and support the establishment of an international criminally focused investigative mechanism for Yemen through the UN general assembly.” A spokesperson for the Future Fund said the fund held developed market equities in accordance with global weightings, including companies listed on the New York stock exchange. Raytheon is among the largest 200 companies on that exchange: “These stocks are not selected, they come as part of an index holding.” The spokesperson said the Future Fund “abides by Australian law and observes any sanctions imposed by the Australian government”. “The Australian government has no ban or sanction on these companies. In fact it contracts extensively with them,” pointing out that Raytheon is a contractor to the Australian Defence Force, providing integrated weapons systems and battlefield and satellite communications. The prime minister opened Raytheon’s $50m Centre for Joint Integration in Adelaide last March. Raytheon did not respond to repeated requests for comment. The Saudi-led coalition has denied targeting the detention centre in Sa’adah on 21 January. The ongoing war in Yemen – fought since 2015 between the Yemeni government, supported by a Saudi-led coalition, and Iranian-backed Houthi rebels – has taken a devastating toll on the country’s civilian population. The UN estimates the conflict had killed 377,000 people by the end of 2021, both directly and indirectly through hunger and disease. Violations of international humanitarian law have been committed by both sides of the conflict, observers say. Under international humanitarian law all parties to a conflict have an obligation to protect the lives of civilians, including people who are detained. The deliberate targeting of civilians and extensive, unjustified destruction of property are war crimes. The latest escalation in violence came after strikes by Houthi rebels on Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates on 17 January, which killed three people.I’ve been a vet for 18 years, and I hope you never have to bring your pet to see me. I’m an oncologist, so all my patients have cancer. It’s a tough time for families – often tougher on them than their pet. Your dog doesn’t know they have cancer and we’re having difficult conversations about surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, palliative care. Your cat doesn’t know we’re discussing how long they might have left to live. Your guinea pig doesn’t know I’m recommending amputating their leg (the guinea pig went on to live a full happy life with three legs). I used to say I went into veterinary, instead of human, medicine because I loved the science but didn’t want to deal with people. What I had clearly failed to consider is that, for most vets, not dealing with people is not an option. Sometimes I look at specialties like pathology, anaesthesia, and radiology, where you rarely talk to clients, and wonder how I ended up in oncology where “talking to clients” is most of my job. Clients often say “I don’t know how you do your job” after I have euthanised their pet, or when I am counselling them about end-of-life care. To me, those parts of my job are about relieving suffering, advocating for the animal, and helping people. That’s incredibly rewarding. The hard part is when clients take out their stress and fear on me and my co-workers. Despite recent publicity around the high rates of mental ill-health and suicide in the veterinary profession, I often wonder if clients have any idea. Recently, colleagues at an emergency clinic had death threats made to them by clients when the staff didn’t want to discharge the seriously injured animal. A friend was once told by a client that they would kill their dog with a sledgehammer rather than pay for euthanasia. I’ve come in at 3.30am to help an intern deal with a client whose dog had cancer which had spread to its brain. I was then accused of killing the dog when it had a seizure and died. I’ve had a client yell at me about complications his dog had from a procedure I had nothing to do with. My nurses were outside the door listening so they could intervene if they thought he was going to get violent. All vets have heard that we’re “only in it for the money” when we explain the costs of veterinary care. We understand. You’re worried about your pet. We are too. A vet friend of mine posted a meme recently that said “Sometimes I wake up at 3am thinking about your dog. There is no extra charge for this.” It’s typically 4am for me. We want to help your pet, and you, but sometimes it’s difficult. Many vet clinics have a sign on their door, or a message on their phones, along the lines of “Please respect our staff. Abusive behaviour will not be tolerated.” I wonder if these signs make any difference. If you’re upset enough to make death threats, you’re probably not in a frame of mind to take those messages on board. Although we dwell on the difficult clients, I know that most appreciate the care we give them and their pets. I remember a dog who was given an accidental chemotherapy overdose and spent a week in intensive care. Months later, I bumped into his owner in a hair salon, and she thanked me again for taking care of her dog. When I went to pay for my haircut, she had paid for me. The clients who say, “Thank you so much for taking the time to call,” when I phone to offer my condolences, and “Thank you for everything you did for us,” when I wish I could have done more. The clients who send photos of their pets on adventures so we can see them at their best. The cactus a client gave me after her dog died because she wanted me to have something that would last. The client who found me in a different country, in a different job, years after I cared for his dog, because his wife had recently died, and he found the gift she had forgotten to send me among her things. We will do our best for your pet no matter what, and we get it – people are people – but if you’re a “difficult client” know that we won’t forget. We’re people too. • Claire Cannon is a diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (Oncology) and a registered specialist in veterinary oncologyOn a humid Saturday afternoon, the Sydney suburb of Bankstown comes to life for the first time in many moons. Locals arrive in droves for the council-organised lunar new year festival, dressed to the nines to celebrate the year of the tiger. People walking through the lunar year festival in Bankstown But reminders of the pandemic are still here, from masked attendees to signs urging people to social distance. Kim Chi, owner of Huong Giang Kim Hoan Jewellers, is selling hand-crafted paper flower arrangements outside her stop. She says the celebration is a chance for the community to feel like things are going back to normal. “Its not just about selling the flowers, I wanted to make them to create a nice atmosphere, to make everyone feel normal again, so we don’t have to think about the pandemic or Covid for once” she says. Kim Chi, owner of Huong Giang Kim Hoan Jewellers Chi’s business has suffered through the pandemic, shutting down multiple times due to lockdowns, but she says it’s time the community “moved on”. She describes the lunar new year as “our first chance in a while to get together, to encourage each other to move on and accept what we have in life”. L-R Eight-year-old Lilly, Pham and Christina Lee in matching outfits at the Lunar New Year markets Prancing around in a bright yellow dress to mark the occasion, eight-year-old Lilly explains to Guardian Australia that lunar new year also brings the line dragon dance and big red envelopes full of money. “I normally get around $50 to $100, and I think I will put it in my bank account to save it this year,” she says. As locals mill about, drink bubble tea out of pouches and line up for the rides, Nine Doan says that after two years of Covid-affected celebrations, there is particular excitement this year. Nine Doan drinking bubble tea “Its really good to see the community together after two long years of essentially staying home,” Doan says. “We’ve been disconnected from each other, it’s been weird. We’ve both been apart from each other and bonded more than ever. So lunar new year this year is a chance to say ‘hi’, have a fresh start and wash away everything from the previous year.” Hiya Philips Although a sense of trepidation hangs in the air, the festival is brightened by the fashion, with Hiya Philips and her friends coordinating their outfits. Philips says the festival is both marker of the lunar new year and a chance for local diaspora communities to reconnect with their cultural roots. “As a Vietnamese woman living overseas, it’s a chance for us to feel connected to our roots and our culture, and an opportunity to get together and remind us where we come from, and to hold on to it here in Australia,” she says. Daniel Tran with a toy gun that he won at sideshow Alley It’s a sentiment echoed by 11-year-old Andy Le, who says he feels more connected to his family and culture than when he was younger. “When I was seven, I used to say, ‘God, I hate going to this place, my parents won’t let me do anything.’ Now, I understand it a lot more and feel connected to them through it,” Le says. “And the fireworks are just a blessing, it’s like the air gets blown up, I love it.” Decorations line the streets across Bankstown, and a grinning Van Phan explains, between deliveries, that he is glad some normalcy is being restored. “I’m so happy to see this new year’s festival, its so good to see family celebrating again. I was upset in the beginning of the pandemic, but now I feel happy seeing things get back to normal.” Eleven-year-old Andy Le In a sidestreet away from the official festivities, a group of men in face masks watch an intense match of Chinese chess, each move deliberated and consequential. Li, an onlooker, says everyone here is friends, and have gathered here after work . He says the festivities are great, but the “tension” of the pandemic lingers. “We don’t have all our freedoms back, it still feels like the pandemic. It’s good to celebrate, but not everyone can join us.”Bernard Collaery’s case has taken many twists and turns in the almost four years since he was charged. The latest chapter in the protracted, convoluted prosecution has seen the government launch proceedings in the high court. The story remains critically important to understand, particularly at a time when so many Australian whistleblowers are under threat, and secrecy is becoming increasingly pervasive across all aspects of government. At the heart of the current Collaery proceedings is a tension between transparency and open justice, on the one hand, and national security and secrecy on the other. With that in mind, let’s break down where the case is up to. Remind me, what is the Collaery case all about? In a nutshell, Collaery, a barrister, and his client Witness K, a former intelligence officer, were charged over their role in exposing a 2004 espionage mission against Australia’s ally Timor-Leste. Australia bugged the offices of the young nation to give itself an advantage during commercial negotiations to carve up the resource-rich Timor Sea, which a range of major oil and gas corporates, led by Woodside, wanted to exploit. Witness K, a long-serving member of the Australian Secret Intelligence Service, had become disillusioned and questioned the mission, which not only targeted an ally for commercial gain, but diverted crucial intelligence resources away from the region at a time of heightened terror threat. Both Witness K and Collaery helped Timor-Leste build a case against Australia in the international courts, arguing the treaty they struck over the Timor Sea was void, because Australia had spied and not negotiated in good faith. Collaery also spoke publicly about the case. The government held off approving a prosecution against them until 2018, just after Timor-Leste and Australia had signed a new treaty. They were then both charged with disclosing protected intelligence information, an allegation Collaery is fighting at trial in the ACT supreme court. Four years is a long time to wait for trial. What on earth is going on? The case against Collaery has dragged on interminably. Four long years have passed since charges were laid, and we still have no trial in sight. The government believes significant parts of the trial must be held behind closed doors to protect Australia’s national security. That creates an unavoidable tension with the need for open justice, a founding principle of Australia’s courts system. It’s this tension that accounts for much of the delay to this point. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The federal attorney general has sought to invoke the National Security Information Act (NSI Act) to force the courts to keep parts of the case secret. Initially at least, the courts agreed and the ACT supreme court ruled in the attorney general’s favour and ordered significant parts of the trial be kept from the public. But Collaery won a major victory for open justice in the ACT court of appeal last year, overturning the earlier decision. The court of appeal ruled that the secrecy posed a “very real risk of damage to public confidence” and cited the importance of open justice in preventing “political prosecutions”. But it also left the door open for the government to go back to the ACT supreme court and show it new evidence about the potential risks of not suppressing parts of the trial. The parties are still arguing about how, and if, the court should accept this new evidence. OK. But what does all of this have to do with the high court? Well, when the ACT court of appeal delivered that win for Collaery last year, it held off on publishing its full judgment. The government believed that publishing the judgment in full would pose a risk to national security. Yes, that old chestnut. The attorney general asked chief justice Helen Murrell to suppress parts of the reasons. She kindly declined. Remarkably, the government then asked the high court for special leave to appeal against that decision. Take a moment to consider that. The Australian government is asking the country’s highest court to suppress parts of a ruling that ordered Collaery’s trial should not be held in secret. The government has told the high court there is a risk to national security from the unredacted judgment. Strangely, it has so far not given the high court a copy of the unredacted judgment so it can see it for itself. The government also argues that the judgment should not be published before the ACT supreme court has resolved the issue we mentioned earlier, namely whether it should hear new evidence from the government about the changes to the national security environment that make the open hearing of Collaery’s case a risk. The Human Rights Law Centre senior lawyer Kieran Pender has described the high court bid as “perverse”. “The attorney general’s continued pursuit of secrecy in this case is a damning indictment of the Morrison government’s priorities,” he said. “Rather than enacting long-overdue reform to whistleblowing laws, the government has gone to the high court to keep parts of a court judgment that said no to a secret trial itself secret.” What has Collaery said in response? We’ve only just obtained Collaery’s submissions to the high court. In them, his lawyers describe the government’s argument that the judge erred in deciding to publish the judgment as “without foundation”. “The Attorney-General here bases her application for special leave to appeal expressly upon the proposition that disclosure of the reasons for decision of the Court of Appeal in the Primary Judgment, as redacted by her Honour the Chief Justice, would reveal national security information that is protected by the certificate, and that such information should not be revealed in circumstances in which the remittal question is not yet resolved. “The propositions are directly inconsistent with the approach of her honour the chief justice, the assertion of error in the exercise of discretion is without evidence, and the application for special leave is without foundation.” Where to from here? The high court will first need to decide whether it needs to hear the case about publishing the judgment. If it does, we could be waiting on a high court hearing and judgment for some time. In the meantime, the ACT supreme court is still grappling with whether it should accept new evidence from the government on new risks posed to national security by hearing all of Collaery’s case openly. The government is saying, in effect, that the circumstances affecting Australia’s national security have shifted considerably since the case was first brought. That means the court needs to consider new potential implications of holding Collaery’s case in public, the government says. It is also arguing it should be able to present this new evidence in a super secret form, denying Collaery the chance to see it. If this happens, only the judge would be able to view this new evidence the government says justifies keeping the trial partly closed to the public. Collaery has warned that allowing the government to do this risks creating a never-ending cycle, where the delays in the case are used as an excuse to present new evidence of the need for secrecy, which delay the case again. The supreme court judge David Mossop expressed a similar concern last year. “Is there any prospect of this matter ever being completed? Or will we be stuck in a perpetual vortex of updating?” he said.The number of new electric vehicles in Australia has nearly tripled after years of lagging sales, off the back of incentives introduced by state governments to support their uptake. Australia recorded 20,665 EV sales in 2021, a significant increase from the 6,900 sold in 2020, which means electric cars now make up 1.95% of the new car market. The Tesla Model 3 was the bestselling electric car in Australia, with 12,094 vehicles sold last year – accounting for 58.5% of all EVs sold. It was followed by the MG ZS with 1,388 and the Mitsubishi Outlander with 592. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The sales figures now include the number of cars sold by Tesla in Australia after a deal was struck between the Electric Vehicle Council (EVC) and the US company. In previous years Tesla refused to release a breakdown of figures by region, instead releasing only total global sales figures. The company delivered 936,172 electric cars worldwide in 2021. In the past, industry bodies that monitor changes in the car market have been forced to make informed estimates, but Tesla’s regional breakdown reveals the number of electric vehicles on Australian roads. The EVC chief executive, Behyad Jafari, said the sales figures represent a milestone in a market where EV sales have lagged for years because of mixed signals from government, especially compared with other parts of the world. “We’ve been waiting for quite a few years to hit the 1% mark, so to skip that and go straight to 2% is a big deal,” Jafari said. He said the boost can be attributed the mix of supportive policies introduced by individual states and territories designed to support uptake, including stamp duty waivers and rebates. Though there had been solid growth in New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria, with market share hovering around the national average, the Australian Capital Territory – which is widely considered to have introduced the most generous policies in the country – has consistently outperformed every other jurisdiction with a market share of 5.87%, Even with the positive numbers, Jafari said there is still more that could be done provided there is federal government support. “There’s no reason why we shouldn’t be up to 20% already,” Jafari said. “We have a federal government talking about hitting those targets by 2030 when really we could be there today. It’s just a matter of them doing their jobs.” Even at 1.95% of the market, electric vehicle sales in Australia lag behind other countries. Electric vehicles make up 11.2% of the market in western Europe, according to data from Schmidt Automotive Research, with registrations for battery electric vehicles surpassing those for diesel for the first time in December last year. Though the US is also considered to be behind the curve, , electric cars account for roughly 3% of the new car market – still greater than in Australia But with demand in the US and other countries expected to take off in 2022, Australian companies in the supply chain are already looking overseas for opportunities. Brisbane-based company Tritium, a manufacturer of electric vehicle fast charging systems, is expected to announce the site of its new US factory in coming weeks, with plans for it to be operational by September. The company’s share price closed at US$7.74 on Wednesday after it successfully listed on the Nasdaq this week, earning the company’s longtime backer Trevor St Baker A$344.7m for his 31.5m shares. Its Brisbane facility is currently able to manufacture 5,000 units a year and the new factory would triple the company’s capacity without the need to ship material overseas. With plans to expand into Europe, Tritium could quickly position itself as one of the world’s largest makers of fast charging systems. This article was amended on 1 February 2022. An earlier version, based on information supplied by the Electric Vehicle Council and Tesla, said there were 24,078 EVs in total sold last year, including 15,054 Tesla Model 3s, but this included sales for both 2020 and 2021. As a result the proportion of new cars sold that are electric has been amended from 2.39% to 1.95%.Women experiencing financial hardship or stress because of the pandemic are up to three times more likely to be sexually or physically abused by their partners, new research shows. Female breadwinners are also more likely to experience abuse, the Australian report found, pointing to previous research that has argued the relationship between economic disparity and intimate partner violence “is a consequence of attitudes that support traditional gender norms and hegemonic masculinities”. Australia’s National Research Organisation for Women’s Safety (Anrows) surveyed 10,000 women to investigate links between economic insecurity and intimate partner violence during the Covid-19 pandemic. It found “clear evidence” that economic stressors were associated with both the onset and the escalation of abuse. This was true for women whose partners had not previously been violent to them, suggesting the financial stress contributed to the violence, as opposed to stress being the consequence of the abusive relationship. The authors, Anthony Morgan and Dr Hayley Boxall, from the Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC), found one in three women surveyed suffered at least one form of economic hardship (defined as an “inability to pay for essential household expenses because of a shortage of money”) during the pandemic. Previous research has shown women were more likely to lose their jobs or have precarious work situations during the pandemic. Women with higher levels of financial stress who hadn’t already experienced violence “were much more likely to have experienced physical and sexual violence or emotionally abusive, harassing and controlling behaviours relative to women who reported low levels of financial stress in the last 12 months”, the authors wrote. “Women who were the main income earner in the relationship were more likely than women who were not the main income earner to have experienced physical violence, sexual violence and emotionally abusive, harassing and controlling behaviours. “Specifically, respondents who said that they could find $2,000 within a week in an emergency, but that their partner could not, were significantly more likely than respondents in relationships where neither partner could obtain the money to have experienced sexual violence and emotionally abusive, harassing and controlling behaviours.” The authors found the opposite was also true, that women whose partner would be able to obtain $2,000 in an emergency, but they could not, were also more likely to experience abuse. Employed women with unemployed partners were also more likely to experience all forms of intimate partner violence. Women with more economic power could be seen as a threat to “gender norms”, the authors wrote, with men turning to abuse to “reaffirm their notion of themselves as masculine”. They said previous research had found “men may use violence as a means of establishing control within their relationships, and mitigating any feelings of inadequacy they may have”. When men had the economic power, women’s dependence was a barrier to leaving an abusive relationship or seeking help. According to the survey results, women who were the main income earners had 1.7 times higher odds of experiencing physical violence, 1.6 times the odds of sexual violence and 1.5 times the odds of non-physical violence. Women experiencing high financial stress were three times as likely to experience physical or sexual abuse and 2.6 times more likely to experience non-physical abuse. Ninety-five per cent of those surveyed had a male partner. The researchers found there was an increased risk for women with health conditions, or who’d been pregnant in the past year, or living with children, or Indigenous women. The AIC deputy director, Dr Rick Brown, said the results suggest that some abusers “may be using sexual violence as a way of exerting control over their partner that they feel they have lost or is being challenged in other areas”. Padma Raman, the Anrows chief executive officer, said strategies to address “harmful attitudes supporting gender norms” and to “dismantle systems that enable these problematic attitudes” were needed alongside responses to improve women’s economic security. Stable housing, income support, debt forgiveness, microloans and access to affordable childcare were among the sorts of support needed. The women’s safety minister, Anne Ruston, said the federal government’s draft national plan to end violence against women and children had a “strong focus” on women’s economic security. The government also has a payment of up to $5,000 for survivors leaving violent relationships. “We understand that financial hardship can be a barrier to leaving violent relationships and the new escaping violence payment aims to provide direct financial support to victim-survivors when they make the incredibly brave decision to leave any form of intimate partner violence, including physical violence, coercive control and financial abuse,” she said. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233).There are a hundred reasons why any one of us may struggle to sleep, and there are nearly as many remedies to match. Without wanting to sound like a snake oil salesperson, I have found one small change that all of us could make, that truly works: a short stretch before bed. Studies have shown that low level physical activity and meditation practice that use gentle stretching like yoga or tai chi, can help with sleep quality. And while it is good to stretch at anytime of day, establishing a gentle and quiet routine before bed can help send a signal to the brain that it is now time for sleep. Best of all, stretching doesn’t require money. There are plenty of exercise and stretching apps you could buy or subscribe to that will have routines you can follow. I have found that the subscription-based apps Sweat and Centr have good, short routines (under 10 minutes) with clear instructions to improve your form. But we’re post lockdowns now and there is a veritable platoon of personal trainers and yoga instructors on YouTube who have been giving away their classes for free to people stuck at home. Yoga with Adriene is the best known, with a huge library of videos available, but I also enjoy Zanna van Dijk’s relaxed and low-key stretches. There are plenty of others that offer routines specifically aimed at bedtime too. If you’d rather perfect your technique in person, you can also find free yoga and tai chi lessons in your local community – most of Australia’s major cities offer some in parks or public areas like Melbourne’s Federation Square – and take those lessons home. What works for you will depend on your current physical state. I am a 30-year-old who hunches over her computer for too many hours a day, and I have been to yoga classes with women in their 80s who could do a cartwheel over my poor, suffering body. But if you struggle with mobility, there are things like chair yoga to try. So clearly I’m no expert, but I have been stretching right before bed since the pandemic began and have found that I always sleep better on the nights that I do it. Whatever your ability, the key is to start gently and work your way up – because the best thing about stretching is that you see great returns quite quickly, as long as you do it routinely. And how better to establish a routine than doing your stretches just before something you do every day? Sleep well.Australia has distributed 18m doses of Covid-19 vaccine to neighbouring countries but is being urged to dedicate money and resources to Covax – the global vaccination mechanism – so that the world’s least-inoculated countries can access vaccines. Australia’s “vaccine diplomacy”, focusing on bilateral donations to the Pacific and south-east Asia has come at the expense of commitments to the global Covax facility, to which it has committed zero doses and only $130m. The Delta variant emerged from highly unvaccinated India, and Omicron from Africa, which has the world’s lowest vaccination rates. With major new variants detected, on average, every four months, there are concerns that persistently laggard vaccination rates in the developing world will allow new variants to keep emerging, sparking new global waves and prolonging the pandemic. Tim Costello, spokesperson for the End Covid for All initiative, said bilateral vaccine donations prioritised a “charity model” over a “justice model” for vaccine access. “The problem with distributing vaccines bilaterally is it becomes a ‘charity model’. It comes out of the rich countries buying five times as many doses as they need, and then looking generous, saying ‘we will donate these to you’. The Covax facility was designed to be a justice model, so that people in poorer countries had equitable access to the vaccination that everybody needs.” End Covid for All has written to the Australian government, calling for an additional $250m to be dedicated to the Covax mechanism, arguing “the global vaccine effort is dangerously off-track, unfair and unjust”. UN data shows while vaccination rates in high-income countries are 67%, the figure is just 11% across low-income countries. Costello told the Guardian nobody would be safe from coronavirus until everybody was. “When the government says ‘I am protecting you, look how many people are vaccinated, soon we will have enough rapid antigen tests’, it is hollow. We in Australia cannot shut ourselves off and protect only ourselves.” The raw numbers of Australia’s vaccine distribution are generous by global standards. Australia has committed to distributing 60m doses of Covid-19 vaccine across the Indo-Pacific by the end of 2022. It has, to 29 January, donated 18,283,000 doses to 16 countries across the Pacific and south-east Asia. Indonesia has received 5.7m doses, Vietnam 5.6m and Cambodia 2.3m. Australia has donated $130m to Covax, an amount that puts it among the very lowest of developed nation donors. Roland Rajah, director of the International Economics Program at the Lowy Institute, said Australia’s vaccine commitments made it the second-most generous per capita donor – behind the US – pledging approximately 2.3 doses internationally per Australian. Australia had also already delivered 30% of its pledged doses, above the global average. “But the reality is when you think about bringing an end to the pandemic – about doing things in an efficient way – there needs to be global equity in vaccine access. Covax prioritises that. The biggest gap is in Africa, which is simply not keeping up in getting shots into people’s arms. And it is largely a supply issue, there needs to be more vaccines going to Africa.” Australia’s focus on the Pacific islands and south-east Asia was geopolitically motivated, and focusing vaccines on countries that already had reasonable rates of protection. Most developed nations, Rajah said, had engaged in some form of vaccine diplomacy, focusing vaccination donations on countries of strategic importance or alliance. But Australia is an outlier in its exclusive bilateral focus, “out of step” with other major global donors. “The only other major donor displaying a similar pattern of bilateral vaccine diplomacy is China, which shares none of its vaccine doses via Covax and has contributed relatively little financially to the facility.” Bilateral vaccine donations are, Rajah said, “not as good”. “It is more in line with vaccine diplomacy and playing politics than it is focused on equity. It is also less efficient. And, when we are trying to end a global pandemic, equity and efficiency are what we need.” There are concerns, too, that if new variants do emerge from largely unvaccinated populations in developing countries, wealthy countries will prioritise their vaccination supplies to provide boosters for their own populations, further exacerbating the global inequality and, ultimately, prolonging the pandemic. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said: “Australia’s commitment to our region’s resilience against the global Covid-19 pandemic remains steadfast.” It said Australia’s vaccine support for the region was “end-to-end”, strengthening local health systems to deliver vaccines to those who need them most, and addressing vaccine hesitancy in places where uptake of vaccines is low, such as Papua New Guinea. “Australia will continue to provide practical and timely support for our neighbours in the Indo-Pacific region to save lives, advance economic recovery, and build health systems to protect against future pandemics.” The director of the Burnet Institute, Professor Brendan Crabb, said on average a major new variant of Covid-19 has been detected every four months since the World Health Organisation characterised it as a pandemic. “Alpha emerged in an – at the time – unvaccinated UK, Delta emerged in a largely unvaccinated India, and Omicron emerged in a largely unvaccinated South Africa. Another variant of concern will no doubt arise unless we ramp up global vaccination efforts.” After a slow start to distribution, the Covax facility has distributed more than 1bn doses across 144 countries, out of 2.8bn doses that have been pledged. Crabb said while “Covax may not be perfect”, it offered an end-to-end vaccine program tailored to each country, working to ensure vaccines that are delivered ultimately find their way into people’s arms. “Widespread vaccination is the central pillar of the plan to reduce the global Covid burden, which is essential to ending the Covid pandemic for us all. And Covax is our best shot at vaccinating the world.”Health officials in New South Wales warned vaccines “may be less effective” against the Omicron variant and could lead to an increase in hospitalisations, just days before premier Dominic Perrottet announced Covid-19 restrictions would be scrapped. On 10 December, NSW Health’s Covid-19 critical intelligence unit published a briefing note on what was then the emerging Omicron variant, which had been discovered in South Africa in late November. Based on emerging data at the time, the unit warned of early evidence suggesting that vaccines could be less effective against the strain, and of “enhanced transmissibility” which suggested Omicron had a “substantial growth advantage over Delta”. It also flagged preliminary evidence suggesting “an increased risk of reinfection” from the variant, and pointed to increased hospitalisation rates in the Gauteng province of South Africa. The note was published as Covid-19 case numbers began to surge following the arrival of the first case of the Omicron variant in late November. When the critical intelligence unit published the note on 10 December, NSW recorded more than 500 daily cases for the first time in two months. A week later the figure had more than tripled. Despite that, the NSW government pushed ahead with its decision to ease restrictions introduced during the long Delta-wave of infections. On 15 December the government announced masks would no longer be mandatory at most locations indoors, scrapped the use of QR code check-ins for low-risk venues and dropped density limits. The NSW opposition leader, Chris Minns, said the fact the document had been published just days before restrictions were loosened was an “extraordinary revelation”. “This is clear evidence that the department of health was briefing the NSW government about the emerging risks of Omicron at least five days before the premier dropped the mask mandate, density limits, proof of vaccination and QR check-ins,” he said. “It was early days of Omicron but clearly the experts warned that caution was needed. Instead Mr Perrottet decided to ignore the emerging threat and all related advice. “Ignoring this health advice has had major real-world consequences, for the health system, our frontline workers, and to businesses and families.” In a statement, a spokesperson for Perrottet did not respond directly to questions about whether the briefing note was included in NSW Health advice given to the premier prior to easing restrictions on 15 December. “The NSW government’s top priority is and always has been the health and safety of our people,” a spokesman for Perrottet said. “The government carefully considers the health advice and also weighs up a range of other important factors before making its decisions including operational demands on the health system. “Throughout the Omicron wave, and over the past two years, our government has tailored the settings as the situation evolved to keep the community safe and ensure those who need care can access it.” The premier has repeatedly defended the decision to push ahead with the re-opening in the face of Omicron’s arrival as necessary for the state to begin living with Covid-19. He has continually pointed to hospitalisations and ICU presentations remaining well within the capacity limits outlined by NSW Health, and pointed to the fact that NSW has adopted restrictions similar to neighbouring Victoria and Queensland. “We’re not going our own way in NSW, we are following the national plan with every other state along the eastern seaboard,” he said last week. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Minns pointed to the fact Perrottet subsequently re-introduced the restrictions on 23 December as the number of health workers furloughed either by illness or isolation requirements rose into the thousands as evidence it was a “mistake”. “It was a case of closing the gate after the horse had bolted,” he said. “And it was one thing to completely ignore the health advice, it was another to fail to plan for the inevitable consequences.” While the Guardian has previously reported the decision to scrap QR check-ins at low risk venues was recommended by NSW Health, Perrottet has previously refused to say whether the state’s chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, supported removing the mask mandate. When the decision was made on 15 December Chant said only that it was a “matter for government” and that she was “strongly recommending we keep masks”. But the briefing document, which was published online but went unreported before being overwritten by an updated brief in January, suggests NSW Health was aware the Omicron variant was likely to present a significant challenge to the state’s hospital system. The 10 December briefing note was provided as an overview of emerging information on the new variant and collated data from the experiences of a number of countries as well as advice from the World Health Organization. The note advised that while studies were still under way to understand how effective vaccines would be at suppressing Omicron, it said there were “early indications that fully vaccinated people are protected against the Omicron variant”. “However, the protection may be less effective,” the note warned. “There are early reports of breakthrough infections in South Africa among people who have received any of the three kinds of vaccines in use in that country (Johnson &amp; Johnson, Comirnaty and Vaxzervia). “Preliminary data presented at a briefing hosted by South Africa’s Department of Health suggests some mutations may be associated with increased antibody resistance [and] Moderna’s CEO says current Covid-19 vaccines are likely to be less effective against Omicron.” While significant data has now emerged linking Omicron with milder symptoms than other previous strains of the virus, on 10 December the briefing warned that it wasn’t yet clear “whether Omicron causes more severe disease” and warned that it had led to increasing hospitalisation rates overseas. “Early reports suggest increasing rates of hospitalisation in South Africa; however, this may be due to overall increasing rates of infection, and not a signal of more severe disease,” it stated. It also noted the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control had rated the risk of the emergence and spread of Omicron as “high to very high” and warned the mutations observed in Omicron were “associated with enhanced transmissibility”. While briefings are not an endorsed position of NSW Health, the critical intelligence unit was established to provide “rapid, evidence-based insights” on emerging Covid-19 trends. It sits within the Agency of Clinical Information, and provides high level summaries of studies and evidence, which it regularly updates and publishes. In an updated note on 27 January the critical intelligence unit pointed to data from a number of countries suggesting people infected with the Omicron variant are less likely to require hospitalisation compared with Delta, and that the overall stay for those who did require hospital treatment was shorter.On a chilly open field in Texas, Dan Patrick was delivering prepared remarks about the spectre of socialism when the crowd broke into a chant about the 2020 presidential election. “Well, we all know who won in 2020, don’t we?” the state’s lieutenant governor ad-libbed. “Who won?” There was apparently not a soul who believes the answer is Joe Biden. The campaign rally in Conroe, near Houston, was the latest stop in what might be called Donald Trump’s “big lie” tour. The former US president is travelling the country, backing Republican candidates for midterm elections who pass a specific litmus test: reinforcing his debunked claims of voter fraud. They did so with gusto at a rally in Arizona earlier this month. On Saturday night, thousands of Texans watched giant video screens play a trailer for a “documentary” that purports to reveal how 2,000 “mules” were used to stuff votes into drop boxes in 2020 (state officials and judges found no significant evidence of irregularities). The trailer’s sinister visual and sound effects were the overture for a speech by the Texas attorney general, Ken Paxton, who led a lawsuit seeking to overturn the 2020 election results in four battleground states only to see it dismissed by the supreme court. Then came Patrick, who after Trump’s defeat offered up to $1m for evidence of voter fraud, and the governor, Greg Abbott, who has ordered an audit of the 2020 election results in four big counties (even though Trump won the Lone Star State by 300,000 votes). Abbott did not promulgate the “big lie” directly but urged the crowd to show their support for “our president” Trump. It was a jarringly white leadership team in a state of rapidly growing racial diversity. Chris Hollins, a lawyer and vice-president of the Texas Democratic party, said in a phone interview: “This is a star-studded lineup of vote suppressors and anti-democracy champions.” Oil-rich Texas has the biggest population of any state apart from California and biggest land mass of any state barring Alaska. “Everything is bigger in Texas,” the saying goes, and it appears that Trump’s brand of populist authoritarianism is no exception. The state’s Republican party has slashed gun controls, enforced the most rigid abortion limits in the country and taken a draconian line on border security and how race is taught in schools. Paxton – under criminal investigation by the FBI over claims that he abused his office to benefit a wealthy donor – boasted that he has already filed 27 lawsuits against the Biden administration over environmental regulations, asylum rules and other issues. “Texas will be leading the fight against the Biden administration,” he told the rally. Paxton is facing the most competitive Republican primary on 1 March but not because his challengers oppose Trump. One is Louie Gohmert, a congressman who has downplayed the 6 January insurrection and attended Saturday’s rally as a spectator. Another is George P Bush, nephew of former president George W Bush, whose campaign signs lined the approach to the rally venue and whose staff handed out flyers that proclaimed Bush “an early endorser of President Trump”. But it is Trump’s endorsement that is the golden ticket here. Among his slate of anti-democratic candidates is Sid Miller, the state’s agriculture commissioner, who declared that he no longer regards the midterms as a contest between Democrats and Republicans or liberals and conservatives. “It’s a race between patriots and traitors,” he said chillingly. “It’s that simple.” For his part, Abbott has pivoted to the right to fend off even more extreme rivals and keep in the former president’s good graces. It is working. Rally goer Jessica Hehl, 33, commented: “I think Governor Abbott is a little weak but if Trump endorses him then I trust Trump.” Hehl, a stay-at-home mother wearing a T-shirt that said “Let’s go Brandon” – rightwing code for insulting Biden – dismissed Democrats’ warnings that democracy is under threat. “If anything, it’s the other way around. Biden and the liberals stole our election and are trying to keep our faces covered and to mandate vaccines for four-year-olds.” Her husband Brian Hehl, 40, a veteran of the Afghanistan and Iraq wars who now works in underground construction, declared: “We’re pro-life, pro-gun, pro-Trump, pro-freedom.” He cited baseless conspiracy theories about dead people voting and ballot papers being run through machines multiple times to insist that the 2020 election was stolen. “The evidence is everywhere. There are things we see and things we don’t see.” Vendors sold merchandise including flags that proclaimed “Trump won”, “Trump 2024”, “Fuck Biden” and, of course, “Make America great again”. Jason Weaver, 37, a construction business owner, was wearing a T-shirt that said, “Jesus is my saviour, Trump is my president”. For him, Trump’s assertion of voter fraud is enough. “I believe what he says, not what Biden says,” he explained. Several speakers at the rally flattered Trump by dangling the prospect of him winning back the White House in 2024. The event culminated with a characteristically dark, divisive and disjointed speech from the 45th president himself. He vowed: “Texas is never, ever turning blue. That is, unless they rig the election like they’ve been doing in numerous states.” Trump pledged that if he decides to run for president again and wins, the 6 January insurrectionists will be treated “fairly” and could receive pardons, prompting cheers from the crowd. He falsely asserted: “The 2020 election was rigged and everyone knows it. You know who knows it more than anyone else? The Democrats.” This myth has firmly taken root and manifested itself in Texas, where the Republicans-led state legislature has used it to justify an overhaul of laws in the name of “election integrity”. Matt Rinaldi, chairman of the state party, said: “We passed an election law to ensure that 2020 will never happen again here.” But this was not before a standoff when Democrats fled the state to deny Republicans the quorum needed to conduct legislative business. The limbo ended after 38 days when some Democrats returned, enabling Republicans to press ahead with making 24-hour polling sites, drive-through voting and the proactive sending of vote-by-mail applications illegal and punishable by imprisonment. It was a bitter blow for Hollins. The lawyer had successfully introduced these measures during the pandemic-hit 2020 election as county clerk of Harris county, which contains Houston. “We’re under assault in Texas and we’re under assault in many states across this country,” he said. “Democracy is frankly in peril in the United States right now and that’s why I’ve spent my time and so many others have spent their time trying to make the case at the federal level to pass laws that will protect our constitutional right to vote regardless of your party, regardless of what state you live in and regardless of many other attributes.” The effects are already being felt. Ahead of the primaries, local election officials have rejected thousands of mail-in ballot applications because of new personal ID requirements. They have even blamed a limited supply of voter registration applications on paper shortages. Hollins added: “Everything that Republican officials, particularly in Texas, are pushing right now seeks to make voting harder and harder, especially if you’re a person of colour, a young person, a person with a disability and especially if you live on the margins of society where things like having an ID or having transportation to the polls is a challenge for you.” Republicans deny the charges and accuse Democrats of scaremongering. Mark McCaig, chairman of the Texas Republican Initiative, a grassroots political organisation, said: “I don’t think there’s any voter suppression going on. It’s extremely easy to vote in Texas, especially compared to other states. We have nearly two weeks of early voting. All we’re doing is trying to make sure that our voting is secure but that legal votes can be cast easily.” Asked about Trump’s false claim that the 2020 election was stolen from him, McCaig did not offer a direct response, insisting that he is focused on Texas. The attack on American democracy has seen Trump acolytes launch campaigns for key offices in an effort to take control of election machinery. Should the former president run again in 2024 and lose, it is feared, these radicals could abuse their positions to overturn the results and hand him victory. The Brennan Center for Justice, a nonprofit law and public policy institute, said in a recent report that “this is the first time in the modern era that questions about the legitimacy of elections have played such a prominent role in contests for election officials”. Texas has its share of candidates using the “big lie” as a pretext to argue their success in the midterms is essential to the survival of democracy. Angelica Luna Kaufman, spokesperson for the state’s Democratic party, said: “Because this Trumpism and this extremism has taken such a hold in Texas, we’re seeing that, even in moderately conservative counties and districts, people who are basically insurgents are being encouraged to run for public office on the Republican ticket in the primaries. “That’s very scary. That’s going to push out those moderate conservatives and you’re going to have this extremism representing large portions of our state that do not share that same ideology.” Then there is gerrymandering. Abbott signed into law newly redrawn congressional district maps that, voting rights advocates contend in a lawsuit, dilute the vote of communities of colour since recent population growth has been overwhelmingly among Latino, Black and Asian American people. Activists warn that Republicans are playing a long game to shore up white minority rule, with Texas serving as a template for the nation. Trump won the state in 2020 by 5.5 percentage points, the closest margin of victory by a Republican presidential nominee in decades. Cristina Tzintzún Ramirez, the president and executive director of NextGen America, the biggest youth-vote mobilisation organisation in the country, said: “It’s the largest battleground state in the country so Republicans are staking long-term bets on how they can suppress the vote of communities of colour to hold power long term. It’s not just about 2024 – it’s about 2024 and beyond. “Texas is really a microcosm of where we’re headed as a country. We are a state where 95% of our growth came from communities of colour over the last census. It is that exact population that they are trying to suppress.” She added: “As a country we are becoming more diverse and we see a Republican party that is hellbent on suppressing and diluting the power of that voice and vote. In Texas, from voter registration to how we vote to redistricting, they are using any measure and means possible to make sure that our voices are not heard equally to our white counterparts.” Speaking by phone from the state capital Austin, Ramirez was withering in her assessment of the guest speakers at Trump’s rally. “It’s a lineup that quite frankly looks nothing like the state of Texas. People have an image of our state and there are some great white cowboys but Texas is majority young, Brown and Black. “Republicans want to make sure that our voice is not heard in the democratic process because they fear the power of our vote. They’re not winning on their ideas. They’re winning by breaking the rules and bending them in their favour.”Newcastle have reached an agreement with Brighton to buy the centre-back Dan Burn for about £12.5m. The 29-year-old is due for a medical on Sunday, while the club have confirmed the signing of Lyon midfielder Bruno Guimarães, who will cost £33.3m, rising to a possible £40m with add-ons. The two latest deals, along with the previous purchases of Kieran Trippier (£12m) and Chris Wood (£25m), will take the Premier League club’s spending under their new Saudi-backed owners to £80m in this transfer window. Brazil international Guimarães has signed a four-and-a-half year deal with the Magpies, and will wear shirt number 39. “Bruno is a hugely exciting talent and has been one of our primary targets so I’m delighted to secure him,” said the Newcastle manager. “He strengthens the group immediately ready for the challenge ahead. We look forward to welcoming him to the club on his return from international duty.” Newcastle had an £8m offer for Burn rejected last week but returned with a figure acceptable to Brighton after Eddie Howe made the 6ft 7in former Wigan and Fulham player a priority target. Burn, born in Blyth, Northumberland, grew up supporting Newcastle and has been keen on the move. Howe will be relieved to have landed a centre-back after being frustrated in pursuit of Lille’s Sven Botman and Sevilla’s Diego Carlos. The manager hopes to make further additions before Monday’s deadline, notably at left-back and in attack, where Arsenal’s Eddie Nketiah is high on his list. Spending in the post-Mike Ashley era was expected to change dramatically and the profile of signings has altered appreciably too. Ashley favoured younger players with resale value but Newcastle, largely thinking short-term amid a relegation battle, have so far bought or agreed deals for players aged 31 (Trippier), 30 (Wood) and 29 (Burn) as well as the 24-year-old Guimarães. Nketiah is 22.We Are the Brennans Tracey Lange Pan Macmillan, £16.99, pp289 The Brennans are a close-knit Irish-American family, running a pub in a small New York town. Five years ago, their eldest daughter, Sunday, fled to California, breaking off with her fiance and leaving her family disoriented by her abrupt departure. Now she returns after a drink-driving incident and, together with her brothers and father, their individual secrets are begun to be laid bare in this beautifully observed portrait of dysfunctional family life. Hurricane Lizards and Plastic Squid: How the Natural World Is Adapting to Climate Change Thor Hanson Icon Books, £20, pp304 “Simply put, if bush crickets, bumblebees and butterflies can learn to modify their behaviour, then it stands to reason that we can too.” So begins Hanson’s fascinating exploration of climate change, exploring the adaptation of species in different habitats. Hanson is a biologist whose passion and expertise are writ large here, as he combines personal observations – from watching Alaskan grizzly bears to migrating macaws in Central America – with the latest scientific research in a lively, engaging and optimistic assessment of the planet’s future. Boys Don’t Cry Fiona Scarlett Faber, £8.99, pp256 (paperback) Joe is a promising scholar at a prestigious school. His younger brother, Finn, has been diagnosed with cancer. They live in a socially deprived block of flats in Dublin known locally as the Jax, where local criminal Dessie Murphy is intent on getting Joe, like his father, embroiled in illegal activity. Alternating between Joe and Finn’s perspectives, Scarlett paints a vivid, tender and compelling story about fraternal love and grief in this accomplished debut novel. • To order We Are the Brennans, Hurricane Lizards and Plastic Squid or Boys Don’t Cry go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyAlmost 5bn items of personal protective equipment worth £2.7bn will be wasted as they are no longer needed or cannot safeguard NHS staff, ministers have revealed. The huge sum of money involved has prompted the Liberal Democrats to accuse the government of “extreme negligence on an industrial scale” in its use of public funds during the pandemic. The revelation came in a written parliamentary answer by the health minister Edward Argar. He was responding to a question tabled by Wendy Chamberlain, the Liberal Democrats’ chief whip and MP for North East Fife, about how much of the PPE that had been procured had then not been used. Argar said the government’s PPE programme had ordered more than 36.4bn items since the pandemic struck in March 2020. “Of this, approximately 3.4bn units are currently identified as potential excess stock. The estimated price for those items is £2.2bn,” he said. The minister did not explain why so much PPE had ended up as “potential excess stock”, or define precisely what that meant. He also said that 6.96bn items of the 36.4bn ordered so far “are not currently provided to frontline services”. That could be because it was new stock that had not yet been through quality assurance checks or not deployed because “a different product is preferred”. He added: “Of these, 1.2bn items are deemed to be not fit for use. The purchase price for these items was £458m.” Chamberlain said the disclosures showed that “the government is burning a hole in the pocket of the taxpayer through its wastage of personal protective equipment”. She added: “The government has misspent billions of pounds of public money on vital PPE for frontline staff that is either inadequate or will never be used. This is carelessness of the highest magnitude.” The waste of £2.7bn was yet another of the government’s “string of damning failures” over PPE, she said. “Awarding contracts to chums unlawfully, frontline workers wearing bin bags and dodgy masks, and billions wasted – this is merely the latest sorry chapter in this Conservative government’s inglorious record of procuring and supplying PPE to health and care workers who have worked so hard, with a dangerous virus circulating in hospitals and care homes, to give people care over the last two years.” The British Medical Association expressed disquiet at the wasted PPE. “Hearing that stocks of much-needed PPE were potentially left unissued, and that inadequate PPE was ordered, are just more failings in a catalogue of poor management which has resulted in wastage of significant amounts of public funds,” said Dr Vishal Sharma, the chair of the consultants committee at the doctors’ union. Dr Jenny Vaughan, the chair of the Doctors’ Association UK, a grassroots network of NHS medics, said: “The distinction between making sure there is enough protection and keeping stock levels so high [that] much will go to waste seems to have been well and truly lost, along with taxpayers’ money wasted. “We recognise the need to make sure staff continue to be protected but every pound squandered is a pound that cannot be spent elsewhere in the NHS, where every pound counts. The government needs to be completely open about how this is happening, and where the money went.” The revelations raise serious questions about the government’s probity and candour over PPE, she said. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “We have been working tirelessly to deliver PPE to protect our health and social care staff on the frontline, with over 17.5bn PPE items delivered so far. “Where we have surplus stock of PPE, we have a range of measures we can take, including sales, donations, reuse and recycling or recovering costs from the supplier. In addition, we are working on plans to extend shelf life where appropriate.”Libya’s political class should stop conducting musical chairs to stay in power and focus instead on preparing for nationwide elections to be held by June, the special adviser to the UN secretary general has said. Stephanie Williams also warned of a possible resurgence of Islamic State if Libya were to fall back into total division. Libya failed to hold elections for a president and parliament on 24 December partly due to rows over the eligibility of three controversial candidates, but also a wider fear that armed militia across the country would not accept the result if their candidate lost. In the ensuing month divisions have worsened, as Libya’s parliament, the House of Representatives (HoR), prepares to install a government to rival the UN-recognised Government of National Unity (GNU). The HoR says the GNU’s mandate expired on 24 December. Williams told the Guardian in an interview: “My fear is that some people may now manoeuvre for a prolonged period of delay. The HoR exists off a mandate that it was given in elections 3,700 days ago. It has been seven years, seven months since Libya went to the national polls. The other chamber, the High State Council, was elected 10 years ago. Their shelf life has long expired. This is ultimately a struggle over assets, power and money. That is quite a motive to hang on. “I want the HoR as quickly as possible to set out a credible political process that answers the question that almost 3 million Libyans have asked, which is: what has become of our elections? It is entirely possible for the HoR to put elections back on track, and for an electoral event to happen by June. “Instead they have turned their attention to the musical chairs game, and the formation of a new government to replace the GNU. Before discussing a new government whose mandate would be unknown, the HoR should set an election date.” Williams said: “There is a thirst for elections – nearly 2.5 million collected their voting cards and in the city of Benghazi alone 800 people came forward to stand in the parliament. There is another new generation of Libyans that want to exercise their political rights.” She added: “Elections can be part of a broader process of national reconciliation, particularly in countries where there has been no elections for a long time and there is an entrenched political elite who have had their noses in the trough for a long time.” She said she was ready to sit down immediately with the two chambers to hammer out a constitutional basis for the elections. Williams warned the possible formation of two governments in the country could be dangerous. The power vacuum last week led to the re-emergence of Islamic State in the south of the country, and an attempt on the life of the minister of justice. “The spectre of the black flag in the south being raised is something we are all very worried about, and already several Libyan National Army soldiers were killed last week,” she said. The elections set for 24 December never happened partly due to conflicting rulings by Libyan courts on the eligibility of three candidates – Gen Khalifa Haftar, the head of the Libyan National Army, Saif al-Islam Gadaffi, the son of the former Libyan dictator, and Abdul-Hamid Dbeibah, the head of the GNU. The international criminal court is inquiring into the first two while Dbeibah set aside a pledge that he would not stand in the elections, a precondition that had been set for anyone running the interim government. Williams said “it was not for the UN to decide which candidates stood. It is entirely a Libyan decision.” But she added: “You would have to ask Dbeibah what he thinks of a violation of a moral pledge.” She also called for the wings of the GNU, including its budget, to be clipped before it was replaced by an elected body. “The intention endorsed by the UN was for the GNU to be a small technocratic government to deliver services to the municipalities, to prepare for the elections, deal with the Covid crisis and restore electricity. That required only a modest budget.” She also called for the merger of Libya’s two central banks, but said this had to be accompanied by complete transparency, a criticism of a previous UN decision last year not to publish a UN-commissioned Deloitte review of the bank’s finances. She said: “Implementation of the merger of the two banks has to be conducted with total transparency. The distribution and management of oil revenues in the country has long been a key driver of this conflict, so need full transparency.” Williams’ own future as special adviser has been in question since Russia at the UN in New York last week refused to renew the mandate of the UN mission to Libya until a new special envoy was appointed. The mandate expires at the end of this month. Williams, an Arabic-speaking US diplomat, served in 2020 as acting director of the UN’s Libya mission after previously being its deputy director. She was persuaded to come out of retirement after her Russian-backed successor, Jan Kubiš, a Slovak, resigned under a welter of criticism. The UN secretary general appointed Williams as his special adviser in early December in part to circumvent Russian objections to her appointment.One of the most remarkable traits of Rafael Nadal, Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer throughout their incredible careers has been the way they have maintained their hunger for titles and sheer enthusiasm for the sport. No matter the obstacles in their path or the advancing of time, winning seems to bring them just as much joy as it did when they first tasted victory at the highest level. The sheer elation on Nadal’s face on Sunday as he completed an incredible comeback to beat Daniil Medvedev in the final of the Australian Open told its own story. A month and a half after the recovery from foot surgery left him wondering if he would even make it to Melbourne, and a month after he had Covid, which also interrupted his preparations, Nadal is back as champion and for now, the most successful of the lot. Winning his first grand slam at 19, as Nadal did at the French Open in 2005, was a “super-special moment” but when you’re 35 and up until six weeks ago, you did not even know whether you would be able to play in the tournament, let alone win it, the feeling is something else altogether. “It has been more emotional than the first one, no doubt about that,” he said. “At later stages of your career, I think you are able to enjoy more these moments because you know the chances are less. When you are 19, when I achieved the first, of course is super special, but you know if you are playing well, you’re going to keep having chances to enjoy moments, no? Today you never know what can happen. Yeah, of course I am proud. The personal satisfaction is higher than years ago, no? I just stay more in the moment without thinking so far in front.” It was always a nice thought that in this era of three giants of the men’s game, somehow they might all end their careers level on 20 grand slam titles apiece. Having moved ahead with 21, Nadal will go to the French Open, where he has won the title an astonishing 13 times, with renewed confidence. And yet Nadal’s victory may also inspire Djokovic, who beat him on the way to the title in Paris last year, to come back even stronger. Unable to play at the Australian Open because of visa issues due to not being vaccinated against Covid, the world No 1 will have a point to prove. But the way Nadal played throughout the Australian Open, particularly when he trailed by two sets and faced triple break point at 3-2 down in the third set against Medvedev, will surely convince him he has more grand slam titles in him. At 35, and with his history of injuries, there’s no saying how many more years he will have but his desire remains undimmed, as he told the crowd. “A month and a half ago, I didn’t know if I was going to be able to be here. But you have given me the energy to keep trying to come back next year. “I want to keep going. Things can change quick but I feel lucky to have the chance to compete this way. It has been amazing for me and unforgettable. Of course I feel more confident that I’m going to keep going, keep fighting and playing this sport that makes me happy. I just feel confident that now I am going to have my chances to keep playing like this.” Both Djokovic and Federer were quick to congratulate Nadal on social media. Their rivalry has pushed each other and though Nadal is top of the pile for now, he is too modest to say he is the best. “I will never say I deserve” he said. “I don’t care much if I am the No 1, or not the No 1, the best of history or not the best of history. For me it’s about enjoying nights like today, that means everything for me. It means even more to me to achieve a second Australian Open than any other thing.” Asked what has taken him to this point, Nadal said: “Love for the game, passion, positive attitude, and working spirit … that’s all. And the right people next to me helping every single day. I think that’s all.” It’s a humility that has been present and obvious throughout his career, allowing him to accept the painful defeats and enjoy his many highs, from that first one in Paris to this latest one in Melbourne. On the evidence of the past fortnight, there is more to come.My mother, Barbara Brandenburger, who has died aged 91, had only one response when she heard of someone in need – “What can we do to help?” A campaigning journalist and co-founder of the UK’s leading charity for Bosnian Muslims, she began championing the dispossessed while still at school, holding the hand of a Gypsy girl who had been shunned by the other children in the playground. Born in London, Barbara was the only child of Bessie and David Cowan, both shopkeepers descended from Russian and Polish Jewish immigrants. Her father never recovered mentally from serving in the trenches of the first world war. During the blitz, her parents moved to Buckinghamshire and Barbara went to Aylesbury grammar school, then St Godric’s Secretarial College in London. At 19, she met Peter Brandenburger, 10 years her senior, who had been in the second world war. They married in 1954 and had two children, Simon and me. My father came from a background of great privilege, yet theirs was a true marriage of shared values. Barbara began at the BBC as a secretary – her boss spent most of her time devising knitting patterns, so she covertly took over her role of writing continuity scripts and then edited Ariel, the in-house magazine. In 1963, she wrote a book, Working in Television, for Bodley Head, which was a definitive text for decades. Her freelance journalism flourished, and she wrote regularly for the Observer, interviewing John Fowles, Noel Coward and Richard Attenborough, and writing on child development. My mother determined we should invite those who needed help to share our family home in Northwood, north London. And so nine-year-old Rabia, from Whitechapel, came to stay in the holidays and returned for years. At 17, my schoolfriend, Sara, lost both her parents. She came to live with us and my parents regarded her as their daughter. My mother cared for her own parents until they died and then she and my father moved to Parsons Green, Fulham, in south-west London. In 1992, war in the Balkans erupted. My mother watched the news and saw Bosnian Muslims being murdered. With her great friend Claude Murray, she launched a multifaith charity, the Bosnian Support Fund. In three weeks, 1,000 bags of warm clothes and a lorry were heading across Europe for Bosnian refugees, before the harsh winter. Then, they flew to Ljubljana to find a refugee camp to support. Accompanied by an interpreter, 17-year-old Faja, they found Harastnik camp with 200 people and focused aid there for 10 years – supplies, dentistry, therapists and, eventually, resettlement. Back home, they could not forget their teenage interpreter in Ljubljana, his family now under siege in Sbrebenica. He had represented Yugoslavia in the International Physics Olympiad. My mother sat next to a physics teacher at a wedding, and, a few weeks later, Faja received an all fees-paid scholarship to Oxford. By the time the charity came to a natural end in 2001, my father was frail, then Barbara was diagnosed with cancer. Her clean bill of health sadly coincided with my father’s death in 2009. Her home in Fulham remained an open house, an unofficial citizens’ advice bureau for friends, neighbours, local shop workers and market stallholders. My mother had an infinite gift for compassion. Barbara is survived by Simon and me, Sara, Rabia, and her grandson, Henry, and step-grandchildren, Charlotte and Mili.Daniil Medvedev raised his eyebrows, swung his head to one side and mouthed “boring”. Tennis Australia president Jayne Hrdlicka was in the middle of her presentation speech, and listening politely to niceties was not a trick left in his playbook, which had already been sucked dry by the Spaniard standing next to him. It was peak Medvedev. Sore loser? Not really. He likely would have said the same thing even if he had won. Truculence is in his DNA – but not because he is Russian. The stereotyping of Medvedev is still very much alive. For years he has been cast as the “pantomime villain”, the maverick with a hint of crazy in his eyes. This past fortnight all manner of adjectives have been attached to his name in the arenas and on the airwaves. Even the “Russian devil” has somehow seen the light of day, a troubling trope that says more about the mouths from which it came than it does the player himself. Medvedev would probably lament that typecasting of this nature is a sign of a “low IQ”. It might also just be easier to quantify complex characters prone to colourful behaviour by putting them into a little box labelled “bad guy”. Had he outlasted the indefatigable Rafael Nadal and been crowned Australian Open champion – and stopped the “good guy” Nadal from making history – he would now also be confirmation bias personified. In reality, the world No 2 is many things. Unorthodox and tempestuous, intensely confident with the talent to match. And also a contradiction of himself, both unflustered and agitated, calculated and over-emotional. He alienates his audience and in the next breath wins them back over. He tells a chair umpire – without a hint of irony – that he is a “a small cat”, and then apologises profusely. Informs the home crowd he will only watch the start of Ash Barty’s women’s final because it clashes with his dinner plans, then clarifies he will stream it on his mobile phone. Some of his more outrageous moments are visceral eruptions in the heat of the battle. On this particular night he boiled over in the fourth set. Nadal’s momentum had reached a crescendo and whenever Medvedev won a point you could hear a pin drop. When he lost one you could hear him, barking directives at chair umpire John Blom to quieten the chaos. “Can you take control, please? A small ‘please’ is not enough,” he demanded. “Step up. It’s the final of a grand slam. With idiots, ‘please’ doesn’t work.” Last week he admitted he “can get really emotional”. “I have been working on it,” he said. “I think if we look back at myself five years ago when I started playing there was less attention on me, but I was just insanely crazy.” But there is sometimes also a sense he knows exactly what he is doing, his craftiness communicated via that mischievous twinkle in his eye. Like after his quarter-final when, having fought back from two sets and a match point down to defeat Felix Auger-Aliassime, he revealed in his on-court interview he had asked himself “what would Novak do?” He stirs the pot, and revels in the reaction. On Sunday against Nadal, when he won a tightly contested second set, the boos and cheers came in equal measure. He simply spread his arms wide and beckoned for more. He hit a sitter of a drop shot into the net, was greeted by applause, then clapped his racket in sarcastic thanks. Living for the theatre. Thus it really had been no bother when he first walked out on to Rod Laver Arena to boos (not “siuus”). There were cheers, too, but the reception was decidedly lukewarm. Nadal had the masses in his pocket from the off, and he did not care one bit. Back at the 2019 US Open the villain motif was in full swing when, during his third-round defeat of Feliciano López he endured almost two hours of relentless booing and responded with: “I want all of you to know when you sleep tonight, I won because of you. The more you do this, the more I will win for you guys.” A few days later he played Nadal in the Flushing Meadows final, another brutal five-setter – when Nadal took a two-set lead – which doubled as an unlikely resurrection in the popularity stakes. The mutual respect clearly remained in this even longer rematch. “I want to congratulate Rafa because what he did today, it was insane,” he said. “I tried during the match just to play tennis, but after the match I ask him, ‘are you tired?’. I think the level was very high. You raised your level after two sets for the 21st grand slam.” Before this final Medvedev, 26 in mid-February, was the only man the whole tournament to have come back from two sets to love down to win a match. Nadal, in his heavily compromised physical state, should not have lasted the distance against the body up the other end. Medvedev’s is a gangly, willowy thing. One could fold him up like a pair of trousers and slip him into a drawer. But he is as powerful as he is elastic, with a serve that topped out at 214km/h (133mph) and a hard, flat backhand Novak Djokovic says is “strong as a wall”. At odds with his outbursts he is also a cerebral player, befitting somebody who excelled at physics and mathematics in school – he has credited both with helping him develop analytical skills fit for tennis. Mats Wilander describes him as a “chess player on a tennis court”. Opponents do not like playing against him because he is famously hard to read. His only predictable quality is that he is unpredictable. A smiling assassin who gets inside your head and gives nothing away in return. He wanted a second grand slam title – he won the US Open in September – and would use his unpredictability until the very end. Once he had reached it the game was up. Nadal served. He swiped at the net, hit one long, copped an ace, then found himself overcome by a winner – in every sense of the word. After the pandemonium, during that “boring” speech, he chatted and joked with Nadal. When he spoke he was disarming. The crowd love it. Again, somehow, he had won them back. Little did they know he was still scheming. “Last but not least, I just wanted to thank …” they waited for their acknowledgment. He paused, then said: “… my team again. Thank you, guys.”My mother, Margaret Ewan, who has died aged 73, was a teacher of art and design at a number of schools in Scotland, including Beath high school in Cowdenbeath, Summerhill academy and Oakbank school in Aberdeen, and Balwearie high school in Kirkcaldy. Although she enjoyed her time at all of those places, it was in her last job, at Kirkland high school and Community college in Methil, during the 90s and 00s, that she perhaps had the most fun. Often known by some of her students at Kirkland as “Ma Ewan” – and even occasionally receiving Mother’s Day cards – she referred to her time there as “the golden years”, marked not just by a great relationship with the children but a huge sense of camaraderie with her teaching colleagues. Margaret was born in Keith, Banffshire, to Isabella McGregor, a Scot, and Thomas McDonald, a Canadian working with the Newfoundland Overseas Forestry Unit near Ballater. They put Margaret up for adoption as a baby, and she was raised by Cosimo Pacitti, a Scottish-Italian confectionary salesman, and his wife, Wilhelmina (nee Howes), a dressmaker. Cosimo and Wilhelmina brought up Margaret as an only child and absolutely doted on her, Cosimo even raising eyebrows by pushing her around in a pram, something that fathers in the 50s were not expected to do. She left Sacred Heart convent in Aberdeen to study jewellery, silversmithing and tapestry in the city’s Gray’s School of Art, and while there she met Neil Ewan, an architecture student, at a folk gig in 1966 at the local Blue Lamp club. They got married in 1972 and from 1988 our family – now including two daughters, Anna and me – lived in the coastal town of Burntisland, Fife, where Neil had been raised. After art school, Margaret gained her teaching qualifications from Moray House School of Education and Sport in Edinburgh in 1971, before embarking on her long teaching career and retiring from Kirkland in 2007. With Neil, Margaret shared a keen interest in Scottish history and was a long-term supporter of Scottish independence. She devoted her retirement to gardening, caring for her grandchildren and researching her family history. Margaret had met members of her biological family in the 70s and 80s, and a chance phone call in 2009 led her to discover two unknown brothers, Alex and Bert, who had been sent to Australia in the 50s as part of the UK government’s child migrant programme. In 2010 she travelled to Australia with me and Anna to meet them for the first time, and they remained in contact. Margaret was an empathic, clever and fun-loving woman who always gave so much support and love to those around her. Neil died in 2020. Margaret is survived by Anna and me, three grandchildren, Peggy, Daisy and Hamish, and two brothers.My father, John Pennington, who has died aged 94, was a civil servant, a socialist and a trade union activist who was national president of the Society of Civil and Public Servants. Born in Aughton, Lancashire, to James Pennington, a farm labourer, and Amy (nee Balmer), a seamstress, he attended St Edward’s RC secondary school in Liverpool, leaving in 1945 intending to study English, history and classics at Liverpool University. Finding it oversubscribed with demobbed soldiers, he trained as a teacher at Bangor Normal College, north Wales. He spent his national service as a staff sergeant in the Royal Army Education Corps, teaching illiterate young soldiers whose education had been affected by war and poverty. Stationed in Germany and Austria, he developed a love of the language and music of the region, signing on for a further five years with his regiment. In 1950, he met Agnes Starbuck on a blind date in Liverpool and they married in 1952 and settled on the Wirral peninsula. After their first child was born in 1953, John bought himself out of the army for the sum of £60 and joined the civil service as a customs and excise officer. He had great humanity and believed in fighting for fairness in the workplace. From 1955 he worked tirelessly for trade union members, becoming president of the Customs and Excise group, a national union, in 1973. When it merged with the Society of Civil Servants in 1975, he became president of the merged union, the Society of Civil and Public Servants. John was instrumental in campaigns for union recognition, notably the Grunwick dispute (1976-78) and at GCHQ in 1984. A Labour party member, he held officerships as secretary and chair on the Wirral at branch, district and constituency level. John took early retirement from Customs and Excise and from his union activity in 1985 to care for Agnes, who had some disabilities. He continued to serve on the Civil Service Appeal Board until 1997, and was a governor at Hillside primary school, Noctorum. He enjoyed following politics, rambling, birdwatching, music, his beloved garden, and tackling the Guardian cryptic crossword daily. He also learned to speak German, practising on the locals during trips to Germany and Austria with his eldest daughter. Agnes died in 1999. John is survived by their five children, Miriam, Martin, Louise, Richard and me, 14 grandchildren and four great-grandchildren.As a former senior police officer, when considering the Met’s investigation of alleged parties at No 10 I imagine a scene at the start of the shift for the Downing Street beat. I hear the sergeant giving out the orders: “PC Angel, there’s a job here for you from the deputy assistant commissioner, you lucky thing! Nip down to No 10 and issue this bunch of fixed penalty notices. You might want to take PC Butterman with you, and for heaven’s sake make sure you look good for the cameras and turn your body-worn video on.” While this would clearly give the officers a story to dine on for many years, it is unlikely to be a job to savour. This is the position the Met finds itself in, after the latest twists and turns of the past week. The Met had resisted historical inquiries into allegations of breaches of the coronavirus regulations; however, as the evidence being presented seems to suggest the claims are well founded, the police have a duty to act. “Policing without fear or favour” does need to be applied to all, and that’s the demand of the British public. The question facing the police is whether government guidelines or laws were broken – in the latter case, they could proceed with a criminal investigation. The problem now is that the Met is in the invidious position of playing catch-up when an internal inquiry by the civil service has already collected evidence. In a clumsy attempt to ensure best evidence, it has asked for a copy of the Sue Gray report and for a redacted version to be published. This investigation is similar to others that have run in parallel with other processes. The most obvious example is Hillsborough, which took two inquiries and 23 years to be referred for a criminal investigation. In regards to the Sue Gray report, if the police are investigating criminal matters, the evidence produced would not have been gathered using the rules for investigations, which means it is inadmissible in a court. Instead, she would have followed civil service guidelines. There is also the issue that she would not have been able to compel individuals to be available for statements to be taken. Every individual who is interviewed by police as a suspect would need to be told three things to make these statements admissible: they are not under arrest; they can avail themselves of free legal advice; and they must all be cautioned. Police access to emails, phone messages and CCTV images are subject to regulations that an employer may not have had to comply with. For example, employers can monitor use of work computers and phones. Police would need to redo this work adhering to legislation and making sure it can be used in criminal proceedings. The Met may have asked the report to be redacted to reduce the opportunities for collusion among suspects or to prevent prejudice to other investigations. One theory is that other “new” criminal offences may be discovered that could end up in court with a jury. These “new” offences could be compromised if they had already been publicly reported, as this would influence judgment by 12 good people on that jury. This is being denied by the Met, which states it is only looking at Covid breaches, but will it be able to ignore “new” offences that could be discovered when trawling through emails, CCTV photographs and statements? The next step will be a review of the evidence, identifying further lines of inquiry and evidence disclosure to suspects. If criminal proceedings go ahead, the matter must be proven beyond reasonable doubt for each named individual. Using the gathered evidence, the Crown Prosecution Service would consider using tests of sufficiency of evidence and public interest in determining whether to prosecute. The process on the whole is held to a much more robust standard than the publishing of a report, and could go some way to explaining the Met’s requests. Back in my imagined scenario, a sergeant asks for an update. “Well, Sarge, we asked lots of people what happened (took months, what with diaries, getting legal advice, etc). The big chap with the blond hair used loads of baffling words (ancient Greek to me). A lady called Sue provided a report she had written. Seemed to clarify everything but I can’t use it at court. Shame they couldn’t all act sensibly and let us get on with dealing with real crime.” Would you want to be either one of the PCs ? Parm Sandhu is a former chief superintendent with the Met police and author of Black and Blue: One Woman’s Story of Policing and PrejudiceA telecoms firm, a video games developer and a training company have become the latest businesses to join a four-day working week trial as scrutiny increases of work/life balance during the pandemic. Yo Telecom’s 90 employees will move from a 40-hour working week to a four-day, 32-hour working week with no reduction in pay for six months starting in June. They will be accompanied by game developer Hutch, with 120 employees, and MBL Seminars, with 70 employees. The trial is being run by academics at the universities of Cambridge and Oxford, plus Boston College in the US and thinktank Autonomy. It is being overseen by 4 Day Week Global, a campaign group. The UK pilot study appears to have gained momentum in recent weeks, with the 10th business on the verge of signing up, with more than 500 workers. Hundreds more businesses have signed up to information sessions, suggesting they are seriously considering testing the move. Joe Ryle, the director of the 4 Day Week UK campaign, said the trial’s organisers were considering increasing the number of business participants from 30 to 50, given the strong response to the launch of the pilot. Other businesses have implemented the four-day week of their own accord, including app-based Atom Bank and the Landmark London, a five-star hotel, which this month said it would give chefs an extra day off. The Landmark decision came in the context of tough competition for staff in the hospitality sector, as companies chase a limited number of workers. Trade unions have said they hope the UK’s low levels of unemployment – at 4.1% of the workforce – will lead to higher pay for workers. A cut in hours for the same amount of pay can equate to much the same thing for many workers, who can pursue other jobs, training or hobbies in the time off. Ryle said: “In the wake of the great resignation, organisations should embrace the four-day week as a way of retaining staff and attracting new talent.” Nathan Hanslip, chief executive of Southampton-based Yo Telecom, said he hoped an extra day off would result in healthier staff and better customer service. “I feel the additional day’s rest our team will benefit from will push productivity, increase work satisfaction and improve general wellbeing above and beyond anything we have experienced in the past,” he said. Shaun Rutland, chief executive and co-founder of Hutch, said he started the business with a “no-crunch” culture that embraced hybrid working – in contrast to some parts of the software and games industries, which are notorious for long hours. He said he hoped for improvements in productivity and worker health, as well as a boost to gender equality and “a more sustainable work environment”. Morgan Rigby, chairman of Manchester-based MBL Seminars, said: “Now that we are getting to the other side of the pandemic, the four-day week is back on our corporate agenda. It is exciting, a new dawn for a new era. Whilst it will be a challenge, it is one that we are looking forward to.”The MP Rosie Duffield is expected to decide imminently whether to quit Labour, after accusing the party’s whips of doing little to protect her from what she called “obsessive harassment”. The MP for Canterbury is understood to be meeting senior party officials for discussions about her future after a party member accused her of moving 200 miles away from her constituency to be with her partner, a documentary-maker, in Wrexham. Duffield, who was elected in 2017 and has held the only Labour seat in Kent, has faced a backlash from some within the party over her views on gender issues. The MP has a record of expressing gender-critical views and was called transphobic after liking a tweet saying women were people with cervixes. She said she felt unable to attend last year’s Labour conference because of the controversy generated by her remarks. Duffield has denied being transphobic. She has said she is “completely supportive of trans rights”. Her partner, James Routh, is understood to have been previously working on a documentary about Wrexham AFC, the non-league football club bought by the Hollywood actor Ryan Reynolds and TV star Rob McElhenney. In a series of tweets, Duffield described the new allegations – made in a blogpost – about her living arrangements in Wrexham as “personal, libellous, nasty and fictional crap” written by members of her own party. She said she has not moved to Wrexham. She said she was seriously considering whether to quit Labour because she did not feel supported by the party. “It is obsessive harassment. Neither the Labour party or either the former or current Leader or the Whips’ Office have done anything at all to stop it, to offer me any support, help or legal assistance. I am financially unable to pursue a libel action,” she tweeted on Sunday. “Kent police, parliamentary Security team and the Speaker’s Office have been helpful but it is the Labour party that have offered me no support at all since I unexpectedly became an MP 5 years ago. I am today considering my future in the Party very carefully.” Labour has recently asked its MPs to indicate whether they intend to stand again as part of preparations for a general election. Current MPs will be expected to go through a reselection process, though changes brought in by Keir Starmer make it more difficult for members to deselect MPs. A number of long-serving MPs, including Harriet Harman and Margaret Hodge, have indicated they will not stand again at the next election. A Labour party spokesperson said: “The party continues to be in touch with Rosie Duffield and has offered her advice and support.” • This article was amended on 31 January 2022 to remove an incorrect reference, introduced during editing, to Ryan Reynolds as a “US actor”; he is Canadian.A solid defence plus Mohamed Salah equals progress. It might not be particularly edifying or good to watch but it does seem to work. This was a dismal game, two hours of spoiling with a dusting of football but, in the football that was played, Salah was decisive. He scored the equaliser and set up the winner, so Egypt will meet Cameroon in Thursday’s semi-final, a meeting of the two most successful sides in Cup of Nation’s history. Egypt had ground their way to this stage, scoring only twice in four games. That’s the way it has always been for Carlos Queiroz and for all the success it has brought him, his cautious strategy can threaten to come unstuck if his side concedes early. Here they were behind inside six minutes, and it would have been earlier but for a weirdly extended VAR check. Ayman Ashraf clearly hacked down Achraf Hakimi and Soufiane Boufal caressed home the penalty. That forced Egypt out and, in the brief outbreaks of football between the whinging, the squabbling and the feigning of injury, there were moments when they threatened to look quite enterprising. But only moments, because this was a game that was rarely allowed to get going. It was a match in which the respective benches maintained a state of constant tension and at least as much energy was expended shouting at the fourth official as in trying to direct affairs on the pitch. The second half began with a brief football match. Egypt stopped moaning and started playing and the effect was immediate. Salah, having been peripheral, suddenly became a central figure, running at Morocco. He created a chance that Trézéguet, a half-time substitute for the injured Ahmed Hegazi, volleyed just wide. His involvement helped force a corner and, after Mostafa Mohamed’s header was saved, Salah was there to level with a smart sidefoot. And that, for the football, was that, other than a stunning Mohamed Abou Gabal save from a late Nayef Aguerd header. On the basis of that first 10 minutes of the second half, it was hard not to conclude that Egypt might have been better off just playing. Not everything should have to be attritional, but Egypt seem to want to break the rhythm of the game however and whenever they can. Abou Gabal’s protracted departure with a groin injury was dragged out longer than Glenn Close’s demise in Fatal Attraction. There is something depressing about seeing two such talented football teams with so little interest in playing football. It was no great surprise when a 16-man melee broke out with quarter of an hour to go with Hakimi and Mohamed the protagonists. Even then the allure of gravity proved too much for some to ignore, Munir El Haddadi flinging himself to the ground having felt a restraining hand on his chest apparently unaware that it came from the Senegalese referee Maguette N’Diaye. But ultimately, it was the ability of Salah that won out. He broke down the right and, having taken out three defenders, crossed low for Trézéguet to knock in the winner.Salah makes the difference in Egypt’s fightback victory over Morocco, reports Jonathan Wilson. Some emails. Thanks for reading, and keeping up with my own confusion at what was going on there. The answer there was not much and then lots of silliness. Ramzi: “A wholehearted thank you for the utterly amusing and comprehensive summary of the game between Morocco and Egypt. I am genuinely glad that I tuned in to your coverage instead of even watching the game live, wouldn’t want to have missed it.” Simon: “Surely when Trezeguet scores in extra time that’s the end of the match? At least if Euro 2000 is anything to go by...” Peter Oh: “A penny - how much would that be in crypto currency? - for Jürgen Klopp’s thoughts on his star striker having played two gruelling extra-time knockout matches on the trot and advancing to the next round” Ben: “Zamalek did not rate Sobhi... hence his exile to al-Ittihad... on permanent loan.” Egypt win what was a battle, though a slow-moving, attritional battle. Hakimi was not enough of a factor for Morocco and it was Mohamed Salah who took the stage and the game with his tap-in and superb run and cross to set up Trezeguet for the winner. 120+4 min: Salah subbed off at the end, oddly. There still might be a shootout....no, there won’t be. Egypt have done it and will face Cameroon. 120+2 min: Queiroz is booked at last, after two hours of agitation from the sidelines. Morocco win a cheap free-kick, and there’s a melee in the area with the Morocco goalie going up and Trezeguet going down on the floor. And then suddenly, from the free-kick, taken short, the ball breaks all the way and then, with no goalie to be seen, Salah can ‘t convert from a tight angle. Anarchy, chaos, disaster. 119 min: Pain etched on Egyptian faces. This has been tough going to watch, let alone to play in. Salah’s class has been the difference. Even the fighting was a bit half-hearted. 117 min: Sobhy, that third-choice goalie, gets his hands on the ball, and hangs on for dear life. Queiroz encourages him to get up and keep playing. 116 min: Salah wants another and cuts in to shoot when he might have been better served to keep the ball. The clock is ticking down slowly. 114 min: Morocco really need to try and test that third-choice goalie. So far, he’s hardly been near the ball. 112 min: El Haddadi is all bur in tears as he sits on the racetrack by the side of the pitch. 110 min: An Egypt change, on comes Stoke and Huddersfield legend, Sobhi. And off goes El-Haddadi for Morocco, and he looks exhausted. 109 min: Crypto ads aplenty on the sidelines here. It’s not top-level football without it. 108 min: Egypt seem to have control here, and Morocco seem tired by their defensive work in the second half. 106 min: Into the second half of extra time. Salah tries one of those chases down the wing but is then hauled back for offside. 105 min: Egypt want another and Mohamed whacks the ball long and out. What can Masina and Morocco rescue from this game? They will have fifteen minutes to do so. A yellow card for Abdelmonem and a free-kick for Morocco in the last knockings. Hakimi whacks over and that’s disappointing from him. Half-time in extra time. 102 min: That was the moment Salah had waited for, and he took it with the class we are all acquainted with. Egypt’s job is now to protect that third-choice goalie of theirs. It was all about Salah, as at last he finds space down the wing as he takes on three defenders, and then passes across goal and Trezeguet keeps his cool and slots in. Brilliant from Salah. 99 min: A glimmer of a chance as Salah looks to be in, only for the ref to penalise his challenge on Bono in the Moroccan goal. Salah still hasn’t found the service he was looking for. 97 min: Sobhy doesn’t look too secure as the ball is looped into the area and he misses it, only for a defender to clear. Poor Abou Gabal is in tears on the bench. 95 min: Finally, finally off goes Abou Gabal and on comes the third-choice goalie, Sobhy. Abou Gabal can hardly walk to the touchline. 93 min: The bright beginning of the start of the second half is not repeated. As the match ebbs towards penalties then there might be even less football played. 91 min: We are back underway. Egypt change, and it’s not the goalie and Ashraf goes off, and Alaa comes on. Bonus soccer it is, and there will be 30 more minutes. Perhaps some football might break out. 90+4 min: Salah attempts one of his long runs but Masina and Guerd come across to stop him. 90+2 min: Elneny concedes a corner, now can Morocco test Abou Gabal’s dodgy groin? Nope, Egypt get the ball clear. 90+1 min: Five minutes added on, and Abou Gabal still refuses to go off. Shades of Les Sealey at Wembley in 1991. 90 min: Into the last minute of normal time, though it’s been far from normal. Abou Gabal is down for the last time. 88 min: More waiting as Abou Gabal is strapped up and will continue with a defender taking his goal kicks. 86 min: Morocco changes - Louza on, Amallah off. Then Mmaee on, and En-Nesyri off. Salah is chatting behind his hand with Carlos Q. 85 min: The last ten minutes are the usual load of infringements and breaks in play. Morocco waste a chance to get the ball back into the area and Abou Gabal looks to be done. Egypt will be down to their third-choice goalie. 82 min: Abou Gabal hurt himself in that moment of heroism and there’s a further break in play. 81 min: Close, so close for Morocco! From a free-kick, the ball comes back in. Abou Gabal makes an amazing save from a header from Aguerd, who cannot believe it didn’t go in. It came back off the bar and back out. What a save. 80 min: El-Haddadi at it again, but having failed to get the referee booked he’s got Ashraf booked. Well done, mate. 78 min: El-Haddadi has, by some miracle, recovered from that brutal assault by the ref. Silly boy. 76 min: It goes off now, and the punches are going. Amusingly. El-Haddadi dives to the floor after the referee shoves him away from the melee.. It started with Hakimi legging up Mohamed and then everyone piling in. This is not football. This is nonsense. Hakimi is booked as is Mohamed, and the rest get away with it. Still no red card. 74 min: No actual football being played. Saiss and Abdelmonem Elsayed Mohamed Ahmed clash and there’s some playacting. The two benches continue to rave away at each other and the referee screams at Salah to calm down. 72 min: The fouls stacking up and a prediction is a second yellow is coming at some point. Meanwhile, there’s some consternation on the bench, as Abdel Wahed seems to be piling up bookable fouls and not getting a second yellow. Both sets of coaches are rowing with each other. 69 min: Clarification from our correspondent. One of them, at least. 68 min: Salah goes on a long and winding run and gets knocked over. No theatrics, he gets up and gets back on with it. 66 min: Moroccan sub, off goes Boufal the goalscorer and on comes Rahimi. 65 min: Dispatches from Yaoundé here. 63 min: It’s getting bitty again, the foul count feels like it should be stratospheric. Aguerd heads over a decent chance from a set piece, and that could have been better for Morocco. 61 min: Better from Morocco, not so much pressure from Egypt...he speaks too soon as Roman Saiss stops Marmoush speeding through with a superbly judged tackle, taking the ball from the Egyptian just as he shaped to shoot. 59 min: Morocco gain some possession at last. Hakimi takes a whack, and they try to take it slow on the free-kick. Resting on the ball as Brendan Rodgers used to say. The rest doesn’t last long as the ball ends up back with Egypt soon enough. 57 min: Still all Egypt, and the likes of Boufal are seeing very little of the ball at the other end. 55 min: Egypt fancy another, as Mohamed tees up Salah and then Trezeguet has the ball whipped from him just as he is ready to shoot. One chance, one goal. Bounou makes a fine save from Mohamed and the ball squirts to Salah who has read the ball and slots it home. It had been coming from the first kick of the second half. 51 min: More Egypt pressure, more deep-lying Moroccan defence. That seems set to be the pattern of this match until a goal comes. 49 min: Trezeguet and Salah link after a weaving run from the Liverpool man, and Trezeguet unleashes a shot. Much better from Egypt. 47 min: Salah in the middle as Egypt build up a head of steam. Morocco rocking back on their heels against that added attacking impetus. 46 min: The second half is underway. Mo Salah took to the field while having a long chat with the referee. Hegazy couldn’t continue and Trezeguet, of Aston Villa, comes on in a reshuffle, and goes to the left side of attack. Half-time transfer news. Tom Hopkins emails in: “Your point about wasting a goal scorer on set pieces reminded me of the perverse pleasure of Harry Kane taking corners at the Euros before England became, you know, quite good. Good luck Watford fans!” The only moment of class was the Hakimi surge that forced the penalty and the coolness of Boufal, the one-time Saint now Angers man, as he scored. Egypt have been rotten, and Salah peripheral. The main action has been the earache the referee has received from both teams. 45 min: Hegazy is being worked on off the field. The players on the field are still arguing with the referee as Egypt prepare a sub. Two minutes added on. 43 min: Long whack forward from Masina, to nobody and that’s about the limit of ambition for Morocco. Elneny steps back to clear some danger. On the sideline, Hegazy, the West Brom legend, goes down with what looked like groin injury. It doesn’t look good. And he screamed out, though there’s been a bit of that from both teams. 41 min: Somehow Ashraf, guilty of the foul for the penalty, escapes a yellow for a studs-up job. He thanks the referee most gratefully. 39 min: It’s difficult to describe just how bad this game has become. But it’s bad, very bad. And both teams happy for that to be the level. Derby games are often like that. 37 min: To say this game is stop-start would be an understatement. Like being on the District Line out to Dagenham. 35 min: Amrabat sets off on a long run but gets tackled, and at the other end Masina steps in to stop the danger. This is still poor stuff from Egypt, who can’t put any passes together. 34 min: Nonsensical rolling around after a foul from Amallah on Abdel Wahed, and there’s the Moroccans’ first booking. 32 min: Free-kick in a dangerous position and Hakimi will hit it. Like everything in this game, it takes an age to happen. Two minutes of hanging around and he smashes it well wide. 30 min: Morocco carry it forward for the first time in a while. Boufal tries to tempt Wahed into a foul. Then Elneny is penalised for a foul. The Egypt players are surrounding the ref and Salah is called over to tell his teammates to behave. 27 min: Egypt now enjoying far more of the ball but are not playing at all well. 25 min: First booking as Egypt’s Abdel Wahed is penalised for a cruncher in the centre of the park. What you might call a tactical foul, and Queiroz is not very happy with that. 24 min: Masina whacks into Salah, and there’s another free-kick. Guess who takes it? Yes, though this time it results in Bounou having to make a save when the ball comes back out. 22 min: An Egypt counter is on but Mohamed overplays the ball and Salah runs into heavy traffic, with no chance to show off his wizardry. 20 min: Good save from Bounou from a Marmoush shot from distance. Right height, as they say but decent, alert keeping from the Moroccan keeper. 18 min: Salah again over a free-kick, from distance. It comes off the wall and behind but Queiroz is unimpressed on the touchline. Even less so when Salah makes a mess of the corner. Again, why is taking them? 17 min: An Egypt pass out to the right is beyond Ashraf and there’s a lot of arguing going on between the Egypt players. All is not well at all. 15 min: There’s a man down for Egypt, and it’s El Soleya, one of their star men, who got on the end of one of those Moroccan crunching tackles. 13 min: Carlos Queiroz and the referee get involved in a sideline discussion. Egypt seem to be distracted by something, they are way off the pace. 12 min: Boufal again involved as he runs forward, and he has a shot blocked for a corner. Plenty of jostling in the box but Egypt hold firm. 10 min: Salah takes an Egypt corner as they try to find a way back into this game. It’s cleared with a little bit of difficulty. Then Salah takes a free-kick from distance with the same result. It seems a waste to have the world’s best finisher on set pieces. 8 min: The ball has been barely in play, and yet we have had a goal and a possible shock on our hands. Egypt have been poor. It takes almost as long to take the penalty, but Boufal keeps his cool and sends Abou Gabal the wrong way. Nerveless stuff. 4 min: There’s an early penalty claim, and that’s plumb. The VAR is called in, Ashraf has clearly fouled Hakimi as he galloped to the byline. It takes an age for the referee to be called over to see it. About 90 seconds in fact. 1 min: We are go in Yaoundé and the airhorns are seeing some serious use already. Early touch for Southampton’s Boufal, who has such a key role for Morocco. Morocco made two changes from the 11 that began the 2-1 win over Malawi as Aymane Barkok replaces Imran Louza and Munir El Haddadi comes in for Ayoub Elkaabi. Egypt also made two changes. Mohamed Abo Gabal replaces goalkeeper Mohamed El Shenawy and Ayman Ashraf is in for Hamdi Fathi. The players are lined up as they hear the national anthem of Egypt and the cameras go close to them as they sing. Looks like Mo Salah is miming. Instead, his eyes dart around with extreme focus. The Moroccan anthem’s performance is a bit more subdued though hands are clasped to chests. The social media readout of those teams. The excellent Nick Ames reported on Cameroon’s win yesterday, and they will face the winner of this match in the final. Along the road that skirts Japoma Stadium’s western side, soldiers bearing rifles stood on roofs or stared down from balconies. They were members of the Bataillon d’Intervention Rapide (BIR), a feared combat unit that reports directly to the president, Paul Biya, and has been the subject of torture allegations in the past. As fans queued to pass through the turnstiles, which were allowed to open five hours before kick-off to ease pressure on access points, they were man-marked by red-capped gendarmes. The heavy-handedness of the spectacle was deliberate and the visual message clear: nobody would be allowed to take chances in gaining entry. Jonathan Wilson’s Observer column centres on the tragedy that has overshadowed this tournament, and the place of it within the world game. That may, in time, lead to World Cup-style efficiencies, but it must also be a serious concern. Caf should exist to run and promote African football, not as a voting bloc to support Infantino and his schemes. Infantino was at the Council of Europe this past week, explaining the “need to find ways to include the whole world to give hope to Africans so that they don’t need to cross the Mediterranean in order to find maybe a better life but, more probably, death in the sea”. Egypt: Abou Gabal Ali, Abdel Wahed, Abdelmonem Elsayed, Mohamed Ahmed, Hegazy, Mohamed, Ashraf, Elneny, El Soleya, Salah, Ahmed Abdallah, Marmoush Morocco: Bounou, Hakimi, Aguerd, Saiss, Masina, S Amrabat, Barkok, Amallah, El Haddadi, Boufal, En-Nesyri The game is just an hour away. Teams to follow. This is a big one, between the two North African giants remaining in the tournament after Tunisia exited on Saturday. Egypt required penalties to get past Ivory Coast in the last 16 while Morocco had to come from behind to beat Malawi. Like most teams in the tournament, we are yet to see the best of either teams; it’s often been tough going out in Cameroon. Both teams have been strong in defence. Morocco have found goals easier to come by than Egypt, despite the presence of Mohamed Salah. Yaoundé awaits. And in the semi-final, so do Cameroon, the host nation.Donald Trump’s promise to pardon supporters who attacked the US Capitol on January 6 2021 was “the stuff of dictators”, Richard Nixon’s White House counsel warned. Trump made the promise at a rally in Conroe, Texas, on Saturday. “If I run and if I win,” he said, referring to the 2024 presidential election, “we will treat those people from January 6 fairly. We will treat them fairly. And if it requires pardons, we will give them pardons because they are being treated so unfairly.” More than 700 people have been charged in connection with the Capitol attack, around which seven people died as Trump supporters tried to stop certification of his election defeat, in service of his lie that it was caused by electoral fraud. More than 100 police officers were hurt. Eleven members of the far-right Oath Keepers militia have been charged with seditious conspiracy. Trump himself was impeached for inciting the riot. Ten House Republicans voted to impeach but Trump was acquitted when only seven Republican senators found him guilty. That left him free to run for office again. John Dean, 83, was White House counsel from 1970 to 1973 before being disbarred and detained as a result of the Watergate scandal, which led to Nixon’s resignation in 1974. Dean responded to Trump on Twitter. “This is beyond being a demagogue to the stuff of dictators,” he wrote. “He is defying the rule of law. Failure to confront a tyrant only encourages bad behaviour. If thinking Americans don’t understand what Trump is doing and what the criminal justice system must do we are all in big trouble!” Trump was generous with pardons in office, recipients including Steve Bannon and Michael Flynn, both now targets of the House committee investigating January 6 and with Trump in its sights. On Sunday morning, the New Hampshire governor, Chris Sununu, widely seen as a relative moderate in Trump’s Republican party, was asked if pardons should be offered to Capitol rioters. “Of course not,” he told CNN’s State of the Union. “Oh, my goodness. No.” Even Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina senator and dogged Trump ally, said the former president was wrong. “I don’t want to send any signals that it was OK to defile the Capitol,” he told CBS’s Face the Nation. “I want to deter what people did on January 6, and those who did it, I hope they go to jail and get the book thrown at them because they deserve it.” But a moderate Republican, Susan Collins of Maine, indicated the hold Trump has on the party. Appearing on ABC’s This Week, the senator said Trump should not “have made that pledge to do pardons. We should let the judicial process proceed.” But Collins, who voted to convict Trump over the Capitol attack, would not say that she would not support him if he ran for president again. “Well certainly it’s not likely given the many other qualified candidates that we have, that have expressed interest in running,” she said. “So it’s very unlikely.” Trump dominates polling concerning potential Republican nominees for 2024. Others deplored Trump’s words in Texas. Richard Painter, a White House ethics counsel under George W Bush, said the promise of pardons should, constitutionally speaking, stop Trump running again. “This alone is giving aid or comfort to an insurrection within the meaning of the 14th amendment, section three,” Painter wrote. “Trump is DISQUALIFIED from public office.” Trump also complained about investigations of his business and political affairs which have landed him legal jeopardy. On Sunday, Graham, whose actions in support of Trump are being investigated in Georgia, said he would cooperate if asked. “Yeah,” he said. “Give me a call.” But he also complained about a supposed “effort here to use the law, I think inappropriately. So I don’t know what they’re going to do in Fulton county [Georgia]. I don’t know what the January 6 committee is going to do. I expect those who defile the Capitol to be prosecuted. But there’s a political movement using the law to try to knock Trump out of running. And I, particularly, don’t like it or appreciate it.” In Texas, Trump urged supporters to protest. “If these radical, vicious, racist prosecutors do anything wrong or illegal,” he said, “I hope we are going to have in this country the biggest protests we have ever had in Washington DC, in New York, in Atlanta and elsewhere, because our country and our elections are corrupt.” Prosecutors, he said, were “trying to put me in jail. These prosecutors are vicious, horrible people. They’re racists and they’re very sick. They’re mentally sick. They’re going after me without any protection of my rights by the supreme court or most other courts.” Glenn Kirschner, a former federal prosecutor now a legal analyst for NBC, said: “Trump is not only encouraging his supporters to violence if he’s arrest[ed], he’s also signaling that he’ll pardon them, just as he’ll pardon the [January 6] insurrectionists. “Will this finally move prosecutors to hold him accountable for his crimes?”A man in his 20s has been arrested on suspicion of rape and assault, police have said, after Manchester United suspended the footballer Mason Greenwood. Greater Manchester police said on Sunday they had seen “social media images and videos posted by a woman reporting incidents of physical violence”. The force added: “An investigation was launched and following inquiries, we can confirm a man in his 20s has since been arrested on suspicion of rape and assault. He remains in custody for questioning. Inquiries are ongoing.” A statement from United on Sunday afternoon read: “Mason Greenwood will not return to training or play matches until further notice.” In an earlier statement, the club said it was aware of images and allegations circulating on social media, adding: “Manchester United does not condone violence of any kind.” Attempts have been made to contact Greenwood for comment. The Manchester United Supporters Trust (MUST) posted on Twitter: “The club has now confirmed that Mason Greenwood will not return to training or play matches until further notice. MUST fully support the decision of the club in this regard.”Britain’s politicians and intelligence chiefs have stepped up warnings about the likelihood of a Russian invasion of Ukraine over the past week, yet it is not clear, despite a drumbeat of activity, that a military attack is any more certain. That drumbeat has been matched in Washington, but, significantly, the concern is not shared in Kyiv. As Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said on Friday, high tensions with Russia are not new “We have been in the situation for eight years,” he said. The analysis in Ukraine diverges from the west’s assessment of the crisis as primarily a military one. The belief in Kyiv is that Vladimir Putin’s goal is the long-term destabilisation of Ukraine, and that the Russian leader may have other objectives than invasion. Nevertheless, Liz Truss, the British foreign secretary, warned eight days ago of a possible Kremlin coup plot in Ukraine, possibly in tandem with a military attack, involving five former Ukrainian politicians. However, four already live in exile in Moscow, meaning their links to Russia are not a secret. On Tuesday, Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, warned that Russian “military advance force operations” – mostly thought to be conducted by GRU military intelligence – had already begun in Ukraine. Wallace was understood to be largely referring to pro-Russian disinformation activity. Kyiv has also noted their presence, not just in Ukraine but in the Moscow-backed separatist territories of Donetsk and Luhansk, and Russian territory on the border. British intelligence officials then warned in briefings that emerged on Thursday that Russia was “two to three weeks away” from assembling a 150,000-plus invasion force. That matches existing predictions of independent analysts relying on satellite imagery and other open-source, public domain material. The ratcheting-up has helped propel the Ukraine story on to British newspaper front pages at a time when the news in Westminster has been dominated by whether Boris Johnson can survive the “partygate” scandal. However, it would be simplistic to say it is entirely cynical. The concern is genuine in the security community, which is still recovering from the criticism that it failed to predict how fast the Taliban would overrun Afghanistan last summer. This time it will be possible to say the public have been given fair warning if an attack were to happen. Johnson said on Monday there was “a plan for a lightning war”. Meanwhile, the British warnings are being reflected in Washington. On Friday, US intelligence warned that “blood supplies” and other concrete indicators of an invasion were being moved up to the border, although Ukraine’s deputy defence minister said this was part of Russia’s “psychological war”. Mixed messaging followed a phone call last Thursday between Joe Biden and Zelenskiy. A Ukrainian official claimed the US president had said a Russian attack would be imminent once the ground froze in February, prompting a rapid White House rebuttal. What Biden had said, US officials insisted, was that an invasion in February was “a distinct possibility” – a serious enough warning nonetheless. That is a position that Kviv does not dispute, given in its estimate that about 119,000 Russian soldiers are camped out near Ukraine’s border. Nevertheless, senior officials in Kyiv believe that the latest signals from Moscow suggest the Kremlin may be moving away from a military confrontation next month. Speaking at a wreath-laying ceremony on Sunday, Nikolai Patrushev, the secretary of Russia’s security council, was dismissive. “Today, they’re saying that Russia is threatening Ukraine. This is absolutely ridiculous. There is no threat,” he said. “We do not want war. We don’t need it at all. Those who are pushing towards it, especially those from the west, they are pursuing some self-serving false goals of their own,” he said, adding that a war against Ukraine “does not suit us”. According to Kyiv officials, the Kremlin sent 95,000 troops to Ukraine’s borders last April. This time an additional 25,000 have been deployed – an increase, but not sufficient numbers to seize the capital, in what would be a massive and bloody operation to capture a city of over 3 million people. Officials have also suggested that Covid infections have swept through some of the Russian battalions, rendering them less effective. Either way, the picture may not become clear until March, when an invasion would become logistically difficult. However, Ukrainian officials say another crisis could then take place this autumn, following two previous military buildups, in the spring and autumn of 2021. Kyiv believes Putin is “cautious” and argues that his aggressive diplomacy has already brought results, forcing the US and its allies to take Moscow’s security proposals for eastern Europe seriously. These include a permanent veto on Ukraine and Georgia’s Nato membership and a demand that Nato pull back to its levels of deployment in 1997, when Romania, Bulgaria and the Baltic states had not yet become member countries. The White House has dismissed the demands as a “non-starter”. Alternatives for Putin, Kyiv believes, are that he may gain legal recognition for the separatist territories of Donetsk and Luhansk and formally send Russian troops to these regions under the guise of a peacekeeping mission. Russian troops are also thought likely to remain in Belarus once exercises there conclude on 20 February – closer to Nato’s north-eastern flank, Poland and the Baltic states. While the world is preoccupied with Ukraine, officials said, the de facto takeover of Belarus by Russia has been taking place at a rapid rate.The result may have been routine, but it was the late senior debut for Karna Solskjær that stole the spotlight in Manchester United’s 2-0 defeat of Bridgwater United. Having sold out Fairfax Park for the visit of the Women’s Super League side, it was a horrible start for the tier-three side who conceded in the 17th minute through Charlotte Buxton’s own goal, with Hayley Ladd putting her under pressure. However, it would take until the 82nd minute for the team that sits second in the WSL to extend their lead through Ella Toone. With victory all but assured, Solskjær was sent into the fray in the 87th minute, with her parents, the former Manchester United striker and manager Ole Gunnar Solskjær and his wife Silje, watching on from the stands. The 19-year-old forward has impressed for her club’s under-21 side and scored in the team’s midweek 5-0 cup defeat of Aston Villa, which her father also attended, to take her tally to 13 goals in 12 games. Third-tier Southampton delivered the upset of the round. Ella Morris scored in extra time and Bristol City’s Jessica Wooley missed a penalty to send the Championship side out. Coventry United survived a scare, beating Billericay Town on penalties after the game ended 1-1 after extra time. Leicester earned a 3-1 win over fellow WSL side Tottenham with Sophie Howard and Esmee de Graaf scoring in extra time. Reading threw away a 2-0 lead at Brighton before going on to win 3-2. Birmingham earned an extra-time win over Sunderland, a goal from Vivianne Miedema helped Arsenal to a 1-0 win over Championship side London City Lionesses, West Ham saw off Sheffield United 4-1 and Everton beat Huddersfield 4-0. In the 51st minute in several of the day’s fourth-round games attention turned to the bigger picture and “no ifs, no buts, we want an equal FA Cup” echoed around the grounds. The planned protests, with the time chosen to represent the 51-year ban on women’s football, went ahead despite the announcement from the FA on Friday that there would be a “significant increase” in prize money for the women’s FA Cup.Vodafone has been targeted by the activist investor Cevian, prompting speculation that the telecoms giant will come under pressure to overhaul its faltering global business. The Swedish investment firm has built up holdings in Vodafone in recent months, according to sources quoted by Bloomberg, privately piling pressure on the firm to improve its performance. Shares in the British multinational have almost halved in value since 2018, with investor sentiment apparently declining through a series of acquisitions and sell-offs, amid belief that Vodafone overpaid for assets such as the German cable business it acquired in an €18bn deal that year. Cevian, which says it is a constructive investor in “overlooked, misunderstood or out-of-favour” firms, has gained prominence in the City after building up a 5% holding in the insurance firm Aviva, and has also owns a significant stake in education publisher Pearson, as well as Swedish telecoms business Ericsson. Nick Read, the chief executive since late 2018, will be under renewed pressure to reshape the business. Read accepted cuts to his earnings package soon after arrival to head off an investors’ revolt in 2019, after Vodafone said it could not pay a dividend after incurring huge losses in buying up 5G spectrum in European auctions. Supporters say he has made the firm focus more tightly on Europe and Africa, and took decisive action to write off entirely the value of Vodafone’s unhappy investment in the Indian market. Analysts have speculated that Vodafone, a £34bn plc headquartered in Berkshire, may be pushed by Cevian to shore up its UK position – possibly acquiring other telecoms firms to take on BT and Virgin Media, or sell down its remaining stake in the mobile masts business it spun off in 2019. Cevian and Vodafone did not comment. British phone rival BT is also facing boardroom pressure from the interest of an activist investor, with French billionaire Patrick Drahi’s Altice building up a shareholding of 18% last month. Drahi said he was “supportive of BT’s strategy” despite signs that he may be manoeuvring towards a takeover – although the UK government could block any such move.Rayo Vallecano has defended its decision to hire disgraced coach Carlos Santiso to take charge of its women’s team, despite being aware of a leaked recording in which he encourages his staff to find a girl to gang-rape to help team bonding. Santiso was hired by Rayo on Friday even though he had been forced to resign from his job with the Madrid representative under-12s team in November following the leaking of a voice note sent to his coaching staff. Rayo are based in Madrid and the women’s team plays in the Primera División. In the recording, which the Guardian has heard, Santiso tells his staff: “This staff is incredible, but there are things we still lack, that we still need. We still need, I still say it, to do something like what those from Arandina did, man,” he added, in reference to three footballers from the Spanish third division team Arandina CF who were each sentenced to 38 years in prison for the gang-rape of a 15-year-old girl in 2017. He continued: “We need to grab a girl, but overage so we don’t get ourselves into trouble, and to [cargarnosla – which doesn’t translate directly but broadly means to ‘screw her’] there all together. That’s what really brings a staff, a team together. Look at the Arandina lot: they went straight up.” Despite a backlash from fan groups, the club has said it does not intend to take action against Santiso or reverse the hire. Santiso confirmed that the message was real, according to the Spanish radio station Cadena SER, but claimed it was “an informal chat among friends”. Cadena SER also spoke to the Rayo Vallecano president, Raúl Martín Presa, who told them that he would not be drawn into the issue and would not be pushed into sacking his new coach. “We sign professionals, not people here,” he is quoted as saying. The Federation of Rayo Vallecano supporters’ clubs has demanded the club gets rid of Santiso and accused the president of “crossing another red line.” A statement read: “For Carlos Santiso, sexually abusing a girl is what really unites a team. We cannot allow a person with such grave thoughts in their head to sit on the bench and represent Rayo Vallecano.” Fans’ group Plataforma ADRV referred to Santiso as a “degenerate misogynist” who “does not represent the values of [Rayo] and we hope he will be sacked and no longer sully the name of our club.” A banner was put up at the club’s training ground declaring: “Respect for women: Santiso out of Vallecas.” The club’s backing of its women’s team has been in the spotlight recently with fans displaying a similar banner during a game in November calling for “Respect and dignity for the women’s team” after a player had to be treated by doctors from opponents Athletic Club because they do not travel with medical staff of their own. They also have no access to gym facilities and at the start of the season players refused to train because their contracts had not yet been signed. Given the precariousness of their situation, the players have not yet spoken out on the decision to employ Santiso. Presa has a longstanding dispute with fans at the club, who repeatedly chant for him to leave every game. From the neighbourhood of Vallecas, Rayo has a consciously left-wing identity and supporters back a series of social causes.Jürgen Klopp said he “could not be happier” after Liverpool completed the signing of Luis Díaz from Porto in a deal that could rise to €60m (£49.9m). The club are also in talks with Fulham over the potential £5m purchase of the attacking midfielder Fabio Carvalho. Díaz has signed a contract to 2027 and will wear the No 23 shirt for Klopp’s team. The Colombia international underwent a medical in Argentina, where he is preparing for a World Cup qualifier on Tuesday, Liverpool having sent medical staff after agreeing terms with Porto and the player on Thursday. Díaz will cost an initial €40m with another €20m payable in add-ons. In total, that will make the 25-year-old the fourth most expensive signing in Liverpool’s history after Virgil van Dijk, Alisson and Naby Keïta. Klopp has been a long-time admirer of the gifted winger, who has scored 14 goals in 18 league games for Porto this season, and had planned to move for the player this summer. Once the Portuguese club accepted a similar deal from Tottenham, however, Liverpool brought forward their plans with outgoing sporting director Michael Edwards and his assistant, and eventual successor, Julian Ward securing the transfer. “I could not be happier that we’ve been able to get this deal done and bring Luis to Liverpool,” said Klopp. “We believe he has everything needed to fit into our way and adapt to the Premier League, both physically and mentally. He is a player who is hungry for success and knows you have to fight to get what you want. He is a fighter, no doubt. He’s a skilful team player who has always the goal in mind. This team deserved to add quality and when we played against Luis earlier this season, we saw what a danger he is, how fast he is and how his mentality was to help his team. “We know Porto is an outstanding club who nurture players in the best possible way and provide a brilliant football education. They are a class club and, I have to say, have been tough negotiators. I also must make clear my appreciation to our ownership and football operations team for how they have managed to act so decisively to get this done.” Díaz still requires a work permit to enter the UK and is therefore unlikely to join up with his new club until the end of the week at the earliest. He scored 41 goals in 125 appearances for Porto in total and had also been of interest to Manchester United. Everton also tried to sign the winger last summer but were unable to agree a deal that included James Rodríguez returning to his former club. Carvalho, a 19-year-old England youth international born in Portugal, has been in outstanding form and is regarded by Liverpool as a player of huge potential. He is out of contract in the summer and Liverpool are seeing whether agreement can be reached on a deal that would see him remain at Fulham for the remainder of the season and move to Anfield in the summer. The failure to complete a deal for Díaz is the latest blow to Spurs, who also missed out on Adama Traoré to Barcelona, but they have deals in place to sign the midfielders Dejan Kulusevski and Rodrigo Bentancur from Juventus. Kulusevski is due to join on an 18-month loan with a mandatory purchase for about €40m, plus add-ons, if Antonio Conte’s side qualify for the Champions League and the Sweden international has made a specified number of appearances. Tottenham have agreed to pay a loan fee of about €5m for Kulusevski, and that amount would be subtracted from the total payable to make the deal permanent. The 21-year-old can play on the wing or as a No 10 and has been more in than out of the starting XI this season. He cost Juventus €35m from Atalanta in January 2020. Spurs also had offer accepted for Bentancur which would guarantee Juventus €19m, with up to €6m in add-ons to follow. That comes days after Aston Villa had a similar offer for the Uruguay international rejected by the Italian club, who have Denis Zakaria lined up to join from Borussia Mönchengladbach as Bentancur’s replacement. The Tottenham managing director of football, Fabio Paratici, spent 11 years at Juventus. Paratici is also working to move players out. A deal to take Bryan Gil on loan to Valencia has been done and Paratici is also hopeful that solutions can be found for Tanguy Ndombele and Dele Alli. Lyon are in such advanced talks for Ndombele that the player flew to the French city on Sunday in anticipation of returning on loan to his former club with an option for a permanent transfer. Villarreal are interested in taking Giovani Lo Celso on loan and Ajax have not given up hope of signing Steven Bergwijn. As Liverpool prepare to say hello to two players, they could be temporarily saying goodbye to another with 20-year-old defender Neco Williams wanted by Bournemouth on loan until the end of the season. The Wales international could be open to joining the Championship club as he looks to secure more regular football ahead of the World Cup later this year. Williams has featured for only 387 minutes across eight appearances for Liverpool who also have Northern Ireland international Conor Bradley to provide cover for Trent Alexander-Arnold at right-back.Up to 10,000 pupils missed an entire term of school last autumn, according to new analysis that estimates 128,000 children were withdrawn from state education in England in the year up to the January 2021 lockdown. The figures, based on data from schools collated by the education research group FFT Education Datalab, comes as the government wants new measures to boost attendance, while Rachel de Souza, the children’s commissioner for England, has vowed to track down missing children. But FFT found that the number of children being taken off school rolls was no different from years prior to the pandemic, with most being home-schooled, moving to private schools or to other parts of the UK or overseas, soothing fears that the pandemic had caused a surge in children being permanently taken out of school. FFT looked at attendance data from the rolls of more than 5,200 primary schools and 2,600 secondary schools – a third of the total state schools in England – and found that about 0.2% of children enrolled at the same school throughout last term did not attend a single session between September and the end of 2021. “These sorts of proportions would suggest something in the order of 10,000 pupils on the roll of schools who did not attend at all in the autumn term,” the analysis, by the FFT’s Dave Thompson, states. In total, 86,000 children who were on school rolls for at least a month in the autumn term were classed as “severely absent” after missing at least half of their time in school, including those absent because of illness. Those most likely to be counted as severely absent were pupils with special educational needs. Children with an educational health and care plan (EHCP) were many times more likely to have missed half of school in autumn compared with other pupils across all age groups. While politicians and de Souza have expressed alarm at the numbers of pupils withdrawn from school rolls during the pandemic, the data suggests that the overall numbers are similar to previous years. The FFT figures show that more than 128,000 children out of the nearly seven million of compulsory school age had been withdrawn from state school rolls in the year to January 2021 – slightly below the 129,000 withdrawn in the year to January 2020, before the start of the pandemic, and the same proportion as withdrew in the year to January 2019. Of the 128,000, 57,000 are estimated to now be home-educated, according to the Association of Directors of Children’s Services, while a further 10,000 to 20,000 will have moved from the state sector to independent or private schools. The remaining 50,000 children may have rejoined schools in other parts of the UK, most likely Scotland or Wales, or moved overseas with their families. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, said he wants to “end the postcode lottery of how attendance is managed in different schools and parts of the country”, with a new duty for schools to publish their plans to improve attendance. Schools are also being asked to join a new data collection trial that will share daily attendance status for each pupil with the Department for Education. The DfE also said it “remains committed to a registration system for children not in school” and plans to publish a formal response shortly.When scientists hailed a breakthrough this month – a man with end-stage heart disease was given a genetically modified pig’s heart – some non-scientists found the idea familiar. The procedure had already been described by Malorie Blackman in her novel Pig Heart Boy. Reality, it seems, can make fictions come true, and Blackman joins a distinguished line – Jonathan Swift (who posited, among other things, two moons for Mars); Aldous Huxley (oral contraception, mood medicine, test-tube babies); HG Wells (atomic bombs); Orwell (telescreens, mass surveillance) – of writers whose works acquire, over the years, the tingle of prescience. More recently a number of novelists were blindsided by an actual pandemic overtaking their invented plagues. Christina Sweeney-Baird’s The End of Men was finished in December 2019, Bethany Clift’s Last One at the Party was published in February 2021 and Oana Aristide’s Under the Blue a month later. Lawrence Wright’s The End of October (May 2020) even imagines a coronavirus arising in east Asia. And Joanna Kavenna’s 2019 novel Zed, set in a near future controlled by a tech giant, becomes more real every day. But perhaps that is to look at the matter the wrong way round. Margaret Atwood has said, in relation to her own dystopia The Handmaid’s Tale, that it arose out of an acute sense of the then-present; she was responding to nuggets of misogynistic authoritarianism cropping up in the news. Blackman noticed speculation about modified pigs’ hearts in the press; epidemiologists had warned of the threat of a major global pandemic. Swift’s work often mocked the scientists of his day. While it is true that all future is by definition fiction, these tales arise, argued Atwood, when a writer asks “what might happen if those trends continued … Would we like that? Is that where we want to live?” Seeming prophecy is thus a case of emotional and social insight tethered to current reality. In 1909, EM Forster published The Machine Stops, a short story in which “humanity, in its desire for comfort, had over-reached itself. It had exploited the riches of nature too far. Quietly and complacently, it was sinking into decadence, and progress had come to mean progress of the machine” – which, partly by shutting humanity into a cave underground, severs any relationship with the real world. It is an unnervingly accurate picture of the western world in 2020 lockdown – complete with isolations, Zoom-like calls and machine-controlled delivery of food and entertainment. This is one of the great things fiction can do: pay a particular kind of attention. It is a kind of eavesdropping, and a looking under the surfaces of things. Seen like this, it makes sense that a group of literary scholars in Germany was tasked with predicting civil unrest by reading novels and plays – and especially by noting reactions to them. Was a novel censored? Whom by, and why? Was it garlanded or a bestseller? They were not surprised when Azerbaijan, which had been supplying Georgian libraries with anti-Armenian books, went to war in Nagorno-Karabakh. The programme was halted after three years, but the point had been made. Though novelists are not seers, we would do well not to underestimate their grasp on what is to come.Jonathan Liew’s decision to attack my support for sports projects in Israel as “sportswashing” is perhaps the most ringing endorsement of why such bridge-building efforts are needed (Sportswashing is associated with certain countries – why not Israel?, 24 January). When our liberal and open country holds its massive annual Gay Pride parade – the largest (if not the only one) in the Middle East, Israel is accused of “pinkwashing”. When Israel leads in environmental issues and breakthroughs in climate change technologies, Israel is accused of “greenwashing”. When our generous and supremely capable NGOs like IsraAid or Save a Child’s Heart provide support to communities in need around the world, we are accused of “aidwashing”. The reality is that for some, Israel must and can only be viewed through the prism of a conflict forced upon us. This kind of monochromatic myopia washes away the Palestinian leadership’s decades-long refusal to make peace, as well as Hamas’s commitment to terrorism and outright refusal to recognise Israel’s right to exist. My sports initiatives, on the other hand, look to move beyond the conflict, building lasting bonds of coexistence and understanding across our complex region. A recent initiative included saving 167 Afghan women – mostly sportswomen – from the Taliban, through a daring and complex operation, when most of the world stood silent. I would presume that Mr Liew has not been to Israel, and has not seen for himself what is a complex and multifaceted society and reality. He is welcome to do so at my invitation. I just hope he won’t accuse me of truthwashing. Sylvan Adams Tel Aviv, Israel • The subheading and caption on this article were amended on 31 January 2022. Earlier versions named the pro cycling team as Israel Start-Up Nation; it was renamed Israel – Premier Tech in January 2022.Your report describes the rendition and torture of Abu Zubaydah by the US government (The CIA tortured him after 9/11. Then they lied. Will the truth ever come out?, 29 January). UK intelligence agencies played a key role in his interrogation, despite knowing that he was subject to unlawful torture. Yet we still do not know the full extent of the British role in torture and unlawful rendition during this era. The intelligence and security committee (ISC) was, in its own words, “unable to conduct an authoritative inquiry” or produce a “credible report” in its latest attempt in 2018. This was because it was thwarted from collecting the necessary evidence, as its report explains. This is unacceptable. The ISC in its current form is unable to complete such work. Long-mooted reforms to bolster the powers of the ISC must be implemented so that parliament and the public have confidence that the ISC is able to perform its role effectively. Stephen Timms MP Andrew Tyrie House of Lords All-party parliamentary group on extraordinary renditionRe Linda Geddes’ piece on face coverings (Is it time to ditch cloth face masks for FFP2 or next-generation alternatives?, 28 January), I pass on this observation. My partner and I were on a bus the other week. I was wearing an FFP2 respirator, my partner a cloth face covering. A woman at the front of the bus sprayed herself with perfume. My partner smelt the perfume and I only smelt ethanol. Vapours (ethanol) will pass through an FFP2 respirator, but most particles and droplets (perfume) won’t. The cloth face covering is really to protect other people from you, not you from others. She wears an FFP2 now. Mike Williams Swindon • Re English idioms (Letters, 28 January), I recall some salty gems from my 1950s childhood in south Lincolnshire: “She’s all Queen Anne front and Mary Anne back”; “He’s as odd as Oliver’s arse”; “His eyes stood out like chapel hat pegs”; “He tears round the place like a closet with the lid off”; “She’s as airy-fairy as a fart in a colander”. Tom Jones Birmingham • My friend once said to me when I was extolling the virtues of Bruce Springsteen: “He does as much for me as a corpse in the next room.” Helen Romaine Melksham, Wiltshire • On Friday I bought a bunch of British daffodils at my local Aldi for 89p and my sister in Germany bought a bunch of British daffodils at her local Aldi for 67 cents. Could this be another of those great trade deals set up by Liz Truss? Gale Carruthers Norwich • Would now be a good time to ask whether Trident really is such a great deterrent against Russian aggression? Dr Charles Smith Bridgend • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The Environment Agency has not moved away from its frontline monitoring and enforcement role (‘It is desperate’: how Environment Agency staff were silenced as pollution worsened, 29 January). We monitor the state of our rivers ourselves, and now also require water companies to do the same and make the results public. We monitor the country’s coastal bathing waters, which, thanks to the EA’s robust regulatory work, are in the best state ever: in 2021, 99% of them met at least the minimum standards, the highest result since we introduced tighter standards in 2015. We take robust enforcement action against those who break the law, as Southern Water found out last year when it received a record £90m fine in a prosecution we brought. And we respond to hundreds of environmental incidents every year. Last year, more than 76,000 were reported to us, including flood, drought, fires, fish kills and pollution incidents. The reality is that every day our fantastic staff create better places for people and wildlife. Last year we enhanced water quality in over 4,500km of our rivers by tackling pollution, unsustainable abstraction and invasive species; improved the nation’s air quality by regulating down emissions; cut the number of illegal waste sites; and completed our latest flood defence building programme, better protecting over 300,000 homes. Like the rest of the public sector, we operate within a tight budget and must prioritise what we do. But we will always do the best we can with the money we have for the people and places we serve. Emma Howard Boyd Chair, Environment Agency • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.With the public distracted, there was something ghoulishly vindictive about the Department for Work and Pensions’ action last week (Universal credit claimants face tough sanctions in UK job crackdown, 27 January). It changed the rules without legislation or parliamentary approval. Jobseekers must now accept jobs below their occupation from the fourth week of making a claim for benefits, rather than three months, or face sanctions. The DWP claims this is because unemployment is low. But it is punishing victims twice. The tight labour market is due mainly to older people preferring early retirement rather than face health risks in available jobs. Requiring unemployed people to take jobs beneath their abilities, including temporary and zero-hours jobs, intensifies the precarity trap. Someone becoming unemployed must wait at least five weeks before obtaining benefits. Then if they managed to start receiving them, they would lose disastrously if they took a low-wage temporary job, because soon they would be back waiting a further five or more weeks without benefits. You do not need a maths degree to work out that this new measure is cruel to people who have done nothing to deserve it. And taking a job below one’s qualifications lowers the probability of subsequently returning to one’s occupation and lowers lifetime earnings. The long-term solution to this cruel regime is abolition of the DWP, with a new agency for employment and training services, with the benefit function handed to HMRC. Dr Guy Standing Soas University of London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.We find ourselves in the dreadful position that both those running the country and those in charge of our largest police force are accused of misusing their positions (Sue Gray report: redacted version is imminent, say government sources, 28 January). On top of a series of scandals – including the Sarah Everard murder, the mishandling of the vigil on Clapham Common, and accusations of institutional corruption – the speculation about the Metropolitan police’s recent decisions over the Sue Gray report are potentially devastating. It is unclear why the police initially refused to become involved, only then at the last moment to intervene, and to intervene in a way that seems destined to affect the political process. Important though these questions are, however, they are almost beside the point. The belief that the police are in some way colluding in a whitewash is now sufficiently widespread for the integrity of the institution to be at very grave risk. The police cannot operate effectively without trust and, once lost, it is very difficult to rebuild. Melodramatic it may sound, but we are fast approaching the point where the very future of the Metropolitan police in its current form is at stake. Prof Tim Newburn London School of Economics • Jonathan Freedland’s article (We don’t need Sue Gray’s report to tell us that Britain is run by a liar, 28 January) made me wish for one thing: that Sue Gray wakes up this morning and decides that enough is enough; that she walks into the Guardian offices, puts her full “partygate” report on to the reception desk and says: “I’ve had enough of people being denied the truth, of individuals dicking about and putting themselves above the people of this country, so please go ahead and publish it, because people deserve the truth for once.” If Sue Gray did this, she would become the one person we feel we can trust, because we most certainly don’t trust the government, or the police, not only to admit the lies, but also to deal with them. Penny Shadbolt London • The Liberal Democrats, with their suggestion of a “stitch up between the Met leadership and Number 10”, are misrepresenting the real issue. Essentially, the House of Commons has chosen to use the report to establish the facts as a basis for reaching a decision on whether Boris Johnson has knowingly misled the house and should offer to resign. It is legitimate for the legislature to ask the police, who have initiated a judicial process, not to get in the way of this, which is far more important than the question of whether there were infringements of Covid-19 regulations, carrying at most a penalty-notice fine. Alan Bailey London • Politics has always been the subject of satire, but the fact that Joe Lycett’s tweeted parody Sue Gray report caused “chaos” and “mass panic” in government surely illustrates what many of us have believed for a long time: we are governed by people who can no longer tell truth from fiction as they have themselves become the joke (Joe Lycett says Sue Gray report stunt motivated by anger over friend’s death, 28 January). Jackie Epps Alton, Hampshire • Boris Johnson dismisses email evidence of his involvement in the decision to assist the evacuation of animals from Kabul as “total rhubarb” (Report, 29 January). The early rhubarb on my allotment plot is just sprouting. I wonder if Johnson will still be prime minister by the time it is ready to pick? William Wallace Liberal Democrat, House of Lords • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The court system of England and Wales was already in crisis before the pandemic – a direct effect of government cuts leading to closures and staff shortages. Between 2010 and 2020, the Ministry of Justice’s budget was cut by 40%. Annual spending on legal aid fell by almost £1bn over a period of five years. Then Covid hit, gumming up the system further and leading to widespread cancellations and delays. The consequence is an enormous backlog that has been largely overlooked, in part because most people do not regularly interact with the justice system. Currently there are 372,000 cases waiting to be heard in magistrates courts and almost 60,000 in crown courts, where more serious offences are tried. We don’t tend to describe court delays as a “waiting list”, but a long queue for justice is what these numbers add up to. This affects victims and witnesses as well as defendants. All must wait, sometimes for years, for the outcome of events that may well have changed their lives. For those held on remand and subsequently found not guilty, there is no recompense for time wasted. Cumulatively, and over time, the risk is a wider loss of public confidence in the legal system. Among victims’ groups, one fear is that offenders may be emboldened. The number of reported rapes reached a new record of 63,136 in the year to September 2021. At least the government has realised that this situation is untenable. Ministers are considering the recommendations of an independent review of legal aid, including an immediate £135m-a-year funding increase, and the creation of a new oversight board. But the announcement of a new recruitment campaign for 4,000 volunteer magistrates provides cause for concern as well as reassurance. This is because the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, is not seeking simply to build up numbers again – there were 12,651 magistrates last year compared with 25,170 in 2012. Instead his department, supported by the Magistrates Association, is giving them the power to send people to prison for up to a year (the current maximum for a single offence is six months). The plan is that this will free up 1,700 crown court sitting days. Magistrates, who are lay people with no legal qualifications, play an important role in our legal system. There are good reasons for justice to be administered locally, by people who belong to the community in which crimes have been committed. The closure of around half of all magistrates courts between 2010 and 2019 was shortsighted, and efforts to recruit from a more diverse pool are welcome (and supported by the payment of expenses, including for loss of earnings). But there are also reasons why magistrates’ authority, particularly to send people to prison for long stretches, is limited. Sitting for as few as 13 days a year on a voluntary basis, they lack the overview and expertise of judges. England and Wales already have the highest per capita prison population in western Europe, and an atrocious record on rehabilitation. Improving the performance of the probation service, and developing the use of community sentences, would be more likely to benefit the public than these changes. Other concerns include the effect that the new sentencing powers will have on defendants’ decision-making. If longer sentences handed down by magistrates result in more appeals, then reduced waiting lists will not be achieved. Mr Raab, who is the sixth Conservative justice secretary in just seven years, is right about one thing: the backlog in the courts is a disaster. But a system-wide crisis created by chronic underfunding will not, with the best will in the world, be resolved by volunteers. This is no way to deliver justice.The leaders of the Senate foreign relations committee said on Sunday they were on the verge of approving “the mother of all sanctions” against Vladimir Putin, warning there would be no appeasement as the Russian president contemplates an invasion of Ukraine. “We cannot have a Munich moment again,” the panel’s Democratic chair, Bob Menendez of New Jersey, told CNN’s State of the Union, referring to the 1938 agreement by which allies ceded parts of Czechoslovakia to Hitler, believing it would stave off war. “Putin will not stop if he believes the west will not respond,” Menendez said. “We saw what he did in 2008 in Georgia, we saw what he did in 2014 in pursuit of Crimea. He will not stop.” Menendez said he believed bipartisan negotiations for severe sanctions were “on the one-yard line”, despite disagreements with Republicans over whether measures should be imposed before or after any Russian invasion. The UK government promised to ramp up sanctions against Putin and his associates. The negotiations come ahead of an expected UN security council meeting on Monday, at the request of the US, to give Russia the opportunity to explain its actions. Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the US ambassador to the UN, said: “We’re going to go into the council prepared to listen to Russia’s security concerns, but we’re not going to be distracted by their propaganda.” On Sunday, Kyiv urged Moscow to pull back its troops from Ukraine’s border and continue dialogue with the west if it was “serious” about de-escalating tensions that have soared amid fears of a Russian invasion. Canada moved its Ukraine-based military units westward on Sunday and announced the temporary withdrawal of all non-essential employees from its Kyiv embassy, citing ongoing Russian threats along the border. “We will continue to take all precautions necessary to keep our Canadian Armed Forces safe and secure,” said Canada’s defense minister, Anita Anand, at a press conference in Kyiv. Canada has 900 military members supporting the Nato mission in Ukraine via “land, air and sea”, she said. Meanwhile, Jens Stoltenberg, the head of Nato, said Europe needed to diversify its energy supplies, saying the situation “demonstrates the vulnerability of being too dependent on one supplier of natural gas”. Tensions on the Ukraine border have continued to escalate, with Reuters reporting the Russian military buildup included supplies of blood in anticipation of casualties. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, told Fox News Sunday: “Putin has a lot of options available to him if he wants to further invade Ukraine, and he can execute some of those options imminently. It could happen really, honestly, at any time.” Seeking to show bipartisan resolve, Menendez gave CNN a joint interview with his committee’s ranking Republican, James Risch of Idaho. Menendez said: “There is an incredible bipartisan resolve for support of Ukraine, and an incredibly strong bipartisan resolve to have severe consequences for Russia if it invades, and in some cases for what it has already done. “We are building on the legislation that both Senator Risch wrote independently, and I wrote, which I called the mother of all sanctions. It’s to include a variety of elements, massive sanctions against the most significant Russian banks, crippling to their economy, Russia sovereign debt. These are sanctions beyond any that we have ever levied before.” Risch said talks had been a “24 hour-a-day effort for the last several days” in an attempt to reach agreement over sanctions timing and content, and that he was optimistic. “That’s a work in progress,” Risch said, when pressed over discussions about pre-emptive sanctions or measures to be taken in the event of an invasion. “[But] I’m more than cautiously optimistic that when we get back to DC tomorrow that we’re going to be moving forward.” Menendez said he believed western allies did not have to wait to start penalising Putin. “There are some sanctions that could take place up front because of what Russia has already done, cyber-attacks on Ukraine, false flag operations, the efforts to undermine the Ukrainian government internally,” he said. “But then the devastating sanctions that ultimately would crush Russia’s economy, and the continuing lethal aid that we are going to send, means Putin has to decide how many body bags of Russian sons are going to return to Russia. “The sanctions we’re talking about would come later on if he invades, some sanctions would come up front for what has been done already, but the lethal aid will travel no matter what.” Risch criticized the stance of several far-right figures, including the Fox News host Tucker Carlson and the Kentucky congressman Thomas Massie, who have questioned why the US is backing Ukraine and opposing Russia. Carlson said “it makes sense” that Putin “just wants to keep his western border secure” by opposing moves by Ukraine to join Nato. “We side always with countries that are democracies, and certainly there isn’t going to be a truce committed in that regard,” Risch said. “But the people who were saying that we shouldn’t be engaged in this at all are going to be singing a very different tune when they go to fill up their car with gas, if indeed there is an invasion. There are going to be sanctions that are going to be crippling to Russia, it is going to cripple their oil production. And as we all know, Russia is simply a gas station that is thinly disguised masquerading as a country. It is going to have a devastating effect on the economy around the world.” On NBC’s Meet the Press, Dick Durbin, co-chair of the Senate Ukraine caucus, addressed concerns aired by President Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Friday that growing rhetoric over the crisis was causing panic and destabilising his country’s economy. His comments followed a call with Joe Biden that Ukraine officials said “did not go well”. “Any decision about the future of Ukraine will be made by Ukraine,” said Durbin, an Illinois Democrat. “It won’t be made in Moscow or in Washington, in the European Union or in Belarus. It’s their future and their fate and their decision as far as that is concerned.” The caucus co-chair, Republican Rob Portman of Ohio, who is also on the foreign relations committee, told NBC he believed Putin had underestimated the unity of Nato and others. “One thing Vladimir Putin has done successfully is he has strengthened the transatlantic alliance and countries around the world who are looking at this and saying, ‘We cannot let this stand, we cannot let this happen,’” Portman said. “For the first time in nearly 80 years we could have a major and very bloody conflict in Europe unless we stand up together and push back, and so far so good.” • This article was amended on 1 February 2022. James Risch is a senator from Idaho, not Wisconsin as an earlier version said.“I came back to Sale to help this team achieve something near their potential, but we’re not there yet and that’s exciting,” declared Alex Sanderson after his side’s thrilling victory, and why not? Sale had done enough in the second half to show they could yet emerge as a force this season but the manner of their display justified every superlative that came their way. Sanderson’s men, so insipid during the opening 40 minutes, trailed 18-5 at the interval to a Leicester side missing six England internationals. Yet the Sharks, inspired by a rare sell-out crowd at a raucous AJ Bell Stadium, roused themselves in quite spectacular fashion after the interval to eke out a win which could prove vital to their play-off bid. It was a performance chiselled on a collective desire and harvested four second-half tries. Ben Curry scored the first of those and taking centre stage in the absence of his twin brother Tom, who is away on England duty with Raffi Quirke and Bevan Rodd. Sanderson, who left Saracens to return to Sale as their director of rugby 12 months ago, beamed: “I gave the players the challenge at half-time and Jono Ross said: ‘It’s got to hurt, we need that desire to have a greater intensity to dictate the game.’ “Jono put that to the team and they went out and did it. He’s a good captain and this is a great team. I’m proud to be a part of it.” Leicester, who fielded a youthful lineup, scored the game’s opening try in the 14th minute when Julián Montoya barrelled over the line following a lineout drive. It was his fifth Premiership try of the season and Freddie Burns’ conversion made it 10-0. Sale’s reply was almost instant as the full-back Luke James backed himself to beat a Tigers defender and scarpered over the line inside the right channel. Yet Steve Borthwick’s side came back strongly and the winger Guy Porter capitalised on some weak tackling to evade two Sale defenders and dive over in the left corner. With Burns booting two penalties and a conversion, the Premiership leaders were 18-5 up at the interval but in no way in control. Ben Curry, deputising stylishly for his brother, crashed over the line from a lineout drive and AJ MacGinty converted. Sanderson said of the flanker: “Ben just does everything at 100 miles per hour doesn’t he? He’s like a finely-coiled spring and has been exceptional for us, so I’ve had some really difficult selection decisions I’ve had to make. “His brother is one of the best players in the world but Ben’s not far off, let’s face it. Then we’ve got Jono Ross as a captain and Jean-Luc and Dan du Preez as well. But when Ben plays like you’ve got to start him.” Life surged through the Sharks after Curry’s try and Arron Reed again showcased how lightning quick he is by scampering clear in the left corner for a third home score. Montoya’s second try from a maul restored Leicester’s lead but Sale continued to pour forward and they were not to be denied. MacGinty kicked a penalty to put them back in front and, after Dan du Preez touched down, the homegrown winger Tom Roebuck then confirmed victory when he galloped clear to score with four minutes remaining and amid scenes of mounting euphoria. The match, televised live by ITV, was rapturously received by the crowd and Sanderson said the England centre Manu Tuilagi and South Africa’s scrum-half Faf de Klerk could return from injury in Sunday’s trip to Harlequins. Borthwick, Sanderson’s opposite number, cut a frustrated figure but refused to blame the absence of his England men for the defeat. Borthwick said: “I’m not going to spend any time on people who aren’t here. I thought the effort was magnificent. We had a lot of young players out there and the scoreline wasn’t what we wanted it to be, but we’ll learn from it and be a better team going forward.”Rafael Nadal described his Australian Open triumph as his greatest comeback after he recovered from two sets down against Daniil Medvedev to win a record-breaking 21st grand slam title. Nadal defeated Medvedev, the second seed, 2-6, 6-7 (5), 6-4, 6-4, 7-5 in five hours and 24 minutes, the second longest grand slam final. It is the first time in Nadal’s career he has come back from two sets down in a slam final and the Spaniard has now won at least two singles titles at all four grand slam tournaments. “If we put everything together, the scenario, the momentum, what it means. Yeah, without a doubt probably have been the biggest comeback of my tennis career,” said Nadal. The 35-year-old was not certain to compete in Australia. He had not played for most of the previous six months due to a chronic foot injury that required surgery. Then his preparation was disrupted by Covid. Asked if this was his greatest victory, Nadal nodded. “The most unexpected, without a doubt,” he said, smiling. “And most surprising I think for everyone. For you guys, too. For me personally, especially, no? Because I know how I arrived here. I don’t know. Have been a very emotional night. Even now I am destroyed, honestly, physically. I can’t think much, I can’t remember a lot of moments of the match.” Nadal’s unexpected victory means he is now the sole owner of the men’s grand slam record but he has consistently played down the importance of the achievement. “I feel lucky to achieve one more very special thing in my tennis career,” he said. “I don’t care much if I am the one or not the one or the best of the history, not the best of the history. Honestly today I don’t care much. For me it’s about enjoying nights like today. That means everything for me – [it] means even more to achieve the second Australian Open more than any other thing.” Nadal received congratulations from Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic on social media. “What a match! To my friend and great rival@RafaelNadal, heartfelt congratulations on becoming the first man to win 21 grand slam singles titles,” wrote Federer. “A few months ago we were joking about both being on crutches. Amazing. Never underestimate a great champion. Your incredible work ethic, dedication and fighting spirit are an inspirational to me and countless others around the world.” Nadal explained that the hardest part about the past few months was having no timeline for a possible return: “Personally, my feeling is much easier to accept because every week you do a different thing and you see the improvements and you know that after this period of time the normal thing is you going to be fine. My position is completely different. “We were trying things. And for a long period of time without any success, with zero success. After all the things that I went through all my career, of course at my age the doubts are there. Knowing that you have an injury that you can’t recover from … of course the doubts are there. Mentally it is much tougher.” Medvedev said he was not that disappointed by the match because of Nadal’s level and the quality of his comeback. He was, however, rather affected by those spectators who booed and attempted to disrupt him throughout the match. Medvedev, who aired his frustrations during the match, started his press conference with a long monologue, explaining that when he started travelling as a youngster he dreamed of playing on the biggest stages and receiving support. He said that after the treatment from the fans, he had lost those dreams. The 25-year-old said he will only play for himself, his family and people who support him in Russia. “The kid that was dreaming is not any more in me after today,” he said. “It will be tougher to continue tennis when it’s like this.”Frank Lampard has agreed a two-and-a-half-year contract to become Everton’s new manager and has immediately set about bolstering the playing resources at Goodison Park with the impending capture of Dutch midfielder Donny van de Beek on a season-long loan deal from Manchester United. Lampard’s appointment as successor to Rafael Benítez, who was sacked on 16 January after a defeat by Norwich City, comes about after final interviews were held on Friday with three candidates: Lampard, Vítor Pereira and the club’s caretaker manager, Duncan Ferguson. The former Chelsea and Derby manager was offered the job after impressing Everton’s majority shareholder, Farhad Moshiri, in his interview. Official confirmation of Lampard’s appointment as Everton manager is expected shortly. Lampard has been out of management since he was sacked by Chelsea just over a year ago. The 43-year-old’s immediate priority will be to steer the club to Premier League safety; they are currently 16th in the table, four points above the relegation zone. The new manager’s first match in charge will be the FA Cup fourth-round tie at home to Brentford next Saturday, with his first league game away at Newcastle on 8 February. He will expect to be able to call upon Van de Beek for the Newcastle game - he is cup-tied for Brentford’s visit - after Everton agreed to pay the player’s full salary until the end of the season after he was identified by Lampard as a priority target, with Everton short in midfield due to injuries to Abdoulaye Doucouré, Tom Davies and Fabian Delph. The Netherlands international, who has had limited game time at United under both Ole Gunnar Solskjær and Ralf Rangnick, was also wanted by Patrick Vieira at Crystal Palace, who began their pursuit some days earlier, and he appeared ready to switch to Selhurst Park, with Palace offering to pay 85% of his salary. But Van de Beek has ultimately decided he wants to play on Merseyside rather than in south London. There is no buy option included in the deal, with Van de Beek’s agent, Hasan Cetinkaya, in London to finalise the contract. Lampard’s appointment comes at the end of a turbulent week following last Saturday’s home defeat to Aston Villa under Ferguson. Pereira emerged as the majority shareholder Farhad Moshiri’s preferred choice on Tuesday, prompting a hostile reaction from Everton fans. That led the Portuguese to take the unusual step of pitching for the job and defending his record in a live TV interview the following day. On Friday Wayne Rooney said he had turned down the offer of an interview, preferring to stay at Derby. Lampard’s backroom staff at Everton will include Joe Edwards from Chelsea and former Chelsea and Derby coach Chris Jones. A position has also been offered to Paul Clement, who assisted Carlo Ancelotti when he was manager at Stamford Bridge. Lampard also wanted Anthony Barry to join him from Chelsea but he decided to stay put.The UK’s water industry has for years promised to clean up its reputation for pollution incidents, leaks and murky financial dealings. Yet once again, it is hoping for a clean start. In total, water companies spilled raw sewage into coastal bathing waters more than 5,500 times last year, prompting a another investigation by the Environment Agency and the industry regulator, Ofwat, in November. Weeks later, Ofwat raised a red flag over the financial health of three of Britain’s biggest water companies – Southern, Yorkshire and SES. The regulator expressed concern about “weak levels of financial resilience” and levels of customer service that lagged behind the rest of the industry. For Southern, the resilience report gave a snapshot of the company’s financial health before an equity injection from a familiar character in the water sector’s chequered history, the Australian investment bank Macquarie. Macquarie gained notoriety for its role as the owner of Thames Water between 2006 and 2016, when it attracted fierce political scrutiny for extracting billions in shareholder dividends while Thames’s debt soared. By 2018 the Labour party had called for the sector to be returned to public ownership. But five years after selling out of Thames, the Australian infrastructure investor was given the regulator’s blessing to return to run one of the most troubled water companies in the industry – a move that raised eyebrows in the industry. The £1bn in fresh equity for Southern over the summer followed Ofwat’s decision to enforce a record £90m fine against Southern for deliberately pouring sewage into the sea, and came with a promise to invest a further £2bn over the next four years. Macquarie has not stopped there. Within months of its return to the UK’s water sector, it agreed to invest £130m in green bonds issued by a subsidiary of Affinity Water, and £120m in Anglian Water’s debt. The passive investments are part of the bank’s sprawling set of investments in UK infrastructure. Macquarie owns the Green Investment Bank, which was set up with UK taxpayer funds and controversially privatised four years ago. Under its ownership, GIB’s profits more than quadrupled to £144m for the year ending March 2021, compared with the year before. It has paid a total of £174m in dividends to Macquarie, which also owns gas networks, airports and telecoms service companies across the UK. Aileen Armstrong, a senior director at Ofwat, said the regulator had “really welcomed the money coming into the regulated business” while being “clear about the expectations on what the company needed to do for customers. “We have wanted to see a turnaround, and a component of that is an equity injection into the company, which is what this transaction did. We have been very clear – and would be with any prospective new owner – about what we expected of the regulated company and the need for a turnaround in the operations there,” she said. One senior industry source said Ofwat’s decision to give Macquarie its blessing to return to the water industry showed “just how desperate they were” after Southern’s record pollution fine and its troubling financial position. “Southern was not an attractive prospect for investors, and the company’s management was, perhaps unsurprisingly, on its knees. Investors would not have been falling over themselves to take a share of Southern,” the source said. However, Martin Bradley, the head of Macquarie’s “real assets” team in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, said his bank was happy to return to the UK’s water industry despite “misunderstandings” over its ownership of Thames and the concerns over Southern’s financial health. “We didn’t pay a premium for Southern Water,” he said. “We invest in long-term infrastructure, and there’s nothing more long-term than the provision of utilities like water. This is what we do, and we think we’re quite good operators.” Macquarie’s spell at Thames was far from blemish-free. In 2017, the water company was fined £20m after admitting it dumped 1.4bn litres of raw sewage into the River Thames at six sites in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire between 2013 and 2014. The water company’s finances were also a cause for alarm, with Macquarie criticised for selling Thames with almost £11bn of debt after a decade in which the bank paid itself £1.6bn in dividends, ran up a £260m pension deficit and paid next to no UK corporation tax. A former senior Thames employee said of Macquarie: “Were they an effective, focused investor? Absolutely. But can you expect them to operate a utility in the public interest? Well, only if you are certain that the regulatory framework rewards the good behaviours and penalises the bad. Ofwat hasn’t always done that.” The characterisation of the Australian bank as a “vampire kangaroo”, or an aggressive asset stripper, has sometimes been unfair, he added. “They did extract more out of the company than would be ideal, but it was in full sight of the regulator. And where it made sense under the regulatory framework for Macquarie to invest in Thames, they were happy to invest too,” he said. Macquarie’s interests in the water sector are part of a more than £50bn of investment in UK infrastructure that it has either arranged or invested directly since 2005. These include Cadent, which is the UK’s largest gas distribution network operator, as well as the operator of Aberdeen, Glasgow, and Southampton airports and the broadcast service provider Arqiva. “We didn’t need to convince the regulator,” Bradley said of Macquarie’s return to the UK water industry. “Ofwat has said they’d be keeping a close eye on the situation at Southern Water. They expect us to deliver, and we expect to deliver.” The former Thames employee said that at the end of the day, Macquarie was driven entirely by the bottom line and the letter of Ofwat’s regulation. “They were always in it for the money, and they were able to use the regulatory regime to take an aggressive approach at times,” he said. However, there have been concerns for some time that there has been “underspending in areas that Ofwat didn’t measure” that has led to “an accumulation of problems over decades”. Armstrong said there had already been “quite a lot of change in the regulatory regime since Macquarie was last in the sector”. “Over the last few years we’ve been very clear about making sure there is financial resilience in the sector and that the companies are focused on delivering good operation performance,” she said. Hopefully this time, Ofwat has been clear enough. The regulator can wash its hands of the past only so many times.Good morning. For many families and teachers in New South Wales and Victoria, this week is off to an anxious start as children return to school amid the ongoing Omicron outbreak, which over the weekend saw NSW recorded its deadliest day, with 52 deaths, and four confirmed cases of the Omicron subvariant “son of Omicron”. There were also plenty of celebrations over the weekend ahead of the luna new year. Rafael Nadal has made history and claimed his record-breaking 21st-grand-slam titles at the Australia Open after an epic five-and-a-half-hour battle against Daniil Medvedev. From two sets down, Nadal somehow recovered to defeat Medvedev 2-6, 6-7 (5), 6-4, 6-4, 7-5. Nadal now takes sole ownership of the all-time record, breaking his tie of 20 with Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer. “Without a doubt it’s been one of the most emotional moments in my tennis career … One month and a half ago I said maybe there was a chance that’s going to be my last Australian Open ... but now that’s plenty of energy to keep going,” Nadal said post-match. Nadal’s win follows Australian Ash Barty’s historic defeat of Danielle Collins 6-3 7-6 (2) – the first Australian to win an Australian Open singles title since Chris O’Neil in 1978, and her third grand-slam win. Health officials in NSW warned vaccines “may be less effective” against the Omicron variant days before premier Dominic Perrottet announced Covid-19 restrictions would be scrapped. On 15 December, the NSW government pushed ahead with its decision to dropped the mask mandate, density limits, proof of vaccination and QR check-ins five days after NSW Health’s Covid-19 critical intelligence unit published a briefing note warning vaccines could be less effective and there was an increased risk of reinfection with the new variant. A US Senate panel is on the verge of approving “the mother of all sanctions” against Vladimir Putin, warning there would be no appeasement as the Russian president contemplates an invasion of Ukraine. Tensions on the Ukraine border continued to escalate with Reuters reporting the Russian military buildup included supplies of blood in anticipation of casualties. Australia’s finance minister, Simon Birmingham, said Australia “will not hesitate” to ratchet up sanctions against Russia but would not deploy its military if war broke out in the region. Australia US coalmining giant Peabody Energy has agreed to hire auditors after it repeatedly submitted incorrect greenhouse gas emissions reports to the Australian government. Australia’s Future Fund has invested more than $90m in weapons manufacturer Raytheon Technologies, whose laser-guided bomb was allegedly used in an airstrike in Yemen this month, killing nearly 100 civilians. Australia has been urged to dedicate money and resources to Covax – the global vaccination mechanism – so that the world’s least-inoculated countries can access vaccines. Australia has distributed nearly 18m Covid vaccine doses to Pacific and south-east Asian nations, but critics say the “vaccine diplomacy” focus has come at expense of global efforts. Women are three times more likely to be sexually or physically abused if they are in pandemic-induced financial stress, new research has found. Australian researchers found “clear evidence” linking economic stressors to the onset and escalation of abuse by partners. The sales of new electric vehicles has tripled in Australia off the back of incentives from state governments to support their uptake. Tesla models led the market, with the US company’s Model 3 making up almost two-thirds of sales in 2021. The world Former No 10 chief adviser Dominic Cummings has said it is his “duty to get rid” of Boris Johnson as prime minister, describing it as “sort of like fixing the drains”. Cummings, who has sent evidence to the Sue Gray inquiry, said it was imperative Johnson was removed from office, calling his former boss a “complete fuckwit”. Donald Trump’s promise to pardon supporters who attacked the US Capitol is “the stuff of dictators”, Richard Nixon’s White House counsel has warned. Ethiopia is facing a catastrophic humanitarian aid crises as severe drought compounds existing conflict and economic struggles. Recommended reads “I used to say I went into veterinary, instead of human, medicine because I loved the science but didn’t want to deal with people,” writes Claire Cannon, who now understands not dealing with people is not an option. And it’s the emotions of humans that make her job hard. “We understand. You’re worried about your pet. We are too. A vet friend of mine posted a meme recently that said ‘Sometimes I wake up at 3am thinking about your dog. There is no extra charge for this.’ It’s typically 4am for me.” When colleagues overseas ask what educations professor Pasi Sahlberg thinks about Australia’s school system, he tells them it does offer world-class education, but not for everyone. “Some of the best schools I’ve found are here. Why, then, is our educational performance not what it used to be just two decades ago? ... We have one of the world’s most examined, researched and reviewed school systems, but when it comes to taking the evidence and respective recommendations seriously, we find ourselves in the same old debates and confrontations over and again.” Listen More than 2 million kids in NSW and Victoria head back to classrooms this week, despite daily Covid cases still in the tens of thousands. State and federal leaders are determined to keep schools open, even as experts warn the virus will likely circulate in schools for at least the next 12 months. In today’s Fully Story, Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to reporter Calla Wahlquist about the plan to keep NSW and Victorian schools open over the coming year. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport The Matildas are out of the Asia Cup after a shock 1-0 quarter-final loss to South Korea. The result was a cruel blow and a major wake-up call for the Matildas, who had dominated the group stage on the way to scoring 24 goals and conceding just one. GWS player Haneen Zreika’s decision not to wear the club’s Pride round jumper and therefore not play in round four of the AFLW has brought rise to much debate around the concept of “inclusion”, writes Rana Hussain. “For many the question lingers: does opting out mean opposition?… This moment is showing us the limitations of only understanding respect for one another through one’s public performance of it.” Media roundup Aboriginal health officials are calling for urgent support for Indigenous communities in the Northern Territory as a “perfect storm” threatens already vulnerable communities where almost a third of the jurisdiction’s Covid cases have been recorded, reports the NT News. South Australia’s Coober Pedy will receive its first drop of supplies after the Stuart Highway was flooded with up to 50cm of water, says the Advertiser. Coming up Western Australian businesses are beginning to enforce stringent proof-of-vaccination requirements as new rules come into effect. Victoria parliament’s new Pandemic Declaration Accountability and Oversight Committee will hold its first public hearing. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Portugal’s ruling Socialist party is on course to win the country’s snap general election and could even secure a surprise outright majority, according to three exit polls released on Sunday evening. The Socialists, led by prime minister António Costa, are projected to win between 37% and 42.5% of the vote, taking between 100 and 118 seats in Portugal’s 230-seat parliament. The polls, published by the three main television channels – SIC, RTP and TVI – put the centre-right Social Democrats (PSD) in second place on 26.7% to 35%, while the far-right Chega and the libertarian Liberal Initiative party appear to be vying for third place, with each expected to take between 4% and 8.5% of the vote. Sunday’s election was triggered in December after the long-running deal between Costa’s minority Socialist government and its allies in the Portuguese Communist party and the Left Bloc broke down during negotiations over the 2022 budget. The unlikely alliance – known as the geringonça, or improvised solution – finally collapsed when the Communists and Left Bloc joined rightwing parties in rejecting the budget bill after weeks of tense negotiations. The election, held two years ahead of schedule, will delay the approval of a spending programme to use €45bn (£38bn) of EU recovery funds to kickstart the economy amid the lingering Covid pandemic. Costa, who has served as prime minister since 2015, had accused his erstwhile geringonça partners of behaving irresponsibly by voting against his budget and is hoping to be able to govern alone if re-elected. Despite the seemingly unstable nature of his minority government, Costa has won plaudits for turning around Portugal’s post-crisis economy, reversing unpopular austerity measures and overseeing one of the most successful Covid vaccination programmes in Europe. “Everyone is realising how important this election is, and how important it is that there’s a solid victory that will give the country stability and generate the consensus and national unity that is fundamental for us to turn the page on this pandemic,” Costa told a rally in Porto on Friday. Recent polls had suggested that the PSD were creeping ahead of the Socialists and that the race would be a narrow one. The Socialists have pledged to increase the minimum wage in western Europe’s poorest country from €705 (£582) a month to €900, while the PSD has promised to cut taxes on corporate profits and personal income. As he cast his vote on Sunday, Costa said he was “confident and serene” about the election results. Rui Rio, who leads the PSD, said he hoped people would get out and vote despite the pandemic: “Given the uncertainty of the results, we would expect more people to vote, but we also have the pandemic that may lead some to be afraid.” Participation, however, appeared to be up on the last general election. At 4pm, turnout stood at 45.7%, compared with 38.7% in 2019. According to pre-election polls, the Chega party, led by the combative former TV football pundit André Ventura, was garnering more and more support and could overtake the Left Bloc to become the third largest force in parliament. Chega’s anti-Roma rhetoric, attacks on benefits recipients and lambasting of what it sees as a corrupt elite have begun to strike a chord with many voters. After winning a seat in the 2019 general election – taking 1.3% of the vote – the party secured 11.9% in last year’s presidential election. Chega could emulate the example of Spain’s far-right Vox party, which has been the third biggest party in congress since November 2019. Not only has Vox proved pivotal in the formation of three regional governments in Spain, it has also dragged the country’s conservative People’s party further to the right. On Saturday, Vox’s leader, Santiago Abascal, hosted a meeting in Madrid of fellow European far-right politicians including France’s Marine Le Pen and Viktor Orbán of Hungary. “We are the ones who defend Europe,” Abascal told the event. “We will not allow the hammer-and-sickle flag to fly, nor the crescent moon flag, nor the dark flag of the globalist elites.”Frank Lampard has a point to prove. He will know that plenty of people will wonder why he has been given the chance of a fresh start at Everton. There are questions to answer after Lampard’s sacking by Chelsea and, although the former England midfielder has time to alter perceptions of his coaching ability, it is hard not to feel that he needs this job to be a success. If that sounds harsh, consider how it ended for him after 18 months at Chelsea. They had slumped to ninth after a series of tactically incoherent displays and, even taking into account Roman Abramovich’s ruthless streak, there was nothing outrageous about the Russian’s decision to fire Lampard 12 months ago. Chelsea were right to act. They had spent £220m during the summer of 2020 but performances were disappointing and morale in the dressing-room was low. Lampard had fallen out with some big players and he knew his time was up when he woke to an early morning text from Chelsea’s chairman, Bruce Buck, and saw that his presence was required in the boardroom. Buck and Marina Granovskaia, the powerful Chelsea director, thanked Lampard for his efforts. Less than 24 hours had passed since Chelsea’s victory over Luton in the FA Cup, but the decision had been made. Thomas Tuchel was available and the German would go on to make a stunning impact, doing Lampard’s reputation few favours by winning the Champions League four months after taking over. The difference under Tuchel was stark. Chelsea conceded 54 league goals during Lampard’s first season and the defence did not improve during his second campaign. Opponents repeatedly punished an invitingly open midfield by hurting Chelsea on the counterattack and one of the first things that Tuchel did was to make a previously dysfunctional side hard to break down. There had also been questions over how Lampard handled senior players such as Marcos Alonso and Antonio Rüdiger. There was a feeling that the 43-year-old was not a great communicator. At times Lampard came across as awkward and distant. His man-management could have been smoother and there will be concerns that he could struggle again if he has not worked out how to forge stronger connections with players. Some people feel that Lampard needs to loosen up. Even he admits that he can be an over-thinker. Nerves can be an issue. Lampard’s interview for the vacancy at Crystal Palace last summer did not go well – the club ended up turning to Patrick Vieira, who has been quietly impressive this season – and it is understood he has spent time working on how to convey his ideas more effectively. Lampard is a young coach and should not be judged solely on his demise at Chelsea. He performed encouragingly after Derby handed him his first opportunity in 2018. Lampard took Derby to sixth in the Championship and, although they lost the play-off final to Aston Villa, his work was enough to convince Chelsea to give their greatest goalscorer a chance when they needed a unifying figure in the dugout after the departure of Maurizio Sarri in June 2019. It should be remembered that Lampard was not walking into a simple situation. Chelsea were under a transfer embargo and were unable to replace Eden Hazard after selling him to Real Madrid.Yet Lampard took on the challenge and there were positives during his first season. Losing the FA Cup final to Arsenal was a blow, but Chelsea finished fourth and earned some memorable wins over Liverpool, Manchester City, Manchester United and Tottenham. Lampard could also point to the part he played in promoting Chelsea’s talented academy players. At their best, Chelsea could be aggressive, quick, proactive and exciting when they clicked under Lampard. Mason Mount and Reece James have become England internationals since breaking through under him and are key players for Tuchel. The pressure, though, rose when Chelsea were free to spend. Lampard wanted a smaller squad but Chelsea struggled to shift players and were left with three left-backs and five centre-backs. “It’s not nice and you can’t bullshit players,” Lampard said. His team became more confused and a run of five defeats in eight league games convinced Abramovich to fire a club legend. It was a bruising experience for Lampard and he has taken time out to mend his wounds. He did not feel ready when Bournemouth approached him in February 2020 and he has been keen to wait for the right opportunity. He was not convinced about walking into a relegation scrap when he spoke to Norwich City about replacing Daniel Farke last November. There has been a lot of introspection. Lampard has decided to move forward without Jody Morris, who was his No 2 at Chelsea and Derby, and he has put thought into his coaching team. He has convinced Joe Edwards to leave Chelsea and could ask Carlo Ancelotti’s experienced former assistant, Paul Clement, to be his right-hand man. Anthony Barry, though, has decided to remain part of Tuchel’s back room staff. This is not an easy job. Everton look broken after the demise of Rafael Benítez. Lampard, who had three interviews before landing the job, will be under pressure. The atmosphere around Goodison Park has felt poisonous and Everton, who are in danger of being sucked into the bottom three, need Lampard to make a fast start. He has to be ready.• An article said: “When the Covid pandemic began, the European Commission cut the benchmark for flight operations that airlines must meet to keep their [airport] slots open from 80% to 25%.” In fact, the benchmark was suspended altogether. Also, a 50% benchmark was introduced in October, not December (Greenpeace calls for ban on ‘ghost flights’ between EU airports, 26 January, p10). • Other recently amended articles include: The hidden life of a GP: angry patients, anti-vaxxers, extreme goodwill and exhaustion Reckless to leave 3bn unvaccinated while easing England rules, experts say My 1950s school was a topsy-turvy world Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Thank you for reading – congratulations to Senegal - and indeed congratulations to Equatorial Guinea for a fantastic run into the last eight. Bye for now. Our match report is here: Here is Jonathan Wilson’s report from the earlier game, when Mohamed Salah made the difference for Egypt against Morocco: Kouyate and Sarr came off the bench to settle it for Senegal. They are into the last four, where they will face Burkina Faso on Wednesday. On Thursday, Cameroon take on Egypt in the second semi-final. Equatorial Guinea gave them a serious test, and Senegal threatened to lose it completely at one point, but they came through. 90 min +3: Oba tries to buy a penalty after a challenge by Koulibaly. No joy. 90 min +1: Buyla cracks a shot from long range. No luck. 90 min: Belima, one of the Equatorial Guinea subs, tries one from distance. It’s well wide. We’ll have three minutes minimum of injury time. 88 min: The Equatorial Guinea players, on the bench, look distraught. It’s been an incredible journey for them, but it’s coming to an end, unless they can find an improbable comeback in the next two or three minutes. 85 min: Oba, Balboa, Eneme, Belima and Bikoro have all come on for Equatorial Guinea now. Sarr has a sight of goal from distance, and hammers a shot which flies narrowly over the bar. 84 min: Oba, who has just come on for Equatorial Guinea, shoots low from close range and Mendy saves! That third Senegal goal is all about the quality of the left-back, Saliou Ciss. A free-kick was belted diagonally over the top from defence. Sprinting down his wing, Ciss takes the ball from the air with a sublime touch on his chest ... sprints into the area ... and squares for Sarr, who unerringly tucks the ball into the waiting net. That was class. The Watford man tucks home the third. 76 min: Equatorial Guinea pass the ball around at the back, before attacking down their left wing. Ndong tries to cross but no one can get on the end of it. Time is on Senegal’s side, and their opponents haven’t troubled them significantly for a while now. 73 min: Senegal are back in the ascendancy. Collectively, they looked truly rattled by conceding the goal. But not they are back on the front foot, with Kouyate’s goal sending them into the semi-finals as it stands. But they wouldn’t say no to a third ... That was an unfortunate goal for Equatorial Guinea to concede. After a corner was half-cleared but then headed back into the danger area, Coco and Akapo went for the same ball and got in each other’s way on the edge of the six yard box. The ball spooned up off the two of them, and Kouyate, who had literally just come on, was able to tap in beyond Owono. He’s just come on ... and he’s scored! 67 min: Senegal launch it into the box via a free-kick from the right. Kouyate is lurking but it’s cleared. 65 min: More changes for Senegal: Cheikhou Kouyate comes on along with Bamba Dieng. Pape Gueye and the goalscorer, Diedhiou, are gone. 63 min: Ismaila Sarr, of Watford, has been introduced into the action for Dia for Senegal. Aliou Cissé, the coach, mixes it up. 59 min: The supposed minnows are growing into sharks. Akapo now cracks a pacy ball into the danger zone. Nsue tries to reach it at the far post but he narrowly fails. The atmosphere in the stadium is raucous, but can you imagine what it must be like in Equatorial Guinea as people watch on TV??! They must be going bonkers. They are back on terms! What a lovely goal. Ganet slides a ball into the feet of Buyla, lurking in the penalty area. He takes it incredibly early, killing the ball with an instant touch, then immediately hitting a low shot, with the outside of his boot, that rolls into the far corner, well beyond the reach of Mendy. Cracking goal, and we’ve got a game on here ... Senegal’s defending ability seems to have disappeared. No penalty! The ref has a look, and immediately decides that it’s no penalty after a very brief look at the screen. Players from both teams are squaring up to each other as the recriminations continue. The referee has a word with Koulibaly and Nsue, from opposing teams, and asks them to calm things down a bit. As Guy Mowbray is saying on commentary on the BBC, by the current law as it’s applied, that did look like a pen. Drama! Handball by Koulibaly! It was Edu who clipped the ball towards the Napoli man, on the edge of the box ... And it’s going to be checked ... 47 min: An early free-kick for Senegal. Idrissa Gueye belts it from distance, but he’s never over the top of it, and it screams high over the goal. Can Senegal make this game safe, or will Equatorial Guinea get back on terms? Let’s see. Half-time reading: Edú whips a vicious ball into the Senegal area. Mendy punches clear, and seconds later, the referee blows it up for half-time. See you soon for more. 42 min: Ganet gets up and hits the free-kick himself. It’s straight into the wall. 42 min: Ganet is fouled by Idrissa Gueye on the edge of the box. A hint of a chance for Equatorial Guinea ... 40 min: Sarr makes progress on the Senegal right and tries to cross low. There is more last-ditch defending from Equatorial Guinea. Diedhiou tries a knock-down at the far post in the next passage of play. Mane is clattered seconds later as he bears down on the penalty area. Equatorial Guinea are being outclassed at the moment. If it goes to 2-0, you fear for them. 37 min: Nampalys Mendy belts an excellent, powerful shot from distance which is destined for the top corner. Owono saves. But it was a tester. 36 min: Machin is booked for a ludicrous push in the back of Pape Gueye. He tries to shake hands afterwards, but is ignored. Is panic starting to set in in the Equatorial Guinea defence? 33 min: It’s opening up. And it’s all hands on deck for Equatorial Guinea, with Senegal moving through the gears in attack. Mane makes a damaging run on the left. He is stopped in the nick of time. Senegal come again ... Mane shows lovely footwork to find the space to cross with the goal gaping ... but Equatorial Guinea just manage to clear! 32 min: Ciss makes more inroads down the Senegal left. He turns a ball into the danger zone, low, and Akapo clears for a corner. That was a simple, but incredibly effective move. Ciss had the ball on the left touchline. He pinged a ball into the feet of Mane. Mane turned and Diedhiou was already on the move in front of him. The delivery was perfect – low and into the path of Diedhiou – and he had no hesitation in sliding in a low finish. There it is! Diedhiou tucks away a smart finish at the near post after an exquisite, slide-rule pass from his strike colleague Mane. 26 min: Equatorial Guinea whip a free-kick into the area. Mendy claims comfortably. 24 min: This one has yet to take off. Both teams are grappling with each other, feeling one another out to a certain extent. And with so much on the line – a place in the last four of the Africa Cup of Nations – neither seems prepared to commit too many men forward. 20 min: The noise from the crowd is constant, featuring a persistent brass section. It’s a cracking atmosphere at the Ahmadou Ahidjo Stadium. Now, Diedhiou chases a fine ball over the top for Senegal and does well to gather it. He turns in the penalty area and whips a shot towards the far post, but it’s lacking in power, and Owono drops to his left to save. 17 min: Mane breaks down the left after a one-two and cuts the ball back. A fine bit of defending from Equatorial Guinea in the middle, though, with a shot blocked, ends the danger. Pape Gueye is then booked for a cynical foul when Equatorial Guinea try to break down field. “Evening,” emails Dean. “It seems quite possible that Egypt could end up facing Senegal and therefore Salah versus Mané in the final. There has plainly been some competition between them at LFC for goal scoring which has, at times, even looked to be somewhat detrimental to the team ethic. It would be fascinating to watch this rivalry into a game where they are actually on different sides.” 15 min: Equatorial Guinea mount another wave of attacking. They are definitely packing their defence, as a general rule, but they’re also happy to try and get men forward on occasion. 13 min: Idrissa Gueye curls a sweetly-struck free-kick goalwards. It flashes wide, but only just. Owono hadn’t moved – either he calculated it was going wide, or was simply hopelessly beaten by the effort. 11 min: Miranda fouls Mane in a central position outside the area. He remonstrates with the referee, but regardless, it’s a free-kick in a dangerous spot from Equatorial Guinea’s point of view. 9 min: Ciss crunches into an aerial challenge with Akapo. Akapo looks in considerable pain after, I think, taking an elbow to the head. Ciss is the first player to go in the referee’s notebook. 7 min: Well, that has showed me ... Equatorial Guinea attack down the left. Nsue crosses from the left and only a good piece of defending in the middle stops a clear chance. 4 min: The early signs, in terms of how Equatorial Guinea are setting up, aren’t great in terms of this being an open and entertaining game. They are clearly aiming to contain Senegal and hit them on the break. 2 min: Diedhiou of Senegal buys a couple of yards of space about 35 yards from goal. The ball sits up nicely, and he attempts an extremely ambitious shot which flies wildly high and wide. Iban Edu has a crack at the other end, but that too is high over the bar. Senegal get the match under way, and enjoy a spell of possession in their opponent’s half to begin with. The Equatorial Guinea anthem ends and the players gee each other up, clapping, shouting and generally making it clear that they are not here to make up the numbers. Who do you like for this one? You can always email me or tweet @LukeMcLaughlin The teams are out on the pitch, and it’s time for the national anthems. Senegal’s first. The camera zooms in immediately on Sadio Mane, then runs along the rest of the side, Mendy of Chelsea standing alongside the captain, Koulibaly. Cameroon will face Egypt in the semi-final on the other side of the draw. Burkina Faso await the winner of this evening’s match between Senegal and Equatorial Guinea. That’ll be Senegal, won’t it? Unless we see a seismic shock in the next couple of hours. Kalidou Koulibaly there, looking resplendent in that very fetching green Senegal kit: Sadio Mane starts for Senegal, despite that worrying head injury during the week in the round of 16 match against Cape Verde. Edouard Mendy plays, and perhaps most importantly, Kalidou Koulibaly of Napoli is in central defence. Senegal: Edouard Mendy, Sarr, Ciss, Nampalys Mendy, Koulibaly, Diallo, Idrissa Gueye, Pape Gueye, Diedhiou, Dia, Mane Equatorial Guinea: Owono, Akapo, Ndong, Ganet, Obiang, Coco, Salvador, Machin, Nsue, Miranda, Buyla “Condolences to families of the departed spectators,” read a message on the big screens at either end during a well-observed, if brief, period of silence before kick-off. The balance required of the competition’s organisers was one that honoured the eight who died in the crush at Olembé and acknowledged the systemic failings that brought it about, while keeping the show on the road. A solid defence plus Mohamed Salah equals progress. It might not be particularly edifying or good to watch but it does seem to work. This was a dismal game, two hours of spoiling with a dusting of football but, in the football that was played, Salah was decisive. He scored the equaliser and set up the winner, so Egypt will meet Cameroon in Thursday’s semi-final, a meeting of the two most successful sides in Cup of Nation’s history. Senegal are not the only side at this tournament whose campaign was hit by an outbreak of Covid-19, but they are still standing, and are the overwhelming favourites to progress into the semi-finals at the expense of Equatorial Guinea today. Sadio Mané suffered a nasty blow to the head in their win against Cape Verde in the last 16: it seems he has been declared fit to play today, and if Senegal are able to call on their big guns, it is hard to imagine anything other than a victory for them. Equatorial Guinea came through a penalty shoot-out win after a goalless draw against Mali on Wednesday. The 20-year-old goalkeeper Jesus Owono made the decisive save in that shoot-out. Can their run of upsets continue? We’re about to find out. Team news and pre-match reading coming up. Kick-off: 7pm UKEngland’s Six Nations plans have suffered fresh disruption with the Harlequins centre Joe Marchant having returned a positive Covid test. His isolation period will sideline him until later this week, making him a highly unlikely starter for Saturday’s Calcutta Cup showdown with Scotland and adding to the visitors’ selection headaches. Head coach Eddie Jones had been set to hand Marchant a starting role but must now reassess, with Jonny May also sidelined and Northampton’s Tommy Freeman another casualty having injured a hamstring in training. Previously omitted wingers Adam Radwan and Louis Lynagh have been called up to the squad, while Nick Isiekwe will remain as cover for Courtney Lawes who is still “going through protocols” according to an RFU spokesperson. The prop Joe Marler is also currently isolating following a positive Covid test. In Marchant’s probable absence there could well be first Six Nations start for Gloucester’s Mark Atkinson at inside centre, with Owen Farrell and Manu Tuilagi already unavailable. No fewer than 16 of Jones’s training squad have never previously featured in the championship and face an instant test of character at Murrayfield on the opening weekend. No one has a better idea of what to expect than Ben Youngs, who made his England debut in Edinburgh as a replacement wing as long ago as 2010 and has never lost a Test at Murrayfield in a career which has yielded 112 caps for his country. Now 32, Youngs says his younger teammates need to understand the unique rhythms and rigours of the Six Nations and the crucial importance of early momentum. “It’s just about making the guys aware it is bigger than what they experienced in the autumn,” stressed Youngs, now within touching distance of Jason Leonard’s all-time England record of 114 caps. “The Six Nations is an incredible tournament. It is huge and some guys come in and potentially don’t understand the magnitude of it. We have spoken about that already as a team and about what to expect. “Everyone gets involved in the Six Nations. It really captivates the nation. The first thing we want to hammer home to the young guys is what a great privilege it is to play in. You don’t want them overthinking too much but you want them to be aware this is a great opportunity. You also have got to get at it quickly because everyone knows Six Nations is about momentum. Starting well and getting off to a good one is really important.” With no Farrell or Tuilagi currently available to Jones – and not only them – Youngs believes it is time for others to step up as England seek to improve on last year’s fifth-place finish. “When you lose world-class players, you certainly notice it. For sure,” he said. “But it also allows guys the opportunity to come in and show what they’re about. For me it allows the team to grow. “People will come in and add more than they did previously. I think you’ve got to look at it as an exciting way for this group to try and kick on. When those other guys return you want them to be looking at the group and thinking: ‘Blimey, the team has moved forward since I’ve been away.’ That’ll be testament to us if we’re able to do that.” England’s recent record against Scotland, however, has been patchy with a narrow 13-6 victory two years ago their only win in the last four Calcutta Cup meetings. Youngs, accordingly, is wary of the Scots’ attacking game and agrees that the fly-half Finn Russell’s likely duel with Marcus Smith will be a pivotal area. “Scotland’s game has definitely evolved, without doubt. Finn has had a big say in that. I’d say he’s a very similar style to Marcus in terms of that ability to make big plays, to roll the dice and have the tools in the armoury to actually pull them off. They play a fast game and move the ball a lot more. They have game breakers and those guys have had a huge say in where they are now.” The Leicester scrum-half has not yet had time to establish the same instinctive relationship with Smith he enjoys with George Ford – “George doesn’t have to tell me what he wants, I know what he wants” – but insists he is still keen to improve after 12 years of Six Nations endeavour. This season he is aiming to retain the starting No 9 jersey ahead of Bristol’s Harry Randall and Sale’s Raffi Quirke and says the youthful duo are keeping him on his toes. He is particularly an admirer of Randall’s quick-tap instincts and Quirke’s defensive enthusiasm but is not about to relinquish his shirt without a fight. “I love what I do and that love has never gone,” Youngs said, insisting he still has the requisite level of competitive desire. “If you love what you do, why would you lose motivation in it? There’s plenty that keeps me coming back.” Youngs also believes England have benefited from a timely motivational talk from the Olympic and world champion athlete Jessica Ennis-Hill. “She was amazing. We have had plenty of speakers come in and she is probably one of the best we have had,” he said. “It was just fascinating to watch someone who, in 2012, inspired a nation with what she did. There was plenty to take out of it, for sure.”As designer collaborations go, Specsavers is the ultimate quiet achiever. The optical chain has been making specially crafted collections by international design houses like HUGO, DKNY, and MARC JACOBS available to the masses for decades. Australian designers like Alex Perry and Collette Dinnigan have been Specsavers mainstays, too, beloved by fashion-forward Australians for years. And its newest designer collection is sure to excite: an eyewear collection by iconic British brand Liberty is now available exclusively at Specsavers. A stylish and storied history Even if you don’t know the name, you’ll almost certainly recognise Liberty’s vibrant designs. In fact, given its highly coveted and prolific collaborations, there’s a good chance you have one of them in your closet, on your feet, or – soon – on your face. A landmark on London’s Regent Street since 1875, Liberty’s six floors have teemed with carefully curated ornaments, homewares, clothing, and fabrics for almost 150 years. The visionary store was described by fashion aficionado Oscar Wilde as “the chosen resort of the artistic shopper”; the impact on the zeitgeist is such that the Art Nouveau period in Italy is known colloquially as “Liberty style”. Liberty first opened its department store in London in 1875 and has been described as “the chosen resort of the artistic shopper” by Oscar Wilde. And the brand still draws lovers of design, fashion, and style from all over the globe today. Cutting-edge design, then, is in Liberty’s DNA: every one of its 45,000-strong print archive is lovingly hand painted and crafted by its in-house design studio, creating a kind of unique visual language that’s revisited and remastered as trends come and go. Over the years, the prints have adorned everything from fine silk scarves to eclectic throw cushions. In fact, so extensive is its catalogue that Liberty has become something of a collaboration powerhouse itself, lending designs to labels like Supreme, Gucci, and Monolo Blahnik, along with street and activewear brands Puma and Vans over the years. Hermés famously chose to partner with Liberty on a collection of silk scarves in 2009, marking the French fashion house’s first ever collaboration. And now, it’s this history of remastered designs that have inspired the Liberty eyewear collection at Specsavers. An iconic partnership “We are thrilled to be partnering with Specsavers on this exclusive collection that perfectly captures the heritage of Liberty’s, remastered for the now,” says Madeleine Macey, Liberty’s Chief Marketing Officer. “The design focus has combined the rich cultural heritage and vast textile history of Liberty fabrics, creating a modern and relevant interpretation of the Liberty style.” Liberty’s Bronze metal frames in an art nouveau style updated for the 21st century (LL SUN RX 01 55:15 140 SHY BRZ, $349). Macey adds that the beauty of partnering with Specsavers on the launch of the Liberty eyewear collection is that people all over the world will take home a little slice of Liberty for themselves, including here in Australia. “With Specsavers’ years of experience in bringing affordable style to eyewear and Liberty’s iconic textile and cultural heritage, it is a perfect partnership.” Heritage remastered The Liberty eyewear range features 13 optical and three sunglasses designs, along with four children’s styles, all of which boast remastered print patterns and design details from the brand’s iconic print archive. (More power to the team who narrowed 45,000 choices down to just 13 designs for the eyewear collection.) Crystal-sage green, round-eye glasses with keyhole bridge by Liberty (LL 09 48:21 140 SHY GRN CRY, $349). Every pair of glasses features the brand’s signature gold floral Iphis at the temple tip and comes with an instantly recognisable Liberty-designed carry case. Macey counts designs LL 10 and LL 07 as her personal favourites, but the range’s variety of high-quality, modern frames means fashion-lovers can easily integrate Liberty’s timeless style into their everyday look. Shop the exclusive Specsavers Liberty eyewear collection here.Thousands of homes in Scotland and north-east England are still without power after Storm Malik hit, as northern parts of the UK brace for winds of up to 90mph with the arrival of Storm Corrie. Northern Powergrid, which supplies north-east England, confirmed 7,000 homes were still without power on Sunday evening. The Scottish government said that about 7,500 households are expected to be without power by the end of Sunday and warned they could be waiting until Tuesday before their service will be restored. Those affected are mainly in Northumberland, County Durham and rural Aberdeenshire. Paul Glendinning, a director at Northern Powergrid, said: “We have successfully restored supplies to more than 60,000 customers, but given the amount of work that there is to do and the fact that we are expecting more high winds during Sunday afternoon, we think that it is likely that a relatively small proportion of our customers will remain without power beyond Sunday night.” Winds of 92mph were recorded in the exposed region of Stornoway as Storm Corrie began to hit the UK on Sunday night, bringing strong gusts inland. It is set to move eastwards across Scotland and push across the North Sea in the early hours of Monday. Strong winds are expected through to the early hours of Monday and they may reach the tip of Norfolk, where large waves could form and damage could hit the coast. Amber and yellow weather warnings for wind across northern parts of Scotland from Sunday into Monday morning are in force. They state: “Flying debris is likely and could lead to injuries or danger to life.” Two people were killed by falling trees on Saturday as Storm Malik caused widespread disruption and left thousands without power. A nine-year-old boy died in hospital and a man was injured after a tree fell on them in Winnothdale, near Stoke. A 60-year-old woman was fatally injured by falling tree in Aberdeen as gusts of up to 85mph were recorded on the nearby Aberdeenshire coast. Met Office meteorologist Alex Burkill said: “That is exceptionally strong for any time of the year and there is no wonder there were significant impacts such as power outages and damage to buildings. It is very unfortunate that things were worse than that for some people.” Winds of more than 100mph were reported in parts of Scotland on Saturday, but the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said the latest storm could be worse. “Unfortunately, as Malik subsides, Storm Corrie is about to hit from late [Sunday] afternoon and may be more severe for parts of Scotland – eg Highlands, Grampian, Tayside than anticipated,” she tweeted. ScotRail said that due to strong winds from Storm Corrie, all services would be withdrawn by 6pm on Sunday, and it put in place a nationwide 40mph speed restriction. There was rail disruption across the UK on Sunday morning due to damage to overhead wires caused by Storm Malik. Burkill said: “It is not just the case of strong winds causing problems – there is also the ice risk across parts of Scotland through to the early part of Monday morning. There will be some wintry showers. Emergency services are trying to get out, utility companies are trying to make repairs and so the icy conditions are not going to make that easier for them.” Ice warnings were also issued by the Met Office covering Grampian, Highlands and Eilean Siar, Strathclyde and Fife as falling temperatures after Storm Corrie may lead to snowfall and turn untreated surfaces icy.There can no longer be a shred of doubt — Canada have come in from the cold as one of the hottest teams in international football. John Herdman’s side, 2021’s most-improved international team, have begun 2022 by making more history as they seek their first men’s World Cup berth since 1986. On a frigid winter afternoon, they scratched their biggest itch and dismissed their noisy neighbours at a raucous Tim Hortons Field, signaling a continental power shift that feels anything but fleeting. Gregg Berhalter and the USA were fitful and frustrated as they found no answer to Cyle Larin’s ferocious seventh-minute strike before defender Sam Adekugbe delivered the dagger in injury time for a famous Canadian victory. The US now approach Wednesday night’s meeting with Honduras in Minnesota with apprehension, knowing they need to pick things up. For Canada there is only elation. By Wednesday their ticket to Qatar 2022 could well be punched. “We knew we could change a football country forever,” Herdman said as the home fans drifted into the night, barely believing the breakneck momentum the country has built up. “That spirit you see, we all want to get to Qatar. I genuinely believe that these men know they have an opportunity to leave a proper football legacy moving forward.” These really are times without precedent for Canada. In the summer the women’s team won Olympic gold. Sunday marked the first competitive midwinter window on home soil since 1985. Herdman and Canada eschewed the option of playing indoors in Vancouver to keep things interesting outdoors, with logistics also a factor. Conditions weren’t as frigid as feared however, the mid-afternoon slot ensuring the mercury didn’t quite plummet as far as it had last November when Mexico were beaten on the night Edmonton became the Iceteca. Managing the compressed Concacaf schedule has been as challenging as any environmental issues. Herdman’s cycling of his squad has been particularly impressive, coaxing his players through nine unbeaten games before Sunday, when he was without Alphonso Davies. He tinkered again here making four changes to Berhalter’s three. It was one of Canada’s newcomers who set the tone, defender Kamal Miller leaving Christian Pulisic shuddering with a heavy foul four minutes in. The USA star’s abysmal delivery from the resultant free-kick hinted that Miller’s hit had indeed been felt. Three minutes later, the visitors were really rattled. Matt Turner’s goal kick got caught in the breeze swirling in from Lake Ontario and barely made it to the halfway line. Miller’s header was flicked on by Jonathan Osorio and a neat but simple one-two between Larin and Jonathan David opened a chasm in the heart of the visitors’ defence. Larin lashed a shot across Turner and into the top corner and stood alone as his country’s record goalscorer. Canadian lungs emptied into the afternoon air. In an arena the locals call The Donut Box there was a bad joke to be made about the hole in the US defence but Berhalter was unlikely to find the humour in it. Slow starts have been a bugbear in this campaign for Berhalter, who had watched the US draw a first-half blank in seven of their nine games before Sunday. They’d make it eight here in spite of controlling much of the possession. Pulisic continually cut a frustrated figure as, behind him, Weston McKennie struggled to impose himself in the middle. Referee César Arturo Ramos was letting the game flow but the Americans could find little fluidity of their own: Sergiño Dest and Antonee Robinson were both blunted when they attempted to go forward. Steven Vitoria blocked bravely from Brenden Aaronson before the half hour. More set-piece opportunities came and went with Canada content to sit, soak and frustrate. Pulisic wasted a free-kick in a particularly dangerous position before finally, two minutes before the break, getting a corner right. His delivery was met with plenty of power by McKennie but Canada captain, Milan Borjan, back in his hometown, clawed it on to the bar and to safety and then bellowed into the crowd in delight. Berhalter once again had to scrabble to find answers at the interval. The manager’s matchday footwear won rave reviews on social media but Berhalter was in danger of wearing out his Air Jordans on the synthetic surface as he paced the technical area. It was a lot of the same early in the second half with Canada’s pace on the break looking more threatening than most of what the Americans could muster. When it opened up for Aaronson on the hour mark he snatched at the ball and shot straight at Borjan. Change finally came on 69 minutes when USA skipper Tyler Adams was forced off through injury and Berhalter used the break to bring in Kellyn Acosta, Ricardo Pepi and Jordan Morris. But still the best chances were Canadian. Turner spilled a David shot from range and Larin almost poked in his second. Evening’s shadow began creeping in and the cold came with it. When Adekugbe misjudged a cross on 79 minutes, there was a brief flick of light for the US but Pepi blazed wildly over. The seconds ticked down and Adekugbe blocked heroically from substitute Paul Arriola who then flashed the ball acrobatically wide. Canada’s left-back somehow had the legs to break forward soon after and almost seal the win. The Americans were given five more minutes but mustered nothing. Instead it was Adekugbe who scorched clear and delivered the exclamation mark. Doubts? Not a single one. Canada have arrived. Berhalter, for his part, punctuated the post-match debate with a jarringly upbeat analysis. “The result hurts. The performance doesn’t hurt,” he insisted. “It was an entire team effort that was outstanding. We asked them to be dominant, we asked them to embrace the conditions, embrace the physicality ... I think we did that and it’s hard for me to remember a performance away from home this dominant without getting a result.” There were signs of dominance Sunday. In spite of Berhalter’s insistence, that dominance now looks to be coming from the north.And here’s Joe Callaghan’s match report from today’s game in Hamilton: Let’s wrap up with words that should make any US fan worry ... If that was a dominant performance, I’d hate to see one that wasn’t dominant. Did anyone imagine, after seeing the US win the Nations League and Gold Cup, that a US coach would call this performance a good one? A baffling comment after a weak showing. Something has gone seriously wrong. And the US doesn’t have years or even months to fix it. Thanks for following along here, and let’s all welcome our new Canadian overlords. Next up: Olympics! Waiting for postgame comments from any US coach or player on Paramount Plus ... None yet, but here’s this ... Say what now? Ricky Gill writes: “Drown in your tears Beau. Your coverage was entertaining even if extremely condescending towards Canada. Canadian football is on the come up. Today they were clinical, well coached and professional. As a Canadian, I am going to enjoy the win and the saltiness. Have a good Sunday.” Not sure whose coverage he’s reading. Canada was indeed all three of those things. The USA ... passed it around a lot. Did I somehow not make that clear? Oh dear ... Canada has turned the USA’s favorite chant against them: Time to panic? Well, no. That’s just the second loss for the USA in this cycle. And maybe they’ll be encouraged by the fact that Jamaica just scored against Panama. But how many points have the USA left on the field, and how many are left to be taken? This team drew in El Salvador. They lost in Panama. They drew in Jamaica. And they’ve drawn and lost against Canada. Next up is a home game against Honduras. That’s a game the US should and must win. If not, that should be the end of the Gregg Berhalter era. In the last window, the US has to play at Mexico, then home to Panama, then on the road in Costa Rica. Can you imagine this team trying to get a result in Costa Rica if they haven’t clinched a qualification spot by then? Here’s the second goal: Let’s give a lot of credit to Canada. Their Concacaf results have not been a fluke. They may not be as talented as the USA’s expensive European-based playoffs, but they play with more intelligence and panache than the players to their south. Now let’s talk about the USA ... Late in the 2018 qualifying cycle, Alexi Lalas launched into the US team in the memorable “tattooed millionaires” rant. He’s not wrong, and he’s not alone. The conventional wisdom in the 2000s and 2010s was that the US needed to learn to play like Barcelona to turn the corner. But in emphasizing possession play, they’ve lost their spirit and their spunk. The US men pressed and possessed all day in Hamilton. They have absolutely nothing to show for it other than a McKennie header that was well-saved. They don’t go forward with any conviction. They dive when they should stay on their feet. They did not rise to the occasion. There’s a lack of enthusiasm among many US fans about playing a World Cup in Qatar. If this continues, they can safely ignore that competition. The lifeless USA give it away, and Adekugbe converts on the breakaway. Game over. 90+5 min: Last-ditch effort now. Acosta gives it away. Canadian counter ... 90+3 min: Throw-in for Canada, and referee Ramos gestures at his watch as if to say the ball should be put back in play before sunset. The US win it back and play forward. Borjan smartly waits to pick up the ball while the US forget to press. 90+1 min: Morris is clobbered 35 yards from goal. Can Pulisic deliver with the free kick? He opts for the shot, which is mildly impressive but goes straight to Borjan, who knits a sweater and files his taxes before putting the ball back into play. Ask Erin McLeod if that’s a good idea. 90 min: Was Antonee Robinson fouled? Maybe. Did Pulisic foul as Canada countered? Yes. Canada’s bench, led by the ever-fiery John Herdman, is up to yell for yellows. The US players and bench say and do nothing as Borjan takes all afternoon to come forward and play the ball. Five minutes of stoppage time. 88 min: Rob Coughlin writes: “We’re American. “playing” for a team means you’re on the team. Pulisic is playing for Chelsea but he doesn’t play much.” Yellow card to Buchanan. Richards has not re-entered the game. Canadians look happy. Hoilett nutmegs Acosta, and it leads to a decent shot from Adekugbe. 87 min: CHANCE as Arriola tries a bicycle kick after a long spell of pressure. Might have been offside anyway, though. 86 min: McKennie takes on four defenders, watched intently by his immobile teammates. Canada can’t clear, and Arriola ends up with a side volley blocked away. 85 min: Bad news that could’ve been doubly bad for the US. Chris Richards’ legs tangle with Ugbo’s, and Canada get a brief counter as the US defender drops to the turf. No goal conceded, but how long will the US have to play 10 v 11? 84 min: Ugbo replaces David. That’s Canada’s last substitution window, so the 22 players on the field will go the distance. 83 min: Robinnottm writes: “The big question as a Chelsea supporter is will Pulisic return to His team fit after three World Cup games….” Pulisic plays for Chelsea? 82 min: Speaking of MLS academies ... Good talent development. But so far, we’re not seeing the grit that it takes to win in Concacaf qualifying. 80 min: One-way traffic, as they say. Well, it’s actually four-way traffic, as the USA pass the ball all over the place with nothing moving forward. Eventually, Pepi gets an awkward shot from an awkward angle that goes awkwardly out of play. Here’s the Turner save sequence -- some disagreement over whether Larin was offside. It certainly would’ve been reviewed: 79 min: Pardon me -- I took a short nap while waiting for Tajon Buchanan to put the ball back into play. 77 min: The US attack has looked a little sharper since Pepi and company came in. Is there enough time? 75 min: A bicycle kick from Pepi adds a bit of novelty to the US attack. On the next wave of attack, Antonee Robinson takes a pass from Pulisic down the left and tries a cross that Borjan snares. That’s better from the USA. Paul Arriola replaces Musah. Reggie Cannon makes a rare appearance, replacing Dest. 73 min: Antonee Robinson barges into Laryea. Canadians are mad, which doesn’t happen often. 72 min: If you’re a US fan, this half is flying by all too quickly, and it’s been a while since the team has threatened. Junior Hoilett replaces Larin. 70 min: CHANCE! A double-save from Turner, as a poor pass or two sets up a turnover and a shot from David. Turner gives up the rebound, and Larin gets a point-blank shot. Saved, but replay shows Larin was probably offside, anyway. 68 min: In fact, Adams has not yet been replaced, and a perplexed Matt Turner seems to want to know why. Pepi replaces Zardes, who has been less effective in the second half. Morris replaces Aaronson. Pulisic has two new running mates. Meanwhile, Canada have earned a free kick from 22 yards off to one side, but it sails high from Adehugbe. 66 min: To paraphrase George Harrison, here come the subs. Kellyn Acosta, Jordan Morris and Ricardo Pepi will make it a hockey-style line change. Tyler Adams is dinged up, though, and he hands the armband to Pulisic. Acosta will go in for Adams. Morris and Pepi are not yet in for some reason. 65 min: Aaronson finds space in the box and falls. Unfortunately for him, he wasn’t fouled. Learning how to dive properly is one area in which the US men could learn from the US women. 64 min: And there we go -- a long diagonal pass for Antonee Robinson. Doesn’t connect, but the Canadians did seem a little nervous. Speaking of nervous, US fans are fretting now while Berhalter goes without subs past the 60-minute mark. 61 min: McKennie again flings the ball into the box, but it’s five yards shy of the nearest US player. And again, it’s a dangerous Canadian counter, but Dest limits Buchanan. Back to comparative development -- for a couple of decades now, “direct” has been a dirty word in US soccer. But doesn’t it, you know, work at times? Would it help if the US didn’t try to pass the ball 30 times before shooting, like a U-9 team under orders not to shoot because they’re already up 12-1? 59 min: CHANCE as McKennie slips the ball to Aaronson, who has a split-second to shoot from the top of the box. It’s well-saved by Borjan. Just the third shot on target in this game. Borjan saved two. The other went in the US net. 58 min: Sub for Canada, with Fraser replacing Kaye in a like-for-like midfield change. Interesting note on the width of the field: Between McKennie’s throws and several corners, the US players are the only ones to take advantage of the narrow dimensions, though you could argue that it’s easier for Canada to close things down. 56 min: Space for the US attack at last, but Pulisic just haphazardly blasts it toward the goal with no end product in mind. Jason Grant writes: “Seeing several offenses both on and off the ball that would be yellow cards in most of the domestic leagues I watch. And that Honduras-Canada match was much much worse. What is it with CONCACAF and the acceptable level of dangerous play? Who instructs and reviews these officials? Seems only a matter of time before a star player with a major European club suffers a serious injury through foul play.” Perhaps, but maybe I’m just used to hearing English commentators who think everything short of a broken leg would have never drawn a whistle back in the day. 54 min: Dest is shielded off the ball by Buchanan. No call against Buchanan, and again, the referee is correct. But there IS a call against Dest, and that seems strange. The two players have some words at close range, failing to keep social distancing. 53 min: McKennie blows into his hand to warm it up before delivering another long throw-in. They should consider practicing that next time. (Well, maybe they did, but it’s not working, and we get a Canadian half-chance on the counter.) 50 min: Vitoria flirts with a second yellow, our commentators say. Here’s a drop ball, the customary restart when play is stopped for injury, the referee says. I’ll stand by my fellow man in yellow here. This is not your typical Concacaf bloodbath. 48 min: Now Canada has the ball, at least until being flagged for offside near the center circle. From the world of analytics: 46 min: We start the second half much as we saw in the first -- US possession broken up before anything interesting can happen. Final word of the halftime mailbag goes to Peter Oh: “Greetings from California! Early deficit for the USA, but still plenty of time in the game to raise their eh-, er, A-game. With that, I’ll make like a maple tree and leave.” To our Canadian friends, we US people offer words you say far more often than we do: We’re sorry. Scott Bassett offers a more immediate assessment: “Two things: Greggggggg reminds me of how the English press used to call Ranieri “the tinker man” in his Chelsea days--always mixing up his lineups, much to my frustration. And, on Zardes: in the “eyeball test,” he seems gangly, ungainly and headless-chicken like. But then the moneyball thinking comes in: So what if he’s graceful as hog on ice, (to quote Tom Waits)? He scores goals. I am always disappointed and hopeful at the same time when he plays. My brain hurts.” Mine, too. On US player development ... Martin Shields: “But California has more residents than Canada. And they can play year round there!” True. But one thing to bear in mind with Concacaf is that MLS is giving players from around the region a nearby option in which they can continue their development. A lot of players from other Concacaf teams, including Canada, currently or formerly played in MLS. And a lot of Canadian players came up through MLS academies. None of this should suggest the Vancouver Whitecaps and FC Dallas have become the equivalent of Barcelona. But the notion that Canada have found some special sauce that the USA have not requires a bit more evidence. So in the remaining couple of minutes of the halftime interval, check out Canada’s Long Term Development Framework. The traits aren’t that different from what the US is preaching. And a lot of soccer know-it-alls hanging out their shingles as youth coaches here would reject most of it because it’s all about positivity and delaying sport specialization. McKennie heads clear from the corner. The referee finds another 15 seconds of stoppage time before ending another wayward first half for the USA, which dominated possession but didn’t look the least bit like scoring until McKennie’s well-placed header was brilliantly saved in the last few minutes. Quick break, then I’ll tackle the emails, specifically about US development. 45+2 min: A slightly more dangerous attack from Canada, with Tajon Buchanan winning a throw-in deep in the US third. Repeat. Repeat. Repeat. Repeat. And now Buchanan wins a corner with what should be the last action of the half. 45+1 min: A Canadian longball brings Matt Turner out for to take one of his few touches of the half. Can’t remember him touching the ball with his hands other than to pick the ball out of the net. 45 min: Strange to see a referee reach out a hand to help a player to his feet, but that’s what happened after a US foul. Canada quickly lose possession, and the US take their time knocking it around. Three minutes of stoppage time? From what? 43 min: Pulisic’s corner kick is ALMOST IN! McKennie gets a head to it, and Borjan does very well to tap it off his own crossbar. Best attacking moment for the US by a long way. 42 min: Better from McKennie, staying on his feet despite some contact and playing down the left flank to Zardes. They continue to work down the left and win a corner. Where’s Brian McBride when you need him? 41 min: A half-decent US buildup dies at the feet of McKennie, who does not look his best here. 39 min: One thing the US attackers are doing well is pressing. Canada might not be attacking with much commitment, but even so, the defenders aren’t finding much room to play forward. McKennie draws a foul from Cyle Larin, who expertly grabs the Juventus man’s shirt. 38 min: Stats at ESPN: USA lead the possession percentage 64-36. They have five shots, none on target. Canada have one shot. They lead 1-0. The difference between the midfield play and the forward play is a bit like when I saw an ever-entertaining Cheap Trick opening for a desultory Robert Plant. 37 min: Pulisic takes the kick and ... ... how’s the NFL game going? 36 min: Dest wins the ball at midfield, and it ends up with Pulisic. The Chelsea man does better this time, fighting through one challenge and getting taken down for a free kick from 22 yards out. 33 min: A give-and-go between Pulisic and McKennie is gone, as the latter’s shambolic return pass misses the mark. Too early to ask which sub(s) Gregg Berhalter will deploy in the second half? Pepi, perhaps? The poorest of the trio has actually been not Zardes but the megamillion man Pulisic, but I’d think Aaronson would be the one to give way. 31 min: YELLOW to Vitoria after Pulisic is hacked down (yes, with actual contact this time) as the USA try to break forward on a rare counterattacking chance. 30 min: Barry Ragin helps a fellow Irishman: “I certainly wouldn’t know from experience, but I’m told that a North American with a Paramount Plus subscription and a VPN might be able to get a stream of this match in Ireland. Regarding citizenship, it helps to have an Irish born grandparent. Fortunately, my wife had one, which is why I’m sitting here in Cork following your MBM, and maybe keeping up with the match through other means. Cheers! Barry” Will get to other emails, maybe after this rare Canadian foray forward. 28 min: Zardes makes a strong run down the right and crosses into a mostly vacant Canadian box. The ball falls to Aaronson, but the shot is blocked. Canada have barely moved into the US defensive third since the goal. Or before. The goal was very much an aberration in terms of who’s controlling the game, but it’s not as if the US attackers have threatened. 24 min: Musah is slow to get up after Laryea tumbles forward and catches the US midfielder’s midsection with his trailing leg. The US kick the ball out, and Canada sportingly returns it. Polite country. 22 min: The usual bleating over the state of US soccer development is well underway on Twitter. Pity they don’t realize Canada’s players have developed in the same league system as the US players. Weston McKennie with another long throw that serves as a de facto corner kick, but again, the US attackers just aren’t winning anything. 20 min: Pulisic goes against three defenders after a pass from Aaronson, but he can only lunge at the ball after his own poor touch. So far, no one in the USA attack has distinguished himself. Chris Richards slams a knee into the back of Canadian attacker Jonathan David’s leg. Wouldn’t have minded a yellow there. 18 min: Miller knocks over Aaronson in the Canadian box, but it appears to be shoulder-to-shoulder. Our referee is off to a good start, though I have sympathy for referees since I took up the whistle and dealt with a U-10 girls coach from Ohio who basically said she didn’t care if the other team got injured as the result of their “tough” play, which included a defender sliding through an attacker’s legs nowhere near the ball. Where were we? Ah yes -- more USA possession. It’s a bit of a backwards game, with Canada doing most of the defending at home, but an early goal can encourage such behavior. 15 min: USA with possession. Pulisic brought down and ... no call? And yes, the replay shows nothing more than grazing contact. Stand up, young man. Also on Twitter, “Zardes” is trending, as US fans continue their eons-long debate over the merits of the striker. But the best comment on the matter was posted a few days ago: Quick reminder that the USA’s top-flight league is also Canada’s top-flight league. Anyway, here’s the goal. 11 min: The “foul Pulisic” tactic is serving Canada well so far. Vitoria picks the ball away from Zardes, and the US forward bundles it out for a goal kick. Like Canada a few minutes ago, the US midfield briefly gets possession after the goal kick, but unlike Canada, they do not score. 9 min: Pulisic finds Zardes with a corner kick. His near-post header is deflected wide for another corner. Our officials take some time to sort out some unpleasantness, and the next corner goes nowhere. Niall O’Keeffe writes: “Good on you for doing a minute by minute online. I lived in Toronto for 15 years and am trying to find a legal stream in the Republic of Ireland. Any tips from readers. Good thing for me is I have dual Irish and Canadian citizenship so hopefully will have a team to root for in Qatar. Comes in handy in the Snow Olympics. Ireland hardly a powerhouse in luge or the shooting/skiing event which presumably was invented by a stoned Scandinavian.” I’ll have you know I’ve covered biathlon at the Olympics, and it’s my second favorite winter sport after Canada’s specialty, curling. Also, where can I get Irish citizenship? Went there on my honeymoon and my 20th anniversary. Oops. After a decent start, the USA fall asleep on their own goal kick. Canada win the header, and the ball quickly goes to Larin, who turns around the defense and cleanly finishes from 16 yards out. 5 min: Weston McKennie takes advantage of the narrow-ish field to deliver a free kick into the area. It’s cleared, and Tyler Adams breaks up the counter attack. Michael Vraney writes: “Today is the day the USMNT supporters finally accept that Zardes isn’t the problem, but possibly the answer - he scores in a 1-0 result for the red white and blue.” Zardes is many things, but he is not predictable. 4 min: Pulisic draws a foul on Kamal Miller, earning a free kick about 35 yards out. Wrong place for the Canadian defender to send a message, but Pulisic’s kick is poor. 3 min: For all the people making a big deal about which players are in short sleeves, note that Canadian keeper Milan Borjan is in long pants. 1 min: Antonee Robinson gets up the left flank, but it’s not exactly a goal this time. It’s a cross that sails about 15 yards behind the goal. Our referee, Cesar Ramos, is from Mexico. Crowd boos while the USA strings together three passes. USA also gets points for coach Gregg Berhalter’s footwear. No. 1 vs. No. 2. Neighbors along one of the longest land borders in the world. Canada’s crowd at 50% capacity due to Covid restrictions. OK, that slightly dulls the narrative, but only slightly. Kids in the Hall vs. the Groundlings. Rush vs. Green Day. Winner is in first place in the group. Loser might need to check into plans for the last-chance intercontinental playoff, just in case. Anthems away, and the US team sings surprisingly well. Talented bunch here. Canada has a better anthem, but they don’t sing quite as well. Early advantage south of the border. Kickoff in a couple of minutes. Send your comments to me on Twitter or by email. This is not confidence among the US faithful: Alphonso Davies provided commentary for Canada’s last game on Twitch, which is unfortunate because they’d much rather have the Bayern Munich player on the field. Davies tore the US defense apart in September, marauding up the left flank. Also missing: Porto-bound midfielder Stephen Eustaquio. Returning from that 1-1 draw: goal scorer Cyle Larin (Besiktas), goalkeeper Milan Borjan (Red Star Belgrad) and center back Alistair Johnston (Montreal), along with the other three midfielders from September: Sam Adekugbe (Hatayspor), Mark-Anthony Kaye (Colorado) and Richie Laryea (Nottingham Forest). Lille’s Jonathan David leads the attack. Also starting: Kamal Miller (Montreal), Steven Vitoria (Moreirense), Tajon Buchanan (Club Brugge) and Jonathan Osorio (Toronto). Side note: Mark Anthony K is the name of a Canadian who is one-half of the hosting duo for the Yes Music Podcast. As reported above, Tim Weah is unavailable. So is goalkeeper Zach Steffen. Today’s goalkeeper is Arsenal-bound (pending last-minute hangups) Matt Turner. The outside backs are Barcelona’s Sergiño Dest and Fulham’s Antonee Robinson, who scored the lone goal against a defensive-minded El Salvador a few days ago. At the center, it’s Hoffenheim’s Chris Richards and Atlanta’s Miles Robinson. Antonee Robinson is the only player in that bunch with 20 caps. The midfield is the team’s strength, with captain Tyler Adams (RB Leipzig) as the anchor alongside Juventus’ Weston McKennie and Valencia’s Yunus Musah. Up front, the nation will take a break from fretting over Christian Pulisic’s playing time at Chelsea to watch him play. Gyasi Zardes (Columbus) and Brendan Aaronson (RB Salzburg) start ahead of Augsburg phenom Ricardo Pepi. Aaronson was the goal-scorer in the USA’s 1-1 draw with Canada in September in Nashville, a shocking result at the time that seems only slightly less shocking given the current standings. But first, we get surprise announcements. Paramount commentator Clint Dempsey has been voted into the Soccer Hall of Fame, and he just learned it live on the air. Now he gets to surprise Shannon Boxx and Hope Solo. The oft-controversial goalkeeper was shockingly passed over in voting before, and she barely mustered a smile upon learning the news. Paramount Plus, which is airing the game to subscribers in the USA, has punctuated its pregame coverage with a song from another Paramount-affiliated property, South Park -- the classic “Blame Canada.” Unofficial theme song of a new rivalry? Until recently, the North American neighbors have saved their high-pressure battles for hockey, especially women’s hockey. Occasionally, the rivalry bubbles up in women’s soccer, especially in a controversial Olympic matchup we won’t mention. After all, Canada and the USA have never played in the same World Cup. Never. Canada has qualified exactly once for the men’s World Cup, in 1986. The next time around, the USA qualified for the first time in 40 years, starting a streak of qualification that came to a screeching halt in 2017. But now? They’re 1-2 in the Concacaf standings. Canada’s first. But Mexico is close behind, and Panama isn’t far behind the top three. The top three qualify to go to Qatar, while the fourth-place team must defeat the Oceania champion (almost certainly New Zealand) in June. Hello all, and welcome to a vital January qualifier in which the big story is the weather: two feet of snow, 22 degrees Fahrenheit with a “feels like” figure of 9 degrees ... Oh, I’m sorry. That’s the weather in Boston. New York isn’t much better. In Hamilton, Ontario, about an hour’s drive from Niagara Falls, it’s 25 degrees (-4 for those who prefer Celsius) with a “feels like” of 19 (-7). In other words, it’s the same conditions in which I’ve refereed youth soccer games in Northern Virginia in the last two weeks. These players can handle it. Beau will be here shortly. In the meantime, here some team news from today’s game: USA forward Timothy Weah was unable to travel to Canada for Sunday’s World Cup qualifier because he did not meet the vaccination requirements to cross the Canadian border, coach Gregg Berhalter said Saturday. Weah, who was involved in the play that led to the only goal in Thursday’s 1-0 victory over El Salvador, has received one vaccine dose and was infected with Covid-19 before he could receive his second shot, Berhalter said. Weah meets the vaccination standards in France, where he plays professionally, but is unable to enter Canada, Berhalter said. “This is something we can’t control, the nuances of the Covid protocol, and we just have to deal with it,” Berhalter said. “It will be about the next man stepping up and doing their job.” Berhalter said the team became aware of Weah’s situation “a couple of days ago” and had hoped it could be resolved before Sunday’s game.Good morning, happy back to school for those returning today, and welcome to Five Great Reads, your summertime, morning-tea wrap of good exposition and enthralling writing, graded A+ by me, Alyx Gorman, Guardian Australia’s apples, backpacks and crafting editor. If you fancy following the news as it unfolds, please head over to our live blog for that, and if you woke up on the wrong side of the bed today, why not try a gentle stretch tonight? 1. What is going on with Witness K? If you’ve lost the thread on the Witness K case, no one can blame you. It’s been a “protracted, convoluted prosecution”, writes the Guardian Australia reporter Christopher Knaus. Fortunately, he’s here to bring you up to speed. Sign up to receive Five Great Reads as an email Why do I need to know? It’s “critically important to understand,” Knaus writes. “Particularly at a time when so many Australian whistleblowers are under threat, and secrecy is becoming increasingly pervasive across all aspects of government.” Notable quote? “The attorney general’s continued pursuit of secrecy in this case is a damning indictment of the Morrison government’s priorities,” says the Human Rights Law Centre senior lawyer Kieran Pender. “Rather than enacting long-overdue reform to whistleblowing laws, the government has gone to the high court to keep parts of a court judgment that said no to a secret trial itself secret.” How long will it take to read? Two and a half minutes. 2. The seven species of workplace jerk From credit-stealing colleagues to micromanaging bosses, we’ve all dealt with a stress-spiking coworker at some point, but a psychologist, Tessa West, argues we probably didn’t deal with it well. Why not? “Did you ever take a course to learn what to do when someone’s being a low-level asshole?” West asks this piece’s author, Alex Moshakis. And don’t think prestigious workplaces are immune from pettiness either, West says. “I’ve seen Nobel laureates act the same way in meetings that I saw on the shop floor.” So what do you do if someone’s being a low-level asshole? It depends on what flavour that comes in. West outlines seven kinds of unpleasant office behaviour and offers tips on how to handle it. How long will it take me to read? Five minutes. 3. Stonehenge under the microscope We’ll never know all of Stonehenge’s secrets but DNA testing of nearby burial sites and the use of forensic geology are revealing new stories from the mysterious structure. What do we know? For starters, “Stonehenge was not a single event,” writes Tim Adams, “but a series of interventions in the site, beginning in 3000BC with the first earthworks and spanning 1,500 years – or 90 truncated human generations.” Notable quote: “I imagine people may come in thinking that this is a show about England,” says Neil Wilkin, curator of a new exhibition about Stonehenge at the British Museum. “And then be surprised to find that, actually, to understand Stonehenge, you have to keep widening your focus.” Widen your focus to where? Well, if you take “an exquisite jadeitite axe head” for example, Adams writes, you’ll find it was “quarried in northern Italy and left as an offering beside the Sweet Track, a wooden pathway built through reed beds on the Somerset Levels in 3807BC”. That “tells a startling story, proving the movement of neolithic people over vast distances”. How long will it take me to read? Five minutes, but if you spend long enough staring at the the Towie ball, a 5,000-year-old miniature stone carving found in Scotland, you may just travel back in time. 4. Can cryptocurrency turn green? Depending on how you’d like to frame the argument, bitcoin mining uses more energy than Norway, or 0.1% of the Earth’s total energy consumption. One of those figures might sound worse than the other, and either way, there’s disagreement over how to bring the number down. Who’s saying what? On one side, you’ve got the experts (and governments) who’ve decided bitcoin mining just shouldn’t exist at all; on the other, you’ve got the crypto-faithfuls, who tend to get defensive when they hear that. How long will it take me to read? About four minutes, provided you don’t need a primer on what the blockchain is first. 5. The year of the tiger At lunar new Year celebrations in Bankstown, Mostafa Rachwani and Carly Earl find tentative optimism, Covid-caution and a chance to reconnect. Notable quote: “We’ve both been apart from each other and bonded more than ever,” says a local, Nine Doan. “So lunar new year this year is a chance to say ‘hi’, have a fresh start and wash away everything from the previous year.” Remind me, when’s the lunar new year again? It’s tomorrow, 1 February, and we’ll be entering the year of the tiger.If you’ve blitzed through Cobra Kai and it’s left you hankering for yet more fight-based, 80s throwback drama, consider checking out the work of prolific action movie star Scott Adkins in the truly excellent Ninja Shadow of a Tear (AKA Ninja 2). Ninja Shadow of a Tear is the weirdly titled sequel to 2009’s rather more simplistic Ninja. But it works well as a self-contained entity, ditching any remaining story threads from the first film within the first 10 minutes so you can comfortably watch them in reverse order and kick your evening off with the better one. Casey Bowman (Adkins) returns home one night to find his wife Namiko (Mika Hijii) has been brutally slain by an unknown assailant with a unique but deadly weapon. Casey accepts an offer from his friend Nakabara (Kane Kosugi) to stay at his dojo in Bangkok in an attempt to find peace. But Casey’s grief continues to manifest in self-destructive behaviour, losing his temper in a sparring session and drunkenly starting a massive bar fight. When one of Nakabara’s students turns up dead, killed by the same unique weapon that took Namiko’s life, Casey’s thirst for vengeance leads him on a hunt through Bangkok and the jungles of Myanmar to the doorstep of an infamous drug lord known as Goro (Shun Sugata). Although Ninja Shadow of a Tear’s plot is a classic revenge rampage, it still finds space to make its simple story more interesting than most. Casey’s journey is fuelled more by his grief than his desire for revenge. He gets things wrong, fights the wrong people, and in many ways he wants to get beaten up himself. But like any good genre movie it doesn’t necessarily need to be original; it just needs to play to its strengths. In Ninja Shadow of a Tear’s case, those strengths largely lie in Adkins’ unparalleled ability to kick a lot of people in the face. With a colossal 59 movies under his belt and an upcoming appearance in John Wick 4, Adkins has been busy. Ninja Shadow of a Tear marked the sixth time (out of nine) that he worked with director Isaac Florentine. The Adkins/Florentine axis flourished in the mid-2000s to mid-2010s, courtesy of the two Ninja movies and the Undisputed series – three stylish direct-to-video prison fight movies that served as nominal sequels to Walter Hill’s 2002 original. With a surprisingly deft focus on character and stunning fight sequences, both the Ninja and Undisputed series belie their direct-to-video roots to offer up some of the most enjoyably knuckleheaded action since Jean-Claude Van Damme’s kinetic prime. Florentine’s direction captures every bone-crunching kick and deadly elbow in luxurious slow motion, while Adkins’ acrobatic fighting prowess seems to defy all known laws of physics. Every spin kick and airborne punch asserts that gravity is a mug’s game and something for other people to worry about (meanwhile, I’m watching from the couch, shovelling biscuits into my face like it’s the end of the world). The other reason Ninja Shadow of a Tear is so much fun is because it has absolutely no pretensions about being anything other than a one-man-army action film. It wears its love for 1980s action and ninja movies proudly on its sleeve and arguably does it better than the classics that preceded it. Casting Kosugi as Nakabara is a masterstroke; he is the son of legendary martial artist Shô Kosugi who appeared in Cannon Film’s ninja trilogy – Enter The Ninja, Revenge of the Ninja, Ninja III: The Domination – a staple of video stores everywhere. There’s also a nod to Schwarzenegger’s Commando, as Adkins rampages through the woods, taking on an army by himself and announcing his arrival at the drug compound via hand grenade. Amusingly, there is no concession to traditional ninja stealth, but that’s all part of the fun. For additional viewing, you can catch the first Ninja on Prime and 10 of Adkins’ other movies on Netflix. His Art of Action series on YouTube – a lockdown project where Adkins interviews a fascinating selection of action stars, directors and stunt people – is also well worth seeking out. Ninja Shadow of a Tear is a movie I love on a cellular level: as an introduction to Adkins’ filmography, as a nostalgic love letter to ninja movies and VHS rentals, and as an unashamedly fun slice of modern martial arts cinema.Final thoughts You know what, I think I’ve exhausted all of my thoughts, which is very rare for me. The Cincinnati Bengals are AFC champions and are heading to the Super Bowl. There they will be facing the winners of the NFC Championship Game between the San Francisco 49ers and the Los Angeles Rams, which is scheduled to kick off shortly. As it so happens, our own David Lengel will be covering that game live. Thanks to everyone who followed this liveblog of the Bengals’ improbable victory, especially all of those who contributed, and make sure to check out our game report, linked below. Ciao! Joe Burrow’s last word: “It’s something I’m really proud of, being from Ohio... this is something I’ve always wanted: playing in the Super Bowl.” The weirdest thing about this is that he’s completely calm while he says it. Maybe that’s the key to his success under unimaginable pressure. “We have a special team,” Bengals head coach Zac Taylor says. Every head coach says something like this, but for once this doesn’t sound like a cliche. “We’re not done yet,” he adds and I believe him. That was a rough loss for the Chiefs but, unless you’re a Kansas City fan, it’s probably very hard to not feel happy for long-suffering Bengals fans right now. And now it’s time for the trophy presentation! The last time the Chiefs made the Super Bowl was 2021. The last time the Bengals made the Super Bowl was... 1989. To pull this off, the Bengals had to come back from an 18-point deficit, which ties a championship game record, on the road. Tony Romo’s predictive skills never fail. Words are failing me here, which is very bad because having words to type is 100% my job. The Bengals pull off one of the all-time greatest comebacks in AFC championship game history and will now face the winners of the NFC championship game in the Super Bowl! This is why we watch sports. Bengals 27-24 Chiefs, FINAL It’s all about ball security for the Bengals here. Mixon picks up an extra two yards here to bring the Bengals to the 10-yard line. On 2nd &amp; 8, Burrow takes a three yard loss, but that still sets up a 33-yard field goal and if you think that McPherson is going to miss it, you’re out of your mind! It’s right down the middle! The Bengals are going to the Super Bowl? THE BENGALS ARE GOING TO THE SUPER BOWL! Bengals 24-24 Chiefs, 10:52, OT Oh, wow, this is happening. Mixon picks up seven yards to take them to the Chiefs 25. It’s a 2nd &amp; 3 situation, Mixon gets the ball all the way to the Chiefs’ 13 yard line. Kansas City takes a timeout here, but what could Andy Reid possibly say here? Bengals 24-24 Chiefs, 12:51, OT On the Bengals 45, Burrow throws to Higgins for a nine-yard gain. 2nd &amp; 1, Mixon picks up four yards. 1st &amp; 10 at the Kansas City 40, Mixon picks up yet another two yards. 2nd &amp; 8 at the Kansas City 40, Burrow finds Higgins for an eight-yard gain to the Kansas City 32. It feels like they’re close to field goal range already. Bengals 24-24 Chiefs, 14:46, OT The Chiefs start at their own 25 after another touchback. On 1st &amp; 10, Mahomes throws incomplete. On 2nd &amp; 10, Mahomes nearly throws a game-ending interception to Eli Apple. Oh dear, that could be painful if the Bengals can’t get a stop on 3rd &amp; 10. Except this time, Mahomes does throw an interception! This one is caught by Bell at the Kansas City 45. If the Chiefs win this game without the Bengals getting a chance to touch the ball in overtime, there is no chance that the NFL will not change the OT rules in this offseason. There will be riots if they don’t. Coin toss Well, that might be it for the Bengals. The Chiefs win the coin toss and can win it if they score a touchdown on their opening drive For the second straight playoff game. Bengals 24-24 Chiefs, end of regulation 3rd &amp; goal. Mahomes at the nine. He has a ridiculous amount of time to make a decision but the Bengals defense finally gets to him. Hubbard sacks him for a 15-yard loss and a fumble, which Kansas City recovers. That could have ended the game right there if the Bengals had recovered. It’s all on Butker to force overtime here… and he does when his 44-yard field goal is good! The Chiefs have forced overtime yet again! Bengals 24-21 Chiefs, :39, 4th quarter 2nd &amp; goal. Mahomes takes a five-yard sack here, that’s on Sam Hubbard, pushing them to the Cincinnati 9. The Bengals take a timeout. Bengals 24-21 Chiefs, 1:26, 4th quarter It’s 1st &amp; goal at the Cincinnati 5. The clock is a huge factor here, the Chiefs don’t want to leave the Bengals any time here. So, Mahomes hands off to McKinnon for the gain of a single yard. The Bengals take a timeout here. Bengals 24-21 Chiefs, 1:30, 4th quarter 1st &amp; 10 on the Cincinnati 15, Mahomes takes it himself and rushes for 4 yards. 2nd &amp; 6. Mahomes runs and runs and runs and… gets an additional four yards when it’s all said and done. 3rd &amp; 2 at the Bengals 7. Mahomes finds Kelce for… exactly two yards. And the Chiefs take a timeout. Roger Kirkby: Those savvy Vegas guys don’t throw money away, for the chief’s to win by 8 looks way off in the distance, and they ain’t winning right now. Go Bengals defence. Well, the Chiefs are knocking on the door now. Bengals 24-21 Chiefs, 2:00, 4th quarter After being silent the entire second half, the Chiefs offense has woken up at the worst possible time for Cincinnati. On 1st &amp; 10 at the Bengals’ 38, Hardman gets nine yards. On the next play, McKinnon runs the ball to the Bengals’ 15 yard line and takes us to the two-minute warning. Bengals 24-21 Chiefs, 3:29, 4th quarter 2nd &amp; 2 at their own 43, McKinnon picks up 1 yard. Now we have the biggest third-down situation of the game. Mahomes throws to Kelce and the best tight end in the league gives them an 18-yard gain that takes them into the Bengals 38. Bengals 24-21 Chiefs, 4:55, 4th quarter Another kickoff, another touchback. The Chiefs are at their own 25 again. Mahomes throws a pass to Hardman, which gives them a five yard gain. 2nd &amp; 10, Mahomes finds Kelce to make up the ten-yard difference. 1st &amp; 10 at their own 35, Mahomes goes into shotgun mode and finds Kelce for an eight yard gain. Burrow came into this game expressing his annoyance that people considered the Bengals’ underdogs. All the confidence in the world, this guy has, and can you blame him? Bengals 24-21 Chiefs, 6:04, 4th quarter Finally some good news for Kansas City on this drive: a false start penalty pushes the Bengals back five yards. It’s now 1st &amp; 15 at the Chiefs’ 39. Burrow’s first pass attempt is incomplete. Second down. Burrow finds Chase for a five yard gain, which at least erases the penalty. It’s 3rd &amp; 10 at the Chiefs 34. Burrow’s next throw is incomplete, but they’re in field goal range. McPherson’s 52-yard field goal is... JUST good. The Bengals have the lead on another clutch McPherson kick! Fans at Arrowhead are stunned and they should be. Bengals 21-21 Chiefs, 8:22, 4th quarter 1st &amp; 10 at the Cincinnati 45… and here come the flags. It’s an offside penalty on the defense, which will give the Bengals an additional five yards here. So, it’s 1st 7 5 at the 50-yard line. Burrow throws to Higgins who puts on a yards-after-the-catch clinic and extended into a 16-yard play. The Bengals are now at the Kansas City 34. Bengals 21-21 Chiefs, 8:42, 4th quarter It’s 1st &amp; 10, somehow, at the Bengals 31. Mixon picks up a yard. 2nd &amp; 9, Burrow finds Boyd to cut it to a 3rd &amp; 7 situation. At his own 34, Burrow scrambles yet again and gets a first down yet again! The eleven yard run takes him to the Cincinnati 45. On the next play, the Bengals take a timeout. Bengals 21-21 Chiefs, 11:01, 4th quarter The Bengals have already secured a moral victory: can they pull off a real victory? They start at their own 20 where Mixon picks up 4 yards. 2nd &amp; 6, Burrow throws one way too low. The Chiefs have a 3rd &amp; 6 situation and a chance to shut this down, but instead their defense can’t get to Burrow who decides to keep the ball and take it himself for a seven yard gain that takes them to their own 31 and gives them a first down. Bengals 21-21 Chiefs, 12:36, 4th quarter Edwards-Helaire picks up 4 yards to get to the Bengals 49, setting up a 2nd &amp; 6 situation. Mahomes throws his next pass just over Edwards-Helaire in a rare poor throw. This is a big third down situation here. Let’s face it: ever situation is key here. Mahomes gets sacked again! It’s an eight-yard loss courtesy of Trey Hendrickson, the Bengals defense effectively erases the interception and forces Kansas City to punt once more. Townsend’s punt, yet again, falls into the end zone for a touchback. Bengals 21-21 Chiefs, 14:01, 4th quarter And the Bengals drive promptly ends! Burrow tries to throw to Chase, but instead L’Jarius Sneed picks it off at the Kansas City 47! They get the ball right back! Unbelievable! Bengals 21-21 Chiefs, 14:14, 4th quarter Mahomes has plenty of time with the ball and ends up scrambling… for a nine-yard loss! That’s his first sack of the game. The Bengals stop the Chiefs yet again: they haven’t scored this entire half. Here comes the punt team. Townsend’s punt is returned by Taylor to the Bengals 34, where they will start their drive. I can’t beileve I’m saying this, but this game has gone from a potential blowout to a worthy follow-up to Bills-Chiefs. I am not complaining. Bengals 21-21 Chiefs, end of the 3rd quarter McPherson’s kickoff goes for a touchback. The Chiefs will start from their own 25. Mahomes throws incomplete to McKinnon. 2nd &amp; 10, Mahomes finds Kelce for a seven yard gain to their own 32. It will be 3rd &amp; 3 when the fourth quarter begins. What a game we have going here! Bengals 21-21 Chiefs, :14, 3rd quarter The Bengals are at the Kansas City 27 with a fresh set of down. This is trouble for the Chiefs. Mixon takes it to the 22 on first down. 2nd &amp; 5 at the Kansas City 22, the Burrow-to-Chase pipeline gives them 17 yards and takes them to the Kansas City 5! 1st &amp; goal, Mixon gets to the 2. 2nd &amp; goal, Burrow can’t connect with Chase. He doesn’t miss the next time, he finds Burrow in the end zone for a touchdown! After a successful two-point conversion (Burrow-to-Taylor) we have a tie game! If I didn’t have to keep live blogging, I’d collapse right here and now. Bengals 13-21 Chiefs, 2:23, 3rd quarter OH WOW. Game changing moment here! Trey Hill picks off Mahomes, his first interception in a championship game, at the Kansas City 29 and takes it an additional three yards! Bengals ball! Bengals 13-21 Chiefs, 2:58, 3rd quarter McPherson’s kick hits the Bengals end zone for a touchback. The Chiefs lead has been cut by three-points but they have to like where they are right now. McKinnon gets the ball and runs for seven yards to the Kansas City 32. Bengals 13-21 Chiefs, 3:46, 3rd quarter 1st &amp; 10 at the Chiefs 26, Burrow finds Mixon for 18 yards to put them at the Kansas City 8. Things are getting dicey here for the Chiefs, but this is right when their defense steps up. Melvin Ingram sacks Burrow for the first time of the game: it’s a loss of seven yards. On 2nd &amp; goal, Burrow throws incomplete, pressured again by Ingram. Burrow’s next pass to Perine only gets them two yards so they have to settle for a field goal. McPherson’s 31-yarder is good but that feels like a lost opportunity for Cincinnati. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 5:02, 3rd quarter Mixon gets stopped for no gain on the next play. 2nd &amp; 10, still at the Kansas City 32. On the next play, the Chiefs pick a lousy time to pick up their first penalty of the game. Burrow’s throw was incomplete but they get six yards and first down out of it regardless. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 6:25, 3rd quarter On the next play, Mixon gets the ball but can’t advance it. The officials throw a flag, but it’s accidental (at least it’s not a whistle this time). After being relatively quiet today, Ja’Marr Chase gets in on the action in the next play. Burrow finds Chase for a 22 yard gain that puts them at the Chiefs 32 yard line. They are starting to threaten here. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 7:26, 3rd quarter On 1st &amp; 10, Mixon runs the ball to the Cincinnati 40 in a five-yard gain. 2nd &amp; 5, Burrow finds Drew Sample for what is nearly a first down. On 3rd &amp; 1, it’s Quarterback Sneak Time as Burrow barrels his way through for a first down that takes them to their own 46. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 8:48, 3rd quarter We’re at the Chiefs 20. Edwards-Helaire gets four yards. 2nd &amp; 6 at the 24: Mahomes throws a long one to nowhere. It’s a huge third down for the Bengals defense and… the Bengals force yet another punt! Halftime adjustments can be a heck of a thing. Townsend’s 42 yard punt will put the Bengals at their own 35. Can they take advantage? Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 10:16, 3rd quarter Don’t laugh but that punt could pay dividends here, field position wise. Mahomes throws to Edwards-Helaire who runs for four yards. On their own 11, the Chiefs pick up a first down as Hardman picks up 10 yards before being pushed out of bounds by Von Bell, who could have been flagged for a penalty. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 11:08, 3rd quarter It’s 2nd &amp; 14 at the Kansas City 43 and oof Burrow can’t find tight end Drew Sample. On 3rd &amp; 14, Burrow throws incomplete to Higgins. That will be two straight possessions now without a scoring change, believe it or not. Huber’s punt will put the Chiefs at their own 7 yard line to start their next possession. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 11:13, 3rd quarter There’s the second-half start this Bengals offense needed. Burrow matches Mahomes with a bomb of a throw to Higgins to the Kansas City 39-yard line. That’s a 44 yard pass. Mixon picks up two yards on the first down to the 37. Then, unfortunately, the Bengals get hit with a five-yard delay of game penalty. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 12:58, 3rd quarter Tommy Townsend, who probably thought he had a day off, comes in to punt, a 57-yarder that is returned eleven yards by Trent Taylor to the Bengals 17. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 13:03, 3rd quarter On 1st &amp; 10, McKinnon picks up six yards to the 27. On 2nd &amp; 4, Mahomes throws to Pringle for aa six yard gain and a first gain. With a fresh set of downs, McKinnon takes the ball to the Kansas City 37. 2nd &amp; 6, Mahomes throws incomplete… twice in a row? Oh wow, the Chiefs are actually going to punt here from their 37. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, 14:55, 3rd quarter Byron Pringle takes McPherson’s kickoff from the end zone to the Kansas City 27, where the Chiefs will start their opening drive of the second half. Here’s a taste of the debacle: Massive comedy here as the Halftime Show completely drowns out the Halftime Analysis crew who are forced to scream at the camera and at each other to get out their points. Best halftime of the postseason. Email from Mike Priest: As a “viewer” stuck in New Zealand…more data please. While on long commercial breaks…set the field up.. last touch down had no idea wher Cincinnati was playing from …then suddenly a 40+ yard run. Thanks. Carry on, Mike Priest Fair enough. In my defense, Mahomes and Burrow are going so fast that it’s something of a challenge for me to get all the details out without falling way behind myself! I’ll make a better effort in the second half. Halftime thoughts CBS has to be happy about that Apple tackle, it keeps the Chiefs off the board and it puts the Bengals in a much more manageable position than they would be otherwise. An eleven point deficit against this high-flying offense isn’t an ideal situation, but it’s not impossible for this Bengals team, provided their defense can step up. They need to stop a Chiefs drive without an assist from the game clock. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, end of the 2nd quarter Oh wow! Thanks to a clutch Eli Apple tackle that keeps Hill out of the end zone, the Bengals get a key stop as time runs out! Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, :09, 2nd quarter Mahomes just airs one out and draws a defensive pass interference call that puts them in a 1st &amp; goal situation. The Bengals call a timeout and try to figure out what exactly they could possibly do here. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, :13, 2nd quarter The Bengals defense seems to have no answers for Mahomes. Honestly, there might not *be* any answers for Mahomes. He throws to Kelce for a nine-yard gain to the Cincinnati 25. There are 13 seconds left on the clock. Bills fans can tell you how this story ends. Bengals 10-21 Chiefs, :41, 2nd quarter McPherson’s kickoff puts the Chiefs at their own 19. On 1st &amp; 10, Mahomes throws incomplete to Hardman. 2nd &amp; 10. Mahomes makes another MASSIVE throw, this one’s to Hill and it’s a 33 yard completion to the Cincinnati 48. They are already cooking. Mahomes finds Hill again, this time for a 14 yard game to the 34. And we have a Chiefs timeout. 1:05, 2nd quarter Well that’s not great for the Bengals: Mixon gets taken down for a two yard loss. It’s 2nd &amp; 12, and going backward is exactly the thing I warned them against on Friday. OH! Never mind… Perine goes off for a 41 yard run into the end zone! That’s the first Bengals touchdown of the game! Plus, the extra point is good! If they can keep the Chiefs from scoring in the next minute, we’re going to have a ballgame heading into the second half! Of course, that’s an eternity for Mahomes. Commercial Commentary Corner: I have no idea why I’m the only person of my now-graying generation who hates “Jackass” but let me tell you that this modern day revival is bringing back all sorts of high school memories of feeling out-of-place. Bengals 3-21 Chiefs, 2:00, 2nd quarter On 1st &amp; 10, Burrow essentially gives up and throws it to the ground. On 2nd &amp; 10, however, Burrow hits Higgins for an 18-yard gain. I’ll say this: he doesn’t seem too rattled by the score. They’re at the Chiefs 39 at the two-minute warning. They desperately need to score a touchdown before the half if they want to stay in this thing. Bengals 3-21 Chiefs, 3:36, 2nd quarter On 1st &amp; 10, Burrow finds Chase for a six-yard gain but Mixon gets stuffed for a rare one-yard loss on the next play. It’s yet another 3rd &amp; 5 for the Bengals, but this time Burrow can find Higgins for an eight-yard gain. Bengals 3-21 Chiefs, 5:01, 2nd quarter What a brutal few hours for the city of Cincinnati: first WKRP’s Dr. Johnny Fever dies and now the start of this game. The good news for the Bengals is that if they figure out a way to win this game it will be one of the NFL’s all-time great comebacks. Butker’s kickoff is returned by Chris Evans to the Cincinnati 30. 5:04, 2nd quarter On 1st &amp; 10, Edwards-Helaire gets another four yards. 2nd &amp; 6, Burrow throws to McKinnon at the Cincinnati 15. A big 3rd &amp; 1 here: can the Bengals at least force the Chiefs to settle for a field goal? No. They very much cannot. Mahomes finds Kelce for a 12 yard gain. It’s first and goal at the Bengals 3 and… we’ve seen this movie before. In the end zone, Mahomes finds Hardman and makes it look easy man. That’s the Chiefs’ third straight touchdown! No you don’t even have to ask about the extra point. Bengals 3-14 Chiefs, 9:19, 2nd quarter After the five-yard penalty, the Chiefs just need two yards for a first down and, instead, Edwards-Helaire get seven yards for a first down and more. 1st &amp; 10 at their own 43, Mahomes finds Kelce for a ridiculous 19 yards gain. Mahomes has gone into a shotgun formation and the Bengals are struggling to adjust, as Edwards-Helaire picks up 14 yards to the Cincinnati 24. Bengals 3-14 Chiefs, 9:19, 2nd quarter I am not going to say that this Kansas City start is at all unexpected. Here’s the key thing now: the Bengals desperately have to keep the Chiefs out of the end zone or this one could be out of hand by halftime. On 1st &amp; 10, Clyde Edwards-Helaire picks up three yards. On the next play, we get our first yellow flag of the game, as the Bengals defense gets called for an offsides penalty. Bengals 3-14 Chiefs, 10:00, 2nd quarter That is more like it: Mixon picks up 12 yards for a first down. I’m now starting to see why they’re leaning heavily on the star RB this early in this game. 1st &amp; 10 on the Cincinnati 37, Chase gets an additional 3 yards. 2nd &amp; 7. Mixon picks up an additional yard. It’s a 3rd &amp; 6 situation and this already feels like a must-convert even early in the second quarter. They don’t, Burrow throws incomplete to Samaje Perine and the Arrowhead Stadium crowd taunts the opposing team with their problematic chant. Huber’s punt, meanwhile, goes out of bounds to the Kansas City 28. Bengals 3-14 Chiefs, 12:10, 2nd quarter So, uh, now the Bengals are in a position where they have to start scoring touchdowns. Field goals are not going to make much of a dent at this rate. Butker kicks things off with another touchback and one wonders whether we’ll even see the Kansas City punter today. On 1st &amp; 10, Burrow gets swarmed, as we’ve seen far too many times this postseason, and has to throw the ball away. 12:14, 2nd quarter Mahomes shrugs it off and instead throws a pass to McKinnon who gets eleven yards and, obviously, a first down. The Chiefs are at the Bengals 11 with a fresh set of downs. On 1st &amp; 10, Mahomes finds Hill for a seven-yard gain. On 2nd &amp; 3, McKinnon picks up an additional yard. On 3rd &amp; 2, Mahomes finds Kelce for their second straight touchdown of the game! This one feels almost workmanlike: like this is just what Kansas City does. It should go without saying that the extra point is good. Bengals 3-7 Chiefs, 14:21, 2nd quarter McKinnon starts the second quarter off by picking up seven yards to the Cincinnati 24. Meanwhile, the update is that Uzomah is officially out for the game. Not a shocker, but a bummer. Oops, I just jinxed Mahomes. He throws his first incomplete pass of the game. Is this good? Bengals 3-7 Chiefs, end of the 1st quarter Oof, things are getting rougher for Cincinnati: Uzomah’s being carted off the field. Meanwhile: another kickoff, another touchback. The Chiefs start at their own 20. Mahomes throws… WHAT? He immediately uncorks a 44 yard pass to Mecole Hardman to end the first quarter! The Bengals defense could not have predicted that. I know I couldn’t have. That will take them to the Cincinnati 31 almost immediately and take us to the second quarter. :40, 1st quarter On 1st &amp; 10, Burrow throws it to approximately nowhere. 2nd &amp; 10, with the Kansas City end zone just 14 yards away. On the next play, Burrow almost finds Tee Higgins who just can’t hold it in. I have no idea how that wasn’t a touchdown. Instead, it’s 3rd &amp; 10. They can still pick up a first down. However, instead Burrow (in a rarity) can’t connect with old college teammate Ja’Marr Chase in the end zone. They will have to settle for a field goal here, but it’s early and this was an impressive counterpunch. Hot shot kicker Evan McPherson easily makes the 32 yard field goal to put the Bengals on the board. This could be a fun one, folks! Bengals 0-7 Chiefs, 1:33, 1st quarter On 3rd &amp; 5, Burrow finds Boys again and he gets it to the Kansas City 37. Cincinnati looks determine to match the previous Kansas City drive. Oh, and how, Mixon goes off for 23 yards to put them at the KC 14. Bengals 0-7 Chiefs, 2:54, 1st quarter 1st &amp; 10 at their own 49, Burrow throws incomplete to C.J. Uzomah who is shaken up on the play. 2nd &amp; 10, Burrow finds Boyd for five yards before Mathieu makes his return known by taking him down. Bengals 0-7 Chiefs, 3:45, 1st quarter Mixon squeezes out a yard here. Interesting that the Bengals are running early here. Burrow finds Mixon again, this is a seven yard gain that sets up a very manageable 3rd &amp; 2 at their own 46. Burrow finds Tyler Boyd, who just barely gets three yard before being taken down. Bengals 0-7 Chiefs, 5:53, 1st quarter Burrow passes to Mixon for a two-yard gain. Just as in their first drive, they have a 3rd &amp; 5 situation to deal with almost immediately. This time around, however, Burrow takes it himself as the pocket collapses, getting to their own 38. That’s a first down. Bengals 0-7 Chiefs, 6:41, 1st quarter Butker’s kickoff goes into the end zone for a touchback, putting the Bengals on their own 25. Let’s see if they can get their first first down. Well, not at first, running back Joe Mixon picks up just three yards. 7:17, 1st quarter Mahomes throws to Hill for a six yard gain to put them on the Bengals 7. This feels inevitable now and it, in fact, is. Hill makes an athletic end zone grab on a Mahomes pass for the first points of the game. Butker’s extra point attempt is good and the Chiefs are on top early! Bengals 0-0 Chiefs, 8:38, 1st quarter Mahomes finds tight end Travis Kelce for 10 yards and a first down. They’re at the Bengals 34 already, where Mahomes takes it himself, picking up another 11 yards for another first down. They’re at the Bengals 23, where McKinnon takes it seven yards to the Cincinnati 16. The Bengals have not been able to get a stop here. Bengals 0-0 Chiefs, 10:27, 1st quarter Weirdness here. The Chiefs have challenged the call on the field but also they were called for an additional timeout? I’ll wait until the refs come together with a final call here. (Commercial break.) Okay, Chiefs head coach Andy Reid’s challenge is successful, it’s a first down, but he also called a timeout before he made the challenge and the Chiefs have lost a timeout. You win some and lose some. On 1st &amp; 10, McKinnon picks up eight more yards. Bengals 0-0 Chiefs, 10:16, 1st quarter Mahomes finds Tyreek Hill for an eight-yard gain, McKinnon Picks up another yard on second down. That takes us to a 3rd &amp; 1. The Bengals defense push back hard and (apparently) just barely stop their forward progress short of a first down. But the Chiefs are going to challenge this and are probably going to win it based on visual evidence. Bengals 0-0 Chiefs, 12:50, 1st quarter Jerick McKinnon gets the ball first for Kansas City and picks up eight yards. On the next carry, he grabs a Mahomes pass and gets another 14 yards for the game’s first first down. (Say that five times fast.) Bengals 0-0 Chiefs, 13:38, 1st quarter And the Bengals promptly go three-and-out before I can even get settled and start in with my play-by-play. Kevin Huber punts and puts the Chiefs at their own 16 where they will start their first drive of the game. Bengals 0-0 Chiefs, 15:00, 1st quarter The Bengals get the ball first. Chiefs kicker Harrison Butker kicks things off and the ball hits the end zone for a touchback. Our friend Roger Kirkby checks in via email: Hi Hunter, all week long wherever I’ve looked it’s been Chiefs all the way, but those savvy guys in Vegas only make them 7 point favourites. They are betting with their money so maybe they see things differently. They expect them to win by a mere 8 points to pay out, so a close game could be the order of the day. On the plus side they seem to think 54pts will be the combined score so expect a shootout. I’m going with the feel good story so it’s the Bengals for me. Here’s the thing about the view from Vegas as I see it: as the strong sentimental favorites, a lot of people are betting with their hearts and not their heads, so the Bengals have gotten a late push for that reason, not for any football reasons. Ashanti is doing the national anthem, that’s how you know it’s a big game! There seem to be some microphone issues early on, but she’s always great. 8/10. Wow, here’s a blast from the past: Jim Rome is involved in this CBS broadcast. (Long pause.) Do you think I could ask for hazard pay because of this? NFC championship game While we’re hoping for a competitive game, let’s not pretend that there isn’t a reason that Bengals-Chiefs is the undercard today. After the AFC championship game, the winning team will sit back and wait to see who survives the NFC championship game between the San Francisco 49ers and the Los Angeles Rams. On paper, it’s much more of an even fight even if the 49ers beat the Rams both times they met in the regular season (a detail, some of you pointed out, I neglected to bring up when predicting a Rams victory in my preview on Friday). It should be fun but let’s not get ahead of ourselves, that is set to kick off at 6:30 pm EST/11:30 pm GMT while our game is now just ten minutes or so away. Predictions Obviously, I’ve already made mine: I think the Chiefs will win, most likely comfortably. Double-digits. Since I have a chance to be more specific (and risk looking even more foolish) I’ll make a final score prediction here: Let’s say 42-27, something along those lines. I’ll be happy to be wrong though. These Bengals are a fun, feel-good team and the Chiefs have had enough team success that it would be difficult to feel too bad for them and their fans if they only make it to the AFC championship game this time around. It’s also not impossible: the Bengals have already beaten them this season, albeit in a regular-season matchup with considerably lower stakes. (For the record: my rooting interests while liveblogging remains the same: I root for an entertaining game that ends in a timely manner, unless, like Bills-Chiefs last week, it’s so entertaining that I want it to last forever.) Enough about me, what about you? Once again, you can send your AFC Championship Game predictions to us and we’ll include them here in the early goings of our liveblog. Email them to hunter.felt.freelance@theguardian.com or tweet them to @HunterFelt. Here’s someone who concurs with my prediction: The Tom Brady watch continues Yesterday, reports came that Tampa Bay Buccaneers quarterback Tom Brady was ending his NFL career after 22 seasons and a ridiculous seven Super Bowl wins (six with the New England Patriots). After a few hours where sports fans either celebrated his legacy or the fact that they were finally rid of the Death &amp; Taxes of football. Then… came reports that he hadn’t yet made a decision. Now, the question remains: could Brady be contemplating playing another season? It feels doubtful, even if he very nearly pulled off yet another postseason comeback victory over the Los Angeles Rams last weekend and clearly has more in the tank. No, this feels more likely that the announcement leaked early, it’s not the best look to hijack the headlines right before Championship Sunday (not to mention, maybe he would rather have the spotlight entirely to himself.) I simply can’t imagine that we’re going to get any news on the Brady front today, but who knows. New York Yankees slugger Alex Rodriguez once opted out of his contract in the middle of the World Series. Weird things happen in sports. Meanwhile, not even the worst blizzard in years could prevent fans in New England from talking about the player who changed the entire fortunes of the local professional sports scene. Tyronn Mathieu Bengals QB Joe Burrow was sacked an eye-popping nine times during his team’s win over the Titans and life might not get much better for him this time around. It turns out that star Chiefs safety Tyronn Mathieu will be available for today’s game: Courtesy of the AP Wire: “Tyrann Mathieu cleared the NFL’s concussion protocol and the Chiefs removed his injury designation about three hours before kickoff, clearing the way for the Pro Bowl safety to play against the Bengals on Sunday in the AFC championship game. Mathieu lasted only seven plays in the divisional round against Buffalo last weekend before taking a knee to the helmet from teammate Jarran Reed while tracking down Bills quarterback Josh Allen in the first quarter. Mathieu was examined briefly in the sideline tent, then headed to the locker room and did not return to the field. The Chiefs had been optimistic all week Mathieu would play, though. He practiced fully each day, and the only hurdle left was to pass the league’s rigorous testing protocol to play in Kansas City’s fourth straight conference title game. ‘I thought he did a nice job,’ Chiefs coach Andy Reid said this week. “He moved around well.’” Preamble So, slow day for sports, huh? There’s quite a bit going on in a 24-hour timespan or so, but luckily we at the Guardian have got you covered. I’m psyched to be covering today’s AFC championship game between the Cincinnati Bengals and the Kansas City Chiefs, where we get to see two of the league’s best quarterbacks square off for the right to appear in this year’s Super Bowl. This probably isn’t the matchup that most people were expecting. While it almost felt like a lock that Patrick Mahomes and the Chiefs would make it at least this far—even if they needed a miracle field goal and some coin flip luck to put away the Buffalo Bills—but the Bengals? The Cincinnati Bengals? Heading into the postseason, the Bengals had last won a playoff game back in 1991. In the years since their name practically became synonymous with failure and disappointment. However, with the drafting of quarterback Joe Burrow has marked the official end of the Cincinnati Bungles Era. They have now beaten the Las Vegas Raiders at home and, more impressively, the top-seeded Tennessee Titans on the road in last weekend’s thrilling NFL divisional round. Despite their success, they’re coming into this game as clear underdogs. Not only do the Bengals have to win their second straight road game, but they also have to do it against a Chiefs team that has appeared in the last two Super Bowls and has won one. It’s hard to imagine that the Bengals are going to be able to push the Chiefs to the brink like the Bills did during their 42-36 overtime victory last Sunday (one of the greatest NFL playoff games you’re likely to see). Yet, after everything we witnessed last weekend, who knows? We could be in for a blowout, like the many we witnessed on Super Wild Card Weekend. We could be in for a competitive loss between two offensive powerhouses. Perhaps, just perhaps, we might see the improbability: the Bengals in the Big Game. Honestly, it feels like this is going to be entertaining no matter the final result. As we keep track of today’s game action, feel free to send us your NFL-related thoughts, comments and questions either via email (to hunter.felt.freelance@theguardian.com) or on Twitter (@HunterFelt, my home away from home). It’s the AFC Championship Game between the Cincinnati Bengals and the Kansas City Chiefs at Arrowhead Stadium. Opening kick is scheduled for 3:00 pm EST/8:00 pm GMT, but we’ll be back before then with various bits of news. Hunter will be here shortly. In the meantime, here’s his preview of today’s game: What the Bengals need to do to win: Everything perfectly. It all starts with quarterback Joe Burrow taking better care of the ball. Against the Tennessee Titans, Burrow was sacked nine times, tying a playoff record. Much of this was due to the porous offensive line – which will have to step up on Sunday – but some down to Burrow’s refusal to simply throw the ball away when under pressure. The Bengals beat the Chiefs 34-31 in the regular season, so they know they have a chance of an upset, but it won’t happen if Burrow can’t stay on his feet. What the Chiefs need to do to win: The defense needs to do better. Let’s be real: as entertaining as Bills-Chiefs was, Kansas City had to a) set up a game-tying field goal in the span of 13 seconds and b) win a coin toss to clinch the game in overtime. Their defense allowed 36 points against the Bills and they could be without safety Tyrann Mathieu, who suffered a head injury last Sunday. (He returned to practice on Thursday but his status for the Bengals game was still uncertain at time of writing.) Yes, the Bills were an extremely tough matchup, but Burrow and the Bengals are in the AFC title game for a reason. Key player: Patrick Mahomes, quarterback, Kansas City Chiefs. Mahomes only came into the league in 2017, but he has already won a regular season MVP award and is looking to take his team to their third straight Super Bowl (where he also has been selected as an MVP). If we’re living in the golden age of NFL quarterbacks – and it’s difficult to argue we’re not – Mahomes is the perfect example of why. Prediction: Chiefs over Bengals. It’s easy to root for this Bengals team, especially if you are a little tired of seeing Kansas City win the AFC yet again. That doesn’t change the fact that the Bengals are the underdogs for a reason: the Bills were the biggest obstacle between the Chiefs and the Super Bowl and Joe Burrow and co should present less of a challenge. This could be a blowout early.And just like that, the Matildas’ 2022 AFC Women’s Asian Campaign is over. It ended with a bang, delivered off the boot of Ji So-yun in the 87th minute of their quarter-final meeting with South Korea. Australia are going home and make no mistake, their early exit represents a disastrous result for the Matildas. It cannot be sugar-coated. Time and time again heading into the tournament, the repeated line was that the Matildas were in India to win it. Coach Tony Gustavsson said it, the players said it and, as Gustavsson revealed when announcing his squad, the federation had shifted its priorities to expect it. But now, just over 12 months out from a home World Cup that represents Australia’s best-ever chance of staging a proper assault on a world championship, Gustavsson’s vaunted “performance mode” has proven incapable of eliminating one of Asia’s upper echelon. With qualification already secured as hosts, the Swede will enter 2023 with New Zealand – at the Tokyo Olympics – as his highest-ranked scalp inside 90 minutes of a competitive fixture. Before the post mortem continues, it must be acknowledged that, on another day, the Matildas would likely have been able to put some of their multitude of chances away and the result could have been much different. Mary Fowler and Sam Kerr had back-to-back chances in the 19th minute. Kerr had a free header straight at keeper Kim Jung-Mi. Cho So-hyun yanked Steph Catley back on the hour mark as she advanced into the penalty area but VAR did not intervene. Kerr, inexplicably, sent a shot at an open goal wide in the 75th minute. A desperate Hayley Raso couldn’t turn in a wayward Kerr shot in the 91st. Yet to place the narrative of the unlucky loser above all others would not only ignore the haphazard nature of the Matildas attempts to execute a discernible plan, but also remove agency from the Korean performance. It would be unhelpful. Contentious as the VAR-adjudicated decision to award the penalty was, Cho blasted over the bar in the 37th minute. Then, as the Koreans began to exert increasing control over the flow of the game as the second half commenced – compounded by Gustavsson’s move to substitute off Clare Wheeler and shift Emily van Egmond into the six role – Lee Geum-min caught Alanna Kennedy flat-footed and forced a point-blank save from Lydia Williams. Five minutes later, Cho was afforded an open header in the penalty area that Williams, again, somehow managed to keep out. After absorbing the Matildas’ initial 20-minute flurry, the Koreans looked like the more organised and better-prepared team: one that had picked out what Gustavsson’s more heralded XI was trying to achieve. Following the game, Korean coach Colin Bell said that the Matildas’ reminded him of the USWNT; perhaps inadvertently revealing that he has predicted the game plan of his opposite number, a former USWNT assistant. Now, focus will and must turn to the tenure of Gustavsson. There will be time for lessons surrounding players and next steps, but they are subservient to the main issue. He came under increasing pressure during the sputtering run of friendly form during 2021, before staking everything on the Asian Cup, declaring that it would be the forum for adjudication. Judgment is at hand. In the days and weeks ahead, Football Australia will have to decide if the 48-year-old’s plan, philosophy and personality can actually deliver in 2023, or if he is incapable of backing his silver tongue with tangible progression. “I’ve been around long enough to know those questions are going to come from all over the place and that’s fair, that’s OK,” he said. “What I can promise is that I’ve been around long enough to come back from situations like this and learn from it and do better and that’s what I’m going to do if I get the chance to do it.” Regardless of what conclusion is ultimately made, it will be vital that Football Australia be transparent about its reasoning. The discourse around the Matildas has frequently descended into toxicity – distracting from important discussions that should have been happening and negatively affecting player wellbeing – and it is imperative that the federation limits scope for conjecture and innuendo to drag it down again. From there, even more essential is that FA commits wholeheartedly to its course of action. If Gustavsson is to stay, the scrutiny that will follow must be welcomed and he must be backed to the hilt with any possible resources needed to succeed. In the event that a new coach is to be brought in, that resolution must come immediately – any delay and the new coach won’t have enough time to bed in their system, familiarise themselves with the players and take stock of the landscape before the World Cup rolls around. And they must receive similar backing. Inevitably, Football Australia’s reputation will live or die on the decision, and neither comes with an assurance of success. In fact, the only certainty is that an unwillingness to properly commit to either shall result in disappointment.Two teams that had been inseparable for the majority of the match and indeed the series were explosively prised apart at the very last as Jason Holder took a sledgehammer to England’s victory chase by taking four wickets in the final four balls to seal victory by 17 runs. In doing so he became the fourth bowler in international T20 history to take four wickets in as many balls, bringing a frequently thrilling series to a jaw-dropping conclusion. Adil Rashid observed afterwards that England’s problem was that “we just lost too many wickets in clusters”, but this was taking the problem to its logical extreme. “I thought to restrict them to 179, we were pretty pleased with that,” Rashid said, “but with the bat we just didn’t have enough partnerships.” A career-best spell from Akeal Hosein, in which he took a wicket in each of his four overs and with Fabian Allen gradually whittled away England’s chances of victory in the middle overs, had set West Indies on the path to success and a 3-2 win in a series of slender margins, fluctuating fortunes and constant intrigue. England started the final over needing 20 to win, and when Holder’s first act was to deliver a front-foot no-ball the tourists’ task seemed achievable. But from that moment on every player who got bat on ball only succeeded in lifting it to a fielder as Chris Jordan, Sam Billings and Rashid fell, before Saqib Mahmood was bowled to end proceedings with a ball to spare. After a disappointing first match these teams had delivered a succession of compelling and high-quality contests before reaching the closing stages of the series simply refusing to be prised apart, tied as they were at 2-2 after four matches and with England, as West Indies had been earlier in the evening, at 86 for two after 10 overs. But while the hosts lost rhythm in the following phase of their innings, the tourists lost wickets. Moeen Ali, who batted as if he had used up all his timing in compiling Saturday’s half-century, lifted the very next ball to cover, and Hosein delivered the wickets of Liam Livingstone, James Vince – who delivered a 35-ball 55 full of classy shot-making – and Phil Salt in successive overs. In 31 balls England had scored 33 and lost four wickets, and despite Billings’s 28-ball 41 there would be no comeback. For the fourth time in five games West Indies won the toss, but for the first time they chose to bat. Their enthusiasm was understandable, given that the pitch on which both sides scored over 200 in the third game of the series was being reused, and though Reece Topley’s opening over was once again excellent, in the second they switched gears. Mahmood had been out of the England team since the final over of the second game was mercilessly thrashed for 28. Here West Indies greeted his return in much the same style as they had caused his exile, Brandon King carting his opening delivery of the night over long-on for six before Kyle Mayers helped himself to a pulled six and similar four, the over costing 19 and setting the home side on course for a dominant powerplay. But the momentum of the innings shifted immediately afterwards as England’s spinners once again took control. The six overs after the powerplay featured three wickets and three boundaries – between the second ball of the 11th over and the first of the 16th no delivery cost more than one run – and when Rovman Powell carted a Topley slower ball over midwicket in the 18th it ended a run of 42 balls without a boundary. Powell, whose 53-ball 107 on this pitch had powered West Indies to victory on Wednesday, had to wait until the 15th over before coming to the crease and consequently faced only 17 deliveries this time. It seemed a serious misjudgment, particularly given the fact that once he finally arrived he scored even more quickly than he had then. He and West Indies plundered 65 off the final four overs, the latest demonstration of England’s death-over issues. Their total of 179 for four was well below mid-innings expectations but, in the most dramatic style, it would eventually prove enough.